- A CASINO IN EVERY SMARTPHONE: LAW ENFORCEMENT IMPLICATIONS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A CASINO IN EVERY SMARTPHONE: LAW ENFORCEMENT IMPLICATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-130

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-428 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Troy Stock, IT Subcommittee Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on December 9, 2015.................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Joseph S. Campbell, Assistant Director, Criminal
Investigative Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
The Hon. Alan M. Wilson, Attorney General, South Carolina
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14
The Hon. Donald W. Kleine, Douglas County Attorney, Nebraska
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21
The Hon. Mark Lipparelli, Senate of Nevada
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    26

APPENDIX

1. Letters Submitted by Mr. Chaffetz:
2015-12-07 8 State AGs to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy - Wire
Act............................................................    66
2015-12-07 Laxalt-NV AG to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................    69
2014-02-04 16 State AGs to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................    73
2013-09-20 Johnson-DOJ to Rep Young - Money Laundering Via Online
Gambling.......................................................    76
2009-11-13 Henry-DOJ to Rep Bachus - Internet Gambling...........    78
2015-12-08 Gov Hutchinson-AR to JEC - Wire Act...................    81
2015-03-19 Gov Herbert-UT to JEC - Wire Act......................    84
2014-04-22 Gov Scott-FL to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................    85
2014-03-24 Gov Haley-SC to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................    88
2014-03-24 Gov Perry-TX to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................    90
2014-05-01 Gov Pence-IN to IN Delegation - Wire Act..............    92
2015-12-07 Rep Holding to JEC - Internet Gambling................    93
2014-06-27 Christensen-FRC to Rep - Wire Act.....................    95
2014-08-14 Newsweek - How Washington Opened Floodgates to Online
Poker..........................................................    97
2014-03-26 Thirty-Seven Groups to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers
Leahy - Wire Act...............................................   105
2. 2007-07-06 Washington Post ``Three Worked the Web to Help
Terrorists''...................................................   109
3. 2015-10-28 Canterbury-FOP to JEC EEC - Oppose Wire Act........   112
4. Letters Submitted by Mr. Clay:................................
2013-07-17 Norquist-AFTR to McCaskill Heller - ``Expansion of
Internet Gambling''............................................   114
2014-03-10 The Hill ``Congressional Ban On All Online Gaming Is
Wrong For America..............................................   116
2014-03-29 Townhall ``Congress Should Reject Adelson's Crony
Power Play.....................................................   117
2014-03-31 Gale-NASPL to Graham - Wire Act.......................   118
2014-04-01 Reason ``Tortured Textualism and Faux Federalism of
the Chaffetz-Graham-Adelson Online Gambling Ban''..............   119
2014-04-03 Starr Smith-NCSL to Reid McConnell Boehner Pelosi -
Wire Act.......................................................   120
2014-04-09 Keeley-NCLGS to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy -
Wire Act.......................................................   121
2014-05-09 Govs Bentley Tomblin NGA to Reid McConnell Boehner
Pelosi - Oppose Online Gaming Ban..............................   123
2014-04-28 Thirty-Seven Orgs to Goodlatte Grassley Conyers Leahy
- Wire Act.....................................................   124
2014-05-13 WiredSafety ``Cyber-safety Charity Wired Safety
Supports Online Gaming Regulation''............................   126
2014-09-00LV Center for Gaming Research ``The Original Intent of
the Wire Act''.................................................   127
2014-11-16 Ron Paul Institute `Internet Gambling Ban'............   139
2014-12-02 Canterbury-FOP to Reid McConnell Boehner Pelosi - Wire
Act............................................................   140
2014-12-08 Members to Boehner - Wire Act.........................   142
2014-12-09 Polis Cohen to Appropriations - Online Gaming.........   144
2014-12-15 Cullerton-IL State Senate to 16 Members - Wire Act....   146
2015-03-03 Pennsylvania Hr 140 - Wire Act........................   162
2015-03-03 Washington Examiner ``Republicans Take Up Casino
Donor's Fight Against Internet Gambling........................   164
2015-03-04 RedState ``Stacking the Deck in Fight Over Online
Gambling Ban''.................................................   166
2015-03-12 Gleason-KY Lottery to McConnell - Wire Act............   168
2015-03-17 Govs Bullock Hassan DGA to Reid McConnell Boehner
Pelosi - Wire Act..............................................   170
.................................................................
2015-03-18 Roll Call ``Wire Act - Don't Fix What Isn't Broken....   173
2015-05-21 Roll Call ``Regulatory Oversight of Online Gaming in
the States Is Working''........................................   175
2015-06-16 Rep Pretlow-NY to NY Delegation - Wire Act............   176
2015-09-10 US News - Ron Paul ``A Bad Bet For Republicans''......   178
2015-12-04 Brnovich-AZ AG to EEC - Oppose Wire Act support state
control........................................................   180
2015-12-07 The Hill ``Apply 10th Amendment to Online Gambling''..   182
2015-12-08 Nower-Rutgers to Watson-Coleman - NJ Online Gambling..   184
2015-12-08 Rebuck-NJ AGO - NJ Online Gambling....................   186
5. RESPONSE from Mr. Campbell FBI to Questions For The Record....   189
6. RESPONSE from Senator Lipprelli NV to Questions For The Record   192

A CASINO IN EVERY SMARTPHONE: LAW ENFORCEMENT IMPLICATIONS

----------

Wednesday, December 9, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,

Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:24 p.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Jordan, Walberg,
Massie, Meadows, DeSantis, Mulvaney, Buck, Walker, Blum, Hice,
Carter, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Cummings, Maloney, Clay, Lynch,
Connolly, Duckworth, Lawrence, Lieu, Watson Coleman, Plaskett,
DeSaulnier, and Lujan Grisham.
Also Present: Representative Titus.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time. I appreciate the flexibility and your
understanding, as we had votes on the floor. Almost every
member has voted. There's 23 members that have not yet voted,
but--21 now. I think it's important that we start this
important hearing and I appreciate all of your presence and
understanding here.
For more than 50 years we had in place what was called the
Wire Act. The Wire Act had a prohibition on gambling. It's why
you couldn't go down to your local bookie or go down to Western
Union and start wiring money and betting on who knows what.
That was in place until Christmas Eve, the day before
Christmas Eve in 2011. With no input from the public or notice
to Congress, a single unelected lawyer in the Office of Legal
Counsel of the Department of Justice released a 13-page memo
reversing 50 years of Department of Justice precedent and an
understanding that Congress had that the Wire Act was in place
to prohibit the use of wires to engage in gambling.
The memo that was introduced declared that the Federal Wire
Act applied only to sports betting and not to all forms of
betting. This reverses what the Clinton administration, the
Bush administration, the Carter administration, and others had
interpreted.
Now, certainly with the growth and the expansion and
difference of the Internet is making on all of our lives, there
was this interpretation that didn't come through Congress. It
didn't get the proper vetting. There was not the recourse.
The point that I've made in sponsoring a piece of
legislation that would take us back to restoring America's Wire
Act is that if you want to see a change, if you like a
different public policy, if you want to see things done
differently, our Framers have put forward a process, and that
is you introduce a bill, you fight for it, and you try to get
it passed into law, passed through the House, passed through
the Senate, and signed by the President of the United States.
We don't simply make up laws by one attorney at the Department
of Justice down in the bowels there at the Department of
Justice. We don't erase laws. We shouldn't be creating laws.
That's the whole point of this piece of legislation that I
have.
Nevertheless, with this OLC opinion in place, it has
created quite a stir, a lot of confusion, and, potentially, an
awful lot of problems. The reversal that the OLC put forward
was contrary to a plain reading of the statute, the intent of
Congress in passing the law, and the longstanding position of
the Criminal Division at the Justice Department. And the result
is now anything connected to the Internet--desktops, laptops,
tablets, smartphones--no matter your age, potentially becoming
a casino. I got a problem with that. I think the country has a
problem with that. And it certainly needs vetting and
discussion.
And, again, you want to make a change? Come to Congress,
introduce a bill, and make a change. But don't just change the
law based on an OLC opinion. In fact, I would argue that the
law actually has--this confusion by this OLC memo is causing a
lot of problems.
I don't believe that the memo has the force of law, but
there are some that are basing their--placing their bets based
on this interpretation. To those individuals, those
corporations, you're creating an awful lot of liability for
yourself and potential prosecution.
The other challenge that we face is that the Internet
doesn't have neat walls around it. It's not like a physical
facility that we can say: All right, it works just right here.
For anybody to argue that the Internet can be walled off and
used in just these certain boundaries, it's a joke. Come on.
Nobody with a straight face is going to come before the
American people and say: Well, the Internet, it's just for the
people of Nevada; or it's just for the people of Rhode Island.
You kidding me? You give me a good 18-year-old and about 36
hours and you can hack through just about anything.
So let's not pretend that the Internet is special for just
certain people. It's one of the big moral challenges that we
have, but it's also one of the challenges that we have to do in
making good public policy.
I believe the piece of legislation that I introduced,
Restoring America's Wire Act, is a states' right bill. There
are States, Utah and Hawaii in particular, that have no gaming.
Right or wrong, whether you like it or not, the history of the
State of Utah, the history of Hawaii is such that we have
elected to have no gaming. We don't have a lottery. We have no
Indian gaming. We don't have any gaming of any sort. I believe
that's the purview of the individual State. If Nevada wants to
have it, they made that choice. There are a lot of Utahans that
will travel to Las Vegas or to Wendover, for instance, and go
gambling. That's their choice.
But what I don't want is to have gaming coming to Provo,
Utah, and Salt Lake City. That's our choice. That our State's
right, to say: No, you're not going to be gaming in the State
of Utah. That's our decision. And that is the states' right
that by pushing gaming online we're having to deal with.
There is a concern that the OLC memo threatens the right of
people in certain States to decide not to have gambling within
their borders. And it's not just an issue for Utah and Hawaii.
It is for other States as well. A bipartisan group of 16 State
attorneys general wrote a letter to the leaders of the House
and Senate Judiciary Committees in 2014 urging Congress to
restore the decades-long interpretation of the Wire Act. They
wrote, in part, quote: ``The impact of the opinion which, in
effect, opens the door to the spread of Internet gaming will
have a potential significant impact on State and local law
enforcement,'' end quote. They went on later to say, quote:
``Given the inherently interstate nature of Internet gambling
transactions, we anticipate that it will become increasingly
difficult to effectively regulate such conduct as additional
jurisdictions consider legalizing Internet gambling,'' end
quote.
Federal law enforcement officials have also expressed
concerns of online gaming. For example, in 2013 the FBI stated,
quote: ``Online casinos are vulnerable to a wide array of
criminal schemes.'' They went on to say: ``And many provide
more opportunities for criminals to launder illicit proceeds
with increased anonymity,'' end quote.
I would note a Newsweek article that came out: ``Department
of Justice settlements regarding online poker are second only
to financial institutions.'' Fines and settlements in excess
of--I believe the specific number cited in Newsweek was 1
billion, 27 million, 511--I'm getting the number wrong, but
it's over a billion dollars, it's got a lot of digits to it--it
shows what a significant problem the Department of Justice is
currently having with it.
Given the increased access and reliance on technology,
Congress must do its job and understand the implications of
this OLC opinion.
Let's also understand that you're not going to be able to
distinguish if it's a 7-year-old kid or somebody who's of legal
age. The Internet that is used is not going to be able to
distinguish the age of that person. When you go to a physical
facility, you can pretty much get a guess and some people are
carded and checked for their age.
We are raising a generation of children who are extremely
comfortable with technology. They think nothing of picking up a
smartphone or tablet and entering the information about their
life into it. They grow up in a generation where these games,
they think they're great, they're fun, where they're playing
for coins, and they're spending a lot of money on Candy Crush
and others, they don't necessarily know the difference between
real dollars and fake dollars, real coins and fake coins.
The speed at which online casinos operate, coupled with
their accessibility, availability, and anonymity make it clear
we need to understand more about this problem. The Congress
must ensure the law is clear and that some unnamed bureaucrat
down in the bowels of the Department of Justice isn't making
these important decisions. This is one person's opinion, but
you can tell by the wide attendance at this hearing today it is
affecting a lot of people.
There was no consultation with Federal law enforcement
officials or with State or local law enforcement officials
charged with enforcing the vast majority of the criminal laws,
no opportunity for public comment, Congress was not made aware
of what the Department of Justice was doing. The OLC basically
just decided, based on the placement, literally, of a single
comma--a single comma--that the law didn't mean what everybody
thought it meant for more than 50 years. The consequences were
not considered.
Our goal at this hearing is to discuss what the Department
of Justice Office of Legal Counsel failed to do. We'll hear
from Federal, State, and local law enforcement officials who
have expressed concerns with online gaming, including its
potential to be used for money laundering, terrorist financing,
fraud, and other criminal activity. In doing so, we'll respect
the 10th Amendment and examine how the borderless nature of the
Internet makes it difficult, if not impossible for States to
effectively regulate online gaming, protect their States and
their citizens within their borders.
I have taken an excessive amount of time. I appreciate the
indulgence. I will now recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Cummings, for his statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'm going
to yield to Mrs. Coleman in a second. But I want our witnesses
to understand that much of this is new to the Congress, and we
want a full understanding of what is going on here. We're
hearing from both sides, and they're coming at us with
everything they've got. And what we seek is fairness.
We also seek information with regard to those States that
are already doing it. I am not of a belief that--I don't have
an attitude of cannot do. I say we can do if we have the will.
The question is, is how does that play out?
And, you know, let's not kid ourselves. This is about
money. Come on now. In some kind of way we've got to make sure
that whatever we do is fair, is just. But, again, we want to
hear both sides. As a lawyer for many, many years, I know that
there's always another side. So, come on, let's take a look at
both sides of this issue.
And so it gives me great pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to yield
to my colleague, Bonnie Coleman, who hails from New Jersey.
They have online gambling, and she voted for it, and she's been
someone who has been extremely active and interested in this
issue. And so I will yield the rest of my time to her, and
keeping in mind, Mr. Chairman, that I hope that you will give
her the same latitude that you would give me in that you used
10 minutes. I'm sure she has 8 more minutes--7 more minutes
left. Thank you.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you to the ranking member, and
thank you to the chairman. I do speak to you from a position of
a little bit more knowledge and experience in this issue coming
from the State of New Jersey.
The law enforcement implications of online gambling are an
important policy consideration. However, the evidence clearly
demonstrates that with proper regulation, instate online
gambling poses no more challenges to law enforcement or risk to
consumers than brick-and-mortar casinos. According to the
Department of Justice, instate online nonsports gambling is not
prohibited by the Wire Act or other Federal gambling laws, so
States may regulate online gambling within their own borders.
Currently, the three States, New Jersey, Nevada, and
Delaware, have asserted their right to allow regulated online
gambling within their borders and have created strong
regulatory structures to provide oversight and enforcement of
their state regulations. As a member of the New Jersey State
Legislature, as the ranking member mentioned, I had the
opportunity to vote for my State's legislation that allowed
regulated online gambling. I did so because I believed that
that legislation offered the best opportunity to mitigate the
risk associated with online gambling.
Since then, I've been pleased to see that our experience in
New Jersey has proven that assessment to be correct. These
three States have not seen an increase in law enforcement
challenges or consumer risk related to regulated online
gambling in their State. New Jersey's director of gaming
enforcement reported earlier this year, and I quote: ``From a
regulatory standpoint, our system is working. There have been
no major infractions or meltdowns or any systematic regulatory
failures that would make any doubt the integrity of operations.
The issues that have arisen have been dealt with appropriately,
just like in brick-and-mortar casinos.''
The Division of Gaming Enforcement also established a
comprehensive, multifactor geolocation standard that cross
references multiple location data sources and has the
capability to determine if software is being used to hide a
device's location.
Please take a look at the video screen.
[Slide.]
Mrs. Watson Coleman. This is a slide from the company that
is used in New Jersey to enforce the instate online gambling
requirement that play on licensed sites only occurs within the
State of New Jersey.
Federal law enforcement entities have also not provided
evidence of challenges related to regulated online gambling
activities in those three States. This is contrasted with the
significant challenges associated with unregulated offshore
online gambling such as limitations on monitoring transactions
and activity on offshore servers and low levels of
international cooperation. The unregulated offshore gambling
sites are not required to verify a player's age, identity, or
location, and do not provide the significant evidence trail
that regulated online gambling operations provide.
The National Fraternal Order of Police wrote in opposition
to a ban of online gambling, describing the threats that exist
in the unregulated online gambling arena. Not only does the
black market for Internet gaming include no consumer
protections, it also operates entirely offshore with unlicensed
operators, drastically increasing the threat of identity theft,
fraud, or other criminal acts. There is also evidence that
these gaming sites launder money for organized crime and help
to finance terrorist networks, and I agree.
Any legislative attempts to ban online gambling will drive
U.S. patrons to access the unregulated offshore gambling sites
that pose greater risk to consumers. A Federal ban also
interferes with a State's right to decide what gambling is
permissible in its borders and the right to create a regulatory
framework that protects its citizens.
The best way to protect our citizens and support law
enforcement is to allow States to establish a regulated system
of oversight and enforcement for online gambling that will help
drive illegal operators out of the marketplace. And if they are
looking to do so, if the State's looking to do so, New Jersey
has set a model for regulation that protects its citizens.
Other States that choose to allow online gambling can learn
from that approach.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I'll hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize our witnesses. We're
pleased to welcome Joseph S. Campbell, assistant director,
Criminal Investigative Division at the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Mr. Campbell began his career as an FBI special
agent in August of 1990 and reported to the Chicago field
office, where he investigated white collar crime, public
corruption, organized crime, and various drug matters. He also
had a distinguished career since then, having served in
numerous important positions, including as supervisory special
agent in the Counterterrorism Division, Weapons of Mass
Destruction Operations Unit at the FBI headquarters, and head
of the Joint Terrorism Task Force for the Denver field office.
We appreciate you being here because in September of 2012,
Mr. Campbell was promoted to deputy assistant director of the
Criminal Investigative Division. And I think you provide a
valuable insight.
We welcome the Honorable Alan Wilson, the attorney general
of the State of South Carolina. Mr. Wilson was elected South
Carolina's 51st attorney general on November 2 in 2010 and
reelected again in 2014. As South Carolina's attorney general,
Mr. Wilson is the State's chief prosecutor, chief securities
officer, and the State's chief legal counsel. Mr. Wilson joined
the National Guard immediately after joining college. He was
called to serve in Iraq where he led troops through Army fire
and earned a combat action badge.
We thank you, sir, for your service to our country.
Today he continues his military service by providing legal
support for soldiers and assisting the prosecution of military
crimes as a lieutenant colonel in the Judge Advocate General
Corps.
We thank you again for your service.
We're also pleased to have the Honorable Donald Kleine,
Douglas County attorney in Douglas County, Nebraska. Mr. Kleine
was elected Douglas County attorney in November of 2006. He was
reelected again in 2010, and again in 2014. In his years as a
prosecutor, Mr. Kleine has tried numerous high-profile criminal
cases. He is on the faculty at Creighton University School of
Law teaching the trial practice and criminal prosecution. He is
a past president of the Nebraska County Attorneys Association
and a member of the board of directors in the National District
Attorneys Association.
We also are pleased to have the Honorable Mark Lipparelli,
member of the Nevada State Senate. He has an extensive private
sector background, having worked for some organizations,
including Bally Technologies, Shuffle Master, Casino Data
Systems, and in 2013 Mr. Lipparelli completed a 4-year term on
the Nevada State Gaming Control Board, including his final 2
years as the chairman of that board.
We have a good panel. We look forward to a robust
discussion. We thank you all for being here. But pursuant to
committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn before they
testify. So if you will please rise and raise your right hands.
Thank you.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. If you'd please be seated.
And let the record reflect that the witnesses all answered
in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for members to ask questions, we
would appreciate it if you would limit your oral presentation
to no more than 5 minutes, despite the example--well, I set.
But be assured that your entire written record will be made
part of the record.
Mr. Campbell, we'll start with you. You're now recognized
for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH S. CAMPBELL

Mr. Campbell. Good afternoon, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you for
the invitation to appear before you today to discuss online
gambling and the potential criminal activity that could arise
within it.
As assistant director of the FBI's Criminal Investigative
Division, the responsibility to manage, coordinate, and direct
investigative programs focused on financial crime,
transnational organized crime, civil rights violations, public
corruption, crimes against children, and drug-related and
violent crime, fall to the hard-working special agents and
professional staff working with me. Together, we remain
committed to the goals and vision set forth by FBI Director
James Comey to uphold the Constitution and protect the American
public from criminal wrongdoing.
We appreciate the committee's interest in the threat posed
by online gambling, which can have connections to many other
forms of criminal activity. Illegal gambling businesses,
specifically Internet sports books, have become increasingly
popular in the United States, as well as abroad. The existence
of these Web sites has grown exponentially over the past few
years. The National Gambling Impact Study Commission reported
illegal betting on sporting events in the United States is
estimated to range between $80 billion to $380 billion
annually.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation works hard to establish
and maintain strong partnerships with both public and private
entities in order to combat illegal gambling. One of our
priorities has been to work with private sector partners like
the American Gaming Association to publicize our Internet Crime
Complaint Center, IC3. The IC3 is an online tool which allows
the public to report tips about suspected online criminal
activity, including illegal gambling.
Any discussion of issues concerning online gambling should
include the potential for money laundering. Money laundering is
rightly defined as any transaction that seeks to conceal or
disguise proceeds from illegal activities. Thus, it is any act
that converts proceeds gained from illegal activity into assets
that appear legitimate. Money laundering can undermine the
integrity and stability of financial institutions and systems,
discourage foreign investment, and distort international
capital flows.
We suspect online casinos are potentially susceptible to
criminal and money laundering schemes. Online gambling could
provide criminal actors with the potential to be anonymous. The
use of the TOR network, proxy servers, and encryption through
virtual private networks could potentially conceal a player's
identity, location, and true gambling activity.
Criminal actors could fraudulently manipulate games and
conspire with other to use their online gambling accounts to
transfer criminally derived funds to each other. A private
tournament or game could create a platform allowing one person
to transfer funds to another person. Once the private
tournament is created, the criminal actor could raise their bet
to the maximum permitted bet and then fold or intentionally
lose.
The movement of funds which appears as gambling winnings to
one and gambling losses to the other is simply a transfer of
criminally derived funds. One of the goals of criminals who
generate revenue from criminal activity is to launder their
proceeds through our financial systems to make the funds appear
legitimate. Criminal actors use numerous methods to launder
their proceeds. One of those methods is through the use of
casinos.
Internet-based casinos, like physical casinos, can be used
to launder criminal proceeds. A person's online gambling
account can be funded through various methods. Some of these
methods include prepared cards, debit cards, credit cards,
previous gambling winnings, or in-person presence at a physical
casino. An individual wishing to launder criminal proceeds by
funding their online gambling account at the casino could
structure their transactions in efforts to evade regulatory
reporting.
Bank Secrecy Act regulations applicable to physical casinos
also apply to legal online casinos. These Bank Secrecy Act
regulations are designed to detect money laundering activity.
Bank Secrecy Act regulations also require casinos to file BSA
reports when the casino detects suspicious funding or gaming
activity. The FBI reviews these reports regularly.
I thank you all again for inviting me to participate in
this hearing today, and I look forward to taking your
questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Attorney General Wilson, you're now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALAN M. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Chaffetz,
Ranking Member Cummings, members of the committee. I appreciate
the opportunity to be heard here today.
I'd like to preface my testimony with the reality that the
2011 Wire Act revision is one that should have been debated
legislatively, not decided administratively by a DOJ opinion.
Members of this committee already recognize that under our
Constitution, particularly the 10th Amendment, the States have
virtually exclusive authority over gambling. As the fourth
circuit has held, ``Gambling regulation is an area where States
have much expertise and competence, and it lies at the core of
a State's police power,'' end quote. Each State is entitled to
decide for itself how or whether to regulate gambling or to ban
it altogether.
This is the way our Founding Fathers intended the
Constitution to work. The Federal Government should respect the
rights of States, not destroy those rights. They should not
legalize gambling activities the States make illegal. But the
DOJ opinion strikes at the very heart of State powers. DOJ
lawyers cannot rewrite what Senators and Congressmen have
enacted. The executive branch cannot supersede the legislative.
The original Wire Act, with its respect for State sovereignty
and prerogatives, should thus be restored so that casino
gambling does not operate over the Internet in the States which
have outlawed it in their communities.
In South Carolina, gambling is largely prohibited and has
been throughout the history of our State. Our courts recognize
that the public policy of the State is to prohibit gambling. In
recent years my office, our State Law Enforcement Division, or
SLED, and various local law enforcement agencies have had to
combat short-term proliferation of Internet sweepstakes cafes
which displayed Internet-based casino-like games on computer
terminals in strip mall outlets, some of which even lured
patrons with promises of free cell phones provided by the
Federal Government.
Furthermore, South Carolina's experience with video poker
was traumatic. Video poker became a $2 billion industry in the
State and carried with it such an addiction problem that there
are stories where mothers have left children to die in cars
while they played video poker. As a result of video poker,
families were destroyed and gambling addictions proliferated
exponentially. Robert Stewart, our then chief of SLED, even
warned that video poker was bringing organized crime to South
Carolina.
Despite South Carolina's continued best efforts over the
decades to protect our citizens from the threats posed by
gambling, DOJ's revised interpretation of the Wire Act has
opened the door to Internet gambling, potentially turning any
mobile device in our State into a virtual casino. What South
Carolina's legislature has specifically shut down DOJ has
reopened in another form with a single stroke of a pen.
As demonstrated in letters from governors and attorneys
general to Congress on this matter, States are befuddled that a
180-degree turn in Federal policy on such an important issue
was able to occur without public comment or input. Decisions
with such broad national policy implications as the 2011 DOJ
opinion, which abandoned 50 years of DOJ policy, should be
debated by Congress, not left to a lawyer at the Justice
Department operating within a vacuum.
This unilateral opinion has opened a Pandora's box of
enforcement issues for States like South Carolina. Overnight, a
DOJ attorney transformed casino gambling from a tightly
controlled activity requiring interstate or international
travel for South Carolinians to an app on a smartphone
available 24/7 with the tap of a finger.
While it is reasonable to assume that one day in the future
technology will be in place in virtual casinos to prevent these
sites from being accessed in another geographic area, the
reality is offices like mine charged with the responsibilities
of enforcing our own gambling laws and protecting the public
cannot be expected to rely on the good faith of massive
foreign-owned gambling companies licensed by other States.
Our system of government reserves intrastate matters,
including the regulation of gambling at brick-and-mortar
facilities and intrastate lotteries, to the States. But the
Internet, as the Justice Department has successfully argued in
the courts, is inherently interstate, and so are any gambling
casinos offered online. States are ill equipped to enforce
gambling laws against interstate and international companies,
particularly given the technological vulnerabilities of the
Internet and age and location verification mechanisms that are
subject to compromise.
The 2011 DOJ opinion endangers citizens of States like
South Carolina, especially our children. As a result of this
opinion, States with strict laws prohibiting online gambling
are forced to rely on the promises of foreign gaming
corporations and the regulatory agencies of other States which
have legalized online gambling, despite their best intentions.
If we have trouble protecting our children from
cyberbullying and other Internet crimes-against-children cases,
then how can we expect a State to protect our youth from the
potential harm of putting an online casino in their pocket.
This is why I appreciate this committee's thoughtful efforts to
address this serious threat to the citizens of my State and of
our country and support legislation to restore the traditional
interpretation of the Wire Act. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Kleine, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DONALD W. KLEINE

Mr. Kleine. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak today about the challenges of local
law enforcement and protecting our most vulnerable citizens
from the dangers that lurk in the realm of online gambling.
I am the county attorney for Douglas County, Nebraska.
Myself and other colleagues around the country, the local DAs,
prosecute over 95 percent of the crime that occurs in America.
Douglas County encompasses Omaha and much of its metro area and
is home to over one-fourth of Nebraska's residents.
As this committee is well aware, prior to 2011 the
Department of Justice interpreted the Wire Act to prohibit
wagering of any kind over interstate telecommunications,
including the Internet. The Wire Act essentially serves as a
Federal prohibition to online gambling.
In 2011, DOJ revised its longstanding interpretation of the
Wire Act to only apply to wagers placed on sporting event s,
opening the door to online gambling in States without any input
at all from law enforcement. The FBI has warned Congress that
online gambling is uniquely vulnerable to criminal activity,
but DOJ's dismantling of the Wire Act eliminated the risk of
Federal prosecution for online gambling. This left policing of
online gambling to State and local officials with limited
resources.
For example, the Douglas County Attorney's Office, my
office, has an annual budget of approximately $8 million. We
have 56 attorneys dedicated to prosecuting approximately 3,500
felonies that occur within Douglas County. Our office is
largely focused on violent crimes rather than online gambling.
Moreover, while some violations of Nebraska's antigambling laws
are felonies, many are misdemeanors, making it even more
difficult to devote precious resources to enforcement.
In addition to the limited resources available for
enforcing the law, prosecution of gambling laws is especially
difficult given that online gambling is inherently interstate
and often has international implications. It has been my
experience the law enforcement issues concerning in-person
casino gambling are for the most part contained within the
general vicinity of the gaming establishment itself. But online
gambling easily crosses domestic and international borders and
can often be accessed by anyone with Internet access.
Several countries have legalized online gambling, and
companies house servers that are accessible to people outside
the host country. The primary companies operating these online
gaming sites are massive foreign companies against whom it
would be nearly impossible for my office, a local law
enforcement DA, to bring charges. These companies recognize
that criminal prosecution by local officials would be very
difficult, which creates even more opportunities for these
companies to defraud players, launder money for much more
dangerous operations.
Even more troubling are the risks beyond illegal gambling
associated with many online gambling sites. Credit card fraud,
identify theft, and other financial crimes can occur when
players disclose information that should be kept secure. Unlike
other licensed and regulated activities, Internet gamblers
often do not know who is operating the gambling site, if the
games are honest, if the winnings will be paid, or if the money
wager will be used for criminal purposes. Once an individual
chooses to engage in online gambling activities, there are few
remedies should they fall victim to a dishonest site.
The anonymous virtual nature of online gambling also
increases opportunity to gamble more frequently. As I left my
office yesterday, we had two new felony cases come in just from
people who had gambling issues, and they obviously committed
other crimes because of their gambling problems. As a county
attorney, I have prosecuted numerous crimes stemming from
gambling issues, including white collar crimes involving
significant sums of money, to neglect cases from parents not
caring for their children due to gambling issues.
Easy access to gambling is particularly dangerous to young
people, who are two to three times more likely to develop a
gambling problem. The Mayo Clinic compares the physiological
impact of gambling to the impact drugs have on a brain's reward
system. From the mental and emotional perspective, pathological
gamblers are at an increased risk to develop stress-related
conditions, major depressive episodes, anxiety disorders, or
substance abuse issues. Impulsive gambling can also lead to
financial loss, increased crime, lost time at work,
bankruptcies, strained relationships with family members, and
even homelessness.
Finally, online gambling activities are extremely difficult
to monitor because users can remain largely anonymous. Law
enforcement often has limited tools to identify who is gambling
illegal and from where they are engaging in the unlawful
activity. Any smartphone, tablet, or laptop can be a vehicle
for online gambling, and it is virtually impossible to pinpoint
players who sign on from isolated networks.
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
share my concerns with you today regarding the dangerous
consequences of online gambling and the resources required to
support a state-by-state regulating scheme. Law enforcement is
charged with protection of our most vulnerable citizens, but we
cannot be expected to accomplish this monumental task alone. We
need the important resources and expertise of the FBI and
Federal law enforcement to ensure those online gambling
companies preying on our citizens are brought to justice. Thank
you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Kleine follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Kleine, thank you.
Mr. Lipparelli, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK LIPPARELLI

Mr. Lipparelli. Thank you Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, for the invitation to speak today. I am Mark
Lipparelli, and I was asked to present the result of the
emphasis of my work for the past 7 years and my over 22 years
of experience in the gaming technology field.
In January of 2009, I was appointed by the Governor of my
State to the Nevada Gaming Control Board, and in January of
2011, I was elevated to the position of chairman. I also served
on our State's Gaming Policy Committee that adopted support of
regulated interactive gaming in our State. This is relevant
because during my tenure on the Board, our State embarked on
creating the first set of gaming regulations governing legal
interactive gaming in the United States.
I concluded my tenure on the Gaming Control Board in
October of 2012, and since that time have provided advisory
work to a number of entities engaged in the gaming, technology,
sports, and investment sectors. I'm also the cofounder of the
International Center for Gaming Regulation at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, and currently serve as a Nevada state
senator. I would add that prior to serving on the Board, I
spent 15 years in senior management positions with some of the
industry's leading gaming technology providers. The comments I
make today are my own.
As you continue to review igaming and the related role of
law enforcement, I can tell you confidently your committee is
now in a position to benefit from a significant amount of
deliberation and contribution from many well-informed and
experienced operators, regulators, technologists, and industry
experts. Unlike 2009, we are no longer in greenfield.
We have learned a great deal in the past 6 years. The
creation of enabling law and regulation in three States and a
large number of informed studies and debates, as well as,
perhaps most importantly, the creation, testing, and deployment
of many igaming systems throughout the world has created
concrete knowledge that does now and should replace
speculation. The healthy portion of the knowledge gained also
comes from international markets that by our U.S. standards are
not highly regulated.
From a regulatory and law enforcement perspective, Nevada,
New Jersey, and Delaware have been successful. Where there were
concerns over licensing, protecting children and the
vulnerable, player protection, tax collection, money
laundering, and geolocation, these States have had good
success. I have provided further discussion of these items in
my full remarks.
We know there have been many attempts to compromise these
systems, but those issues are being revealed, thwarted,
evaluated, and, where warranted, new standards are implemented.
This is a hallmark of gaming regulation of the traditional
casino business.
I would provide praise to my former colleagues in Nevada
for beginning this effort, and particular praise of the efforts
of Dave Rebuck and the New Jersey Division of Gaming
Enforcement. Unlike Nevada, where regulations currently
authorize only online poker, New Jersey chose to implement all
forms of gaming. This no doubt expanded the scope of the effort
and the energy to get it right.
Like any innovation, ongoing diligence and continued
product improvements will be necessary to meet the constant
work of those who seek to compromise laws and regulations. The
three existing U.S. markets and several regulated markets in
Canada have now applied their knowledge to actual operations,
and historical speculation has given way to their success and
foundation knowledge.
Future regulatory agencies that consider igaming
legislation will be subject to inquiry from those seeking
clarity on the subject of licensing, product submissions, site
approvals, employee registrations. These questions have been
widely debated, tested, and largely addressed. To the degree
possible, I have advised governments, law enforcement, and
regulatory policy advisers to provide for a broad statutory
framework but leave the specific requirements to the
regulations. This approach gives regulators, the experts in the
field, more opportunity to adjust to changing technology and
provide flexibility where appropriate.
Depending on the underlying products that may be introduced
in the future, it is important that law enforcement and
regulators strike an appropriate balance of clarity and
regulatory policy. Where the intent is to allow full
commercial-style casino games, a more robust form of oversight
is likely warranted. Where there are other forms of online
gaming entertainment that fall short of these definitions,
lighter forms of regulation may suffice.
I have a couple concluding remarks. One, I would not leave
this subject without specific reference to what I consider to
be the much bigger policy challenge. In my opinion, illegal
gaming operators need to be put in the spotlight. These
operators continue to exist in the shadows and enjoy untaxed
and unregulated operations.
This is an area where States that have authorized gaming
and those that have not need to work together with Federal law
enforcement to continue to reveal these rogue operators. It is
a continual effort, but cooperation between all levels of
government, financial institutions, and licensed operators is
critical. If illegal nontaxing operators are allowed to freely
compete untested with unregulated products, the playing field
will remain unlevel and consumers will be unprotected.
Nevada, New Jersey and Delaware, as well as many test labs,
have begun to reverse this trend. In the short and the long
term, the lasting impacts on licensed operators will be
significant. This knowledge must be shared with other States
and the Federal Government as policies are shaped.
Number two, the pace of U.S. legalization has to date been
modest. This has largely abated concerns 5 years ago that
igaming would spread too quickly without proper oversight and
without actual knowledge that it could be effectively
regulated. Even with our law in Nevada in place for over 15
years, we remain only a poker jurisdiction, and several States,
after study, elected not to proceed with igaming legislation.
Three, there's a host of attendant businesses that desire
further clarity around igaming policy. These include financial
institutions, handset providers, network providers, credit card
issuers, and many others. In nearly every case, they too seek
the advantage of legal markets and seek to avoid those who are
not providing such clarity.
Four, technology innovation is taking place at a higher and
higher speed and consumers are adopting mobile preferences.
Newer technology to protect State choices on allowing or
prohibiting igaming is getting stronger and more diverse. For
example, the proximity of New Jersey to New York and
Pennsylvania highlights these protections in operation.
Five, consistency in igaming regulation is very important.
The security of any system is made more difficult if we end up
with an application code that varies widely from market to
market. If policy changes are considered, this should be kept
firmly in mind.
And lastly, you have no doubt heard and will continue to
hear from those who suggest that the risks are simply too great
or that you cannot be given complete assurance that legal
igaming can be properly governed. As chairman, these concerns
were very real for me. No other State had taken up the
regulation of igaming, and we had a 75-year history to protect.
My Governor, himself a former Gaming Commission chair, attorney
general, and Federal judge, made it clear to me that outside
risk was not in his or our State's interest.
However, after spending 6 years with experts in the field,
developers of products, independent test labs, and regulators,
from Alderney, the United Kingdom, Gibraltar, France, Italy,
Malta, and the Isle of Man, Singapore, and many others, I can
give you confidence that the regulated market model does work.
That said, you must be willing to accept that this market,
like any market, is not entirely bulletproof prove. As markets
grow, there will no doubt be challenges. I expect we will
uncover new risks that we did not anticipate despite our
exhaustive efforts. State regulators and independent test labs
have and will continue to act to address those challenges.
Thank you very much for your attention. I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Lipparelli follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Before I get to our questioning, I have two UC requests.
First, the chair notes the presence of our colleague,
Congresswoman Dina Titus from Nevada. While she's not a member
of the Oversight Committee, we thank her for the interest in
the hearing topic, and I'd ask unanimous consent that Ms. Titus
be allowed to fully participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I also have a series of letters that I would ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record. (1) A letter from eight State
attorneys general urging Congress to restore the longstanding
interpretation of the Wire Act. (2) A letter from the Nevada
attorney general, Adam Laxalt, expressing the need for
congressional review of the Wire Act and the 2011 OLC memo. (3)
A letter from 16 State attorneys general urging Congress to
restore the longstanding interpretation of the Wire Act. (4) A
letter from Congressman Bill Young that was dated September 20,
2013, stating online casinos are vulnerable to a wide array of
criminal schemes. (5) A letter from the FBI to Congressman
Spencer Bachus dated November 13, 2009, expressing concerns
with online gaming, including its potential use for money
laundering.
Individual letters from various governors across the
country, all expressing concerns with online gaming and the
need to address the Wire Act: (6) Arkansas Governor Asa
Hutchinson from Arkansas, (7) Utah Governor Gary Herbert, (8)
Florida Governor Rick Scott--again, these are all individual
letters--Florida Governor Rick Scott, (9) South Carolina
Governor Nikki Haley, (10) Texas Governor Rick Perry, (11)
Indiana Governor Mike Pence.
(12)A letter from Congressman George Holding expressing
concerns with online gaming. (13) A letter from the Family
Research Council expressing support to restoring the Wire Act.
(14) As well as a Newsweek cover story on the issue.
Without objection, I would like to enter these into the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Chaffetz. Now we'll get to the questioning. I
would like to recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Massie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Campbell, my first question is for you. Approximately
how much of the FBI's budget is dedicated to regulating and
enforcing laws on Internet gambling? What percentage, if you
would, not asking for an exact number.
Mr. Campbell. I don't have with me the exact percentage
related to the budget that we dedicate it to. However, I can
tell you that----
Chairman Chaffetz. If you can move--all of you, if you can
that microphone up close and snug and turn it right--there you
go. Thank you.
Mr. Campbell. Okay. However, in regard to our
investigations regarding this violation, it could cross a
number of areas that of course are funded, such as
transnational organized crime, potential terrorism financing,
other criminal enterprises involved in it.
Mr. Massie. Speaking of that, have you prosecuted anybody
for terrorism financing using Internet gambling as a nexus?
Mr. Campbell. We do have one investigation that we did
conduct where the individual used, among other things----
Mr. Massie. Was there a prosecution?
Mr. Campbell. --gambling for money laundering purposes and
so forth.
Mr. Massie. Was it one of these Internet gambling sites in
one of these three States that allow it?
Mr. Campbell. I don't have that information. I can provide
you with more particulars on that.
Mr. Massie. How big of a priority is this and how prevalent
of a problem is it compared to, say, terrorism--for the FBI--
compared to terrorism, insider trading, counterfeiting,
political corruption? Is it more important than any of those?
Mr. Campbell. Well, it fits into the priority in the sense
that as we go after critical organizations that can hurt
America--and, again, whether those are transnational organized
crime groups, other criminal enterprise groups, terrorism,
etcetera--we look for any and all violations that those
individuals are involved in. And certainly if it involves
online gaming, we're going to pursue that threat and fully
investigate that aspect.
In addition, as information comes to us whereby online
gaming may be occurring in an illegal manner or promoting those
types of threats, we're going to drive most definitely as a
priority.
Mr. Massie. But your testimony is that today, so far, you
are not aware of any terrorism that's been financed using
Internet gambling in any of the three States.
Mr. Campbell. As I said, I can take that back, and we can
do some further analysis to determine----
Mr. Massie. But right now you're not aware of it.
Mr. Campbell. But as I sit here, I do not have that answer.
Mr. Massie. Mr. Campbell, following up, can't States just
pass laws to prevent their own citizens from gambling on the
Internet?
Mr. Campbell. Well, certainly it's up to the States to
determine how they might want to police online gaming. From our
perspective, we use a number of statutes, the illegal gambling
business statue, Unlawful Internet Gaming Act, as well. The
Travel Act, the money laundering statutes, bank fraud, wire
fraud, mail fraud, etcetera. And we partner with States in
investigations and prosecutions.
Mr. Massie. Attorney General Wilson, same question for you.
Can't your State just pass laws regulating this in your State?
Mr. Wilson. It's my opinion that it would not be practical
for States on a state-by-state and a quilt-like matter to pass
laws on something that the Federal law has passed unanimously
across all 50 States.
Mr. Massie. Is that because of enforcement?
Mr. Wilson. Well, it is very difficult from an enforcement
purpose. I mean, it is extremely difficult to enforce.
Mr. Massie. Well, here's my concern. And my next question
is for Mr. Lipparelli. I want to know if you have the same
concern that I do that if we pass a national online gambling
prohibition, under the presumption that it's necessary for
Federal legislation to overturn--essentially overturn State
laws, to deal with a State problem on it, you know, because
they don't want to do it on a state-by-state basis, couldn't
that logic be used in the same way with gun control, for
instance? Because if a State's allowed to sell guns in one
State, that makes enforcement of gun control laws in another
State difficult. Isn't there sort of the same logic at play
there? Or do you share that concern?
Mr. Lipparelli. I wasn't prepared to discuss gun control in
today's hearing. But what I would say to that question is----
Mr. Massie. Well, let's just back it up to the 10th
Amendment, then.
Mr. Lipparelli. Right. What I would say to that question
are two things. State laws that exist today that either
authorize or make illegal gaming operations apply every bit as
much to something that is exposed on the Internet as it would
be in a brick-and-mortar facility. For example, in the State of
Nevada, you no more have a right to expose a gambling game on
the Internet as you do going down the street and opening up a
building without a gaming license. So those State laws apply
regardless. And so that would be my response, is State law
already prevails regardless of whether it's Internet or not.
Mr. Massie. So just in closing, I would say that I do have
that concern, that if we use this logic at the Federal level
that it's hard to enforce, for instance, gun control laws in
one State so we have to have a universal ban, that seems like
the same logic that we're using here by prohibiting Internet
gaming. That is just my concern, Mr. Chairman. And thank you. I
yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. No, listen, I appreciate your thought on
this. I know you care about this issue.
I would just add to my colleague that the Department of
Justice, second only to the financial sector, more than a
billion dollars in fines--a billion. So they are pouring an
awful lot of resources into this, and there have been quite a
few incursions in this category.
We now recognize Mrs. Watson Coleman for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the three States that have created a regulatory
framework to allow licensed online gambling operators have
already greatly reduced the risk of collusion of money
laundering due to regulated sites.
So, Mr. Campbell, I need to ask you, has the FBI had any
successful convictions of a regulated gambling operator, or
have you seen an increase in criminal activity through the
regulated gambling sites?
Mr. Campbell. So for the FBI, we're more concerned with
those businesses that are operating illegally outright.
However, we do look at information that we receive that could
demonstrate that a regulated gambling business might be acting
illegally. I think an important point to make is that
individual subjects, criminals, could still be utilizing any
legal gambling business for illegal activity, such as money
laundering, and then to support other illicit criminal
activity.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Possibly. However, has the FBI any
record of these instances that I've asked about?
Mr. Campbell. I don't have the specific details regarding
that. I can take that back and see whether that does in fact
exist.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. And whether or not you've seen an
increase in criminal activity on those sites.
The other thing, Mr. Campbell, I wanted to ask you, what
are some of the challenges that the FBI faces in going after
illegal online gambling schemes that are unregulated and
offshore? And are there measures to counteract those challenges
on the regulated sites?
Mr. Campbell. Well, certainly, as with any investigation,
whether it's nationally or globally based, we're going to
utilize all investigative techniques in order to gather
information about what criminal activity may be occurring,
which includes working with our State, local, Federal, and
private sector partners, and even foreign government partners
related to that particular threat. So regardless of the
circumstance, we're going to apply the same techniques and
utilize every capability to obtain evidence for a prosecution.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I can appreciate that. So I just kind
of want to, for the record, in that that might be the case, you
have not come here today with any particular knowledge about
problems of this nature in the three States that have the
regulated online gambling and you would have to find out if
there's such a record and let us know. Is that right?
Mr. Campbell. That is correct.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Campbell.
Mr. Campbell. I would have to provide you some other
information on that. That's correct, yes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. With the little bit of time that I
have left, I'd like to contrast the kind of challenges that
have been discussed here by the panel with what happens when
States do regulate online operations.
And so, Mr. Lipparelli, I'd like to know from you, from
your experience, what controls are in place on regulated online
gambling sites that make it easier to catch attempts at
criminal activity like money laundering or collusion?
Mr. Lipparelli. It's a very fair question. One thing that
is probably misrepresented too many times in the public is the
U.S. regulated industry of igaming dramatically differs from
our counterparts in most foreign jurisdictions. We set in place
what many people in foreign jurisdictions criticize us as a
very tight system.
So everything from player registration all the way down to
player transactions is completely transparent to the regulator.
So there is a relational database that identifies issues
associated with potential fraud, collusion, player
manipulation, credit issuance, the laundering of money.
It would be my considered opinion that if you were going to
try to launder money, a legal regulated site would probably be
the last place that you'd want to try to do that. From a law
enforcement perspective, the tools we put in place are quite
robust and would lead right to the doorstep of those that were
using illegal site for those kinds of purposes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I know that no system can be perfect
and no enforcement effort is actually perfect. But to your
knowledge, are there sufficient layers of identification
requirements that would ensure that an individual is playing
from a legalized State in a State that has regulated gambling,
a geolocation issue?
Mr. Lipparelli. There are, to answer your question directly
and separately. Beyond that, it's not just simply identifying
the IP address. The standards that I think were referenced by
one of the witnesses here relate to very specific knowledge of
the location of the transaction. It also incorporates tools
that require users to disable certain functions on their
computer so as to prevent people from disguising their
location. If those applications are actually operating while
the site is accessed, the site will deny access.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Lipparelli. So there are number of technical standards
that have been put in place and tested to prevent that from
happening.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Lipparelli.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for participating.
Alan, thanks especially for coming up. It's always good to
have folks from back home contribute to this process. And thank
you for your service to our State.
Help me, because when I heard you were coming up I was
excited, but I didn't expect you to be on this side of this
issue. You've taken some positions that I support in other
areas, from health care, to gay marriage, to EPA regulation.
You've been taking the position against Federal control, which
I wholeheartedly support.
And I read your testimony today, not the stuff that you
were able to get to when you opened, but your testimony has got
some really good lines in it. ``The members of this committee
should recognize that under our Constitution, particularly the
10th Amendment, the States have virtually exclusive authority
over gambling.'' ``Each State is entitled to decide for itself
how or whether to regulate gambling or ban it all together.
Congress has always recognized the preeminent State interest in
gambling regulation.'' I could go on. And then to have you come
up and take a position here that sounds like you're for Federal
control, I can't square those two things.
I've got this last quote, which says that, ``The DOJ
opinion strikes at the very heart of...It should not legalize
gambling activities the States make illegal.'' I get that and I
agree with that, the Federal Government should not legalize
stuff that the States have made illegal.
But I'm waiting for the other half of that statement, Mr.
Chairman, which is, should the Federal Government also make
illegal that which other States have made legal? And there are
three States who have done this.
So help me square these two things.
Mr. Wilson. First off, let me say this. I'm not up here--
I'm not going to speak for anyone else today--I'm not up here
to say that gambling should be made illegal. I think if New
Jersey--my wife is from New Jersey, I love your State--New
Jersey or other States want to have a robust gambling industry,
they should be free to pursue that. The members in this room
who want that should be allowed to have it.
Mr. Mulvaney. But if the bill passes, that's why she's
here, she's afraid if the bill passes she loses the right to do
that.
Mr. Wilson. What we are talking about is interstate
commerce, which Congress has the authority to regulate under
Article I, Section 8. There is no dispute up here that Congress
can write the Wire Act, that Congress can regulate online
gambling because it is interstate in nature. That is not the
dispute. If----
Mr. Mulvaney. Alan, let me stop you there, because I think
that's right, and I'm hopefully moving to an area we can agree
on, because I am wondering if there is not a better way do what
we want to do in South Carolina, where it's not legal, but
still allow New Jersey and Nevada to do what they want to do,
which is to use technology instead of regulation. If we can
figure out a way to make sure that only New Jersey residents
gamble online, in licensed New Jersey enterprises, using
technology, isn't that another way to accomplish what you want
to accomplish?
Mr. Wilson. I believe that if online gambling, if it is
allowed by the Federal Government, you're basically putting a
virtually floating casino over every State or in every pocket
of every teenager or young person who wants to be able to
access it.
Mr. Mulvaney. I get that, but in your testimony what you
say is that the reinterpretation essentially allows States to
operate online casinos in States like Nevada, Delaware, New
Jersey without any assurance that these online casinos are not
being accessed in States like South Carolina. You also say that
the original Wire Act, with respect to states' rights and
prerogatives, should thus be restored so that casino gambling
does not operate over the Internet in the States which have
outlawed it in their communities.
And what I am asking you is, isn't there perhaps another
way to prevent kids in South Carolina from accessing gambling
sites, legal gambling sites in New Jersey, Nevada or Delaware,
other than Federal regulation?
Mr. Wilson. And I don't know that that way exists. I heard
Ms. Coleman eloquently say that she believes as a matter of
policy that verification can be enforced. I saw the little
points up there on the map. I don't know if those were 18-year-
olds or people crossed the river to gamble. The point is, is
that if you make online gambling legal at the Federal level,
then you have basically legalized it in States where they don't
want gambling at all.
Mr. Mulvaney. Your objection to this is not that the
information might happen to cross state lines in the process of
going over the Internet. That's not the issue here, right? It's
the process of having a person in South Carolina access
something in Nevada, that's the interstate nexus for you here,
correct?
Mr. Wilson. Correct.
Mr. Mulvaney. So if we could figure out a way to fix that,
I would simply suggest if there's a way to fix it through
technology that Mr. Lipparelli has mentioned, maybe that is an
alternative and less intrusive way to deal with the issue.
And here is why I care. And I have all the respect for my
colleague from New Jersey. But unbeknownst to you and maybe the
other folks on the committee, in fact maybe folks on the
committee here, she's introduced a bill that has a lot of
similarities to what Mr. Massie mentioned earlier, which is to
ban Internet ammunition and gun sales through a similar
requirement to what you've just been talking about here, by
making people actually show up in person to show their ID. I
can't remember the name of the bill--the Stop Online Ammunition
Sales Act of 2015. And that's one of my fears here, is that
they are asking you to instead of being consistent in the state
rights position, they come out and say, well, here is a place
where we really do need Federal intervention so that people in
South Carolina can't access legal Internet gambling in Nevada,
and then use it to say, oh, by the way, it really is hard for
New Jersey to enforce our State laws on gun control because you
can just go online and buy one in South Carolina. And that's
what I'm worried about, is that we're going to go through
regulation and expand the role of the Federal Government as
opposed to limit it.
So, anyway, with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Sorry. Go ahead.
Mr. Wilson. May I respond real quick? And, Representative
Mulvaney, I agree with you on many of your points. I would just
add that one of the points regarding--what was the last comment
you made? It was----
Mr. Mulvaney. Gun control.
Mr. Wilson. The gun control. I absolutely would be against
that. I just believe at the end of the day that online gambling
is a very unique industry and that when you make online
gambling proliferate across the country, it is very difficult
for States like South Carolina to enforce its gambling laws. I
believe under the 10th Amendment States should be able to
outlaw Internet gambling, but those States that want gambling
in there can certainly pass those laws that allow it to occur.
Mr. Mulvaney. Last question, Mr. Chairman, I promise.
Chairman Chaffetz. I need to go to--no, I need to go to----
Mr. Mulvaney. Oh, come on, you took, like, 10 minutes.
Chairman Chaffetz. I know. I didn't ask any questions.
So we're going to go to Mr. Cummings from Maryland.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I'm listening to all this, and if I were a judge listening
to this, the first question I would want to get to is the
bottom line. And what I said in my opening statement, it's
about money. Would you agree that if we were to outlaw online
gambling, that the bricks-and-mortar people would make more
money? Anybody disagree? I don't see any disagreement down
there.
And I guess the reason why I'm getting to go that is
because, I mean, you know, we in the Congress, we are--most of
us--well, some of us, but I don't--have the kind of money that
the big players are playing with. And we have to try to
figure--we're trying to figure out how to deal with this
dispute. But there are some things that are coming through from
what you're saying that I think we can kind of get down to the
bottom line of this.
It sounds like the issue of illegal gambling, which I don't
think--I think all of us want to get rid of illegal gambling--
it's one thing, Mr. Campbell. And my question is, so you don't
feel that you have the tools to deal with illegal gambling?
Hold that for a second, hold that.
And then I want to come to you, Mr. Lipparelli. Let me ask,
with you it sounds like what you're saying, if we can steer
more gamblers, in other words, if we're going to--if we can--if
the States can do the regulating, then a lot of the problems
that Mr. Campbell talks about should be resolved because you
used the term relational database.
What he's talking about is information, and you're saying
we're getting the information that would actually allow him to
do a more effective job. Am I missing something? Because this
is what seems like out of everything that you all have said, to
me, this whole thing boils down to what I just said. Help me.
Mr. Lipparelli. Mr. Cummings, the requirements that we put
in place were exactly that. If we're going to allow online
gaming, there will be player registrations, there will be
complete tracking of activity, so that to the extent these
sites were ever to be used or attempted to be compromised, the
audit trail or the transparency trail is there for the
regulators.
So the quick answer to your question is, yes, we want
players to move to and off of illegal gaming sites. That's
often missed in this discussion, is these illegal sites are
readily available to all the U.S. public. They were available
prior to 2011 letter or the opinion that was authored. They
were available.
And by the way, the reference of the chairman with respect
to the substantial fines that were paid were paid by people who
broke the law who were illegal. Those weren't legal regulated
sites that paid those fines, those were people that were
trafficking in our country, in our States, who ran to the steps
of the Justice Department and said, ``We want to get right and
we're willing to pay to do that.''
Mr. Cummings. So now, Mr. Campbell, can you answer my
question? I gave you some time to think about it.
Mr. Campbell. Certainly, sir. As I mentioned earlier, we
use a variety of statutes to go after individuals and
organizations that are involved in illegal online gambling. And
then of course we use statutes, such as those and others, then
to target those criminal organizations that are using online
gaming to support other types of more serious and nefarious
criminal activity, like human trafficking, like narcotics
trafficking, corruption, that type of thing. So we use a
variety of tools in order to target that particular threat.
Mr. Cummings. Now, going back, in 2011, going back to a
point you made, Mr. Lipparelli, the Department of Justice
Office of Legal Counsel interpreted the Wire Act to prohibit
only sports betting, based on the text of the statute and the
relevant legislative history and other materials.
After that opinion was issued, some States legalized
Internet gambling within their borders and regulated it. Some
have questioned that legal opinion.
Now, Mr. Wilson, DOJ cited two conflicting court decisions.
One was the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals case known as in
re: MasterCard, I know you're familiar, which held that, and I
quote, ``A plain reading of the statutory language clearly
requires that the object of the gambling be a sporting event or
a contest,'' end of quote. The contrary position was taken by a
lower Federal court in U.S. v. Lombardo. Is that right? Is that
correct?
Mr. Wilson. I haven't read that case.
Mr. Cummings. Okay, no problem. DOJ took the position of
the higher court citing the legislative history and a natural
reading of the statute.
Mr. Campbell, some of today's testimony has criticized the
DOJ opinion for opening the door for Internet gambling in the
States, but illegal unregulated Internet gambling existed in
the States well before the 2011 opinion and continues to pose a
risk of harm to citizens. Is that correct? Is that correct, Mr.
Campbell?
Mr. Campbell. Well, I can't speak to exactly the
circumstances before 2011, but, again, we use a variety of
tools to target that threat as it exists and as we receive that
information.
Mr. Cummings. But, Mr. Lipparelli, can you answer that by
prior to 2011?
Mr. Lipparelli. Mr. Cummings, I would answer that by saying
the opinions that people form about the 2011 letter, I think it
mischaracterized in such a way that before 2011 there was a
Criminal Division letter in the form of a 1-page letter sent to
two different States that drew a different conclusion. The 2011
analysis by the OLC was a, I think, 16-page, fairly substantial
opinion that interpreted the Wire Act. The decision of the
Justice Department prior to that came in the form of criminal
justice interpretations that came in the form of a 1-page
letter.
In our State, even though we had that opinion as a criminal
interpretation by Mr. Chertoff at the time, we no more had a
sense of whether that was the only potential interpretation of
the Wire Act and whether that would prevent us as a State from
doing what we thought could be done legally. And you see the
impact of that. In 2011, that opinion changed.
So I would say that there was a 1-page letter that
interpreted the Wire Act one way and now a 16-page opinion that
interpreted it a different way. Both of those were
interpretations of an underlying law that a lot of people
struggle with.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Members are advised that we have a vote on the floor. There
are 11 minutes left. It's the intention of the chair to
recognize Mr. Hice of Georgia for 5 minutes and then go into
recess. We'll resume with the Democrats going first after the
two-vote series.
So, Mr. Hice, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank you
for holding this hearing today and for each of those who are
joining us on the panel.
Before I begin my questions, I've got to make it perfectly
clear that personally I am opposed to all gambling in every
shape, form, or fashion, be it in person or online or whatever
it may be. Having been a pastor for over 25 years, I've
personally seen the destruction of various addictions, and
gambling being among them.
So this type of hearing puts me somewhat in a quandary to
begin with because I am opposed to gambling all together. And I
fully agree with Georgia's Governor, Nathan Deal, who has
publicly opposed the construction of a casino in metro Atlanta,
and who I also know for a fact opposes any lottery offerings
that resemble casino games.
So I'm opposed to gambling. With that being said, I'm also
a supporter of the 10th Amendment and our Constitution and the
right of States. The fact is the people of Georgia voted to
have a lottery, and there's no question that the Georgia
Lottery has contributed over a billion dollars to the HOPE
Scholarship and pre-K education since its inception in 1994. No
one can deny the contribution to those programs.
And I also know that the Georgia Lottery has been in recent
years exploring online sales and, in fact, they have
contributed and invested a considerable amount of money to
ensure that those sales that customers make are in accordance
with both State and Federal law.
So all that being said, my first question is really to each
of you and a brief answer. But if the technology exists to
ensure that online sales are kept away from minors and kept
within the State of Georgia alone, why does the Federal
Government have a role to play? Or does it?
I'll just start, Mr. Campbell, with you.
Mr. Campbell. Right. So I'm not here to take a particular
position in regard to all the aspects of your question, but
just, again, to reiterate that the FBI enforces the laws as
they exist and as we receive information about criminal
activity. That's really our role.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. The Wire Act was originally ushered in through
the Kennedy administration when then U.S. Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy was the Attorney General of the United States
in an effort to help States.
There is no violation of State sovereignty or 10th
Amendment because Congress has the authority under Article I,
Section 8 to regulate interstate commerce. A brick-and-mortar
building----
Mr. Hice. I'm talking about in the State of Georgia, not
interstate. If the technology is there to stay within the
State, what role does the Federal Government have? That's my
question. And please be quick, I've got just a couple minutes
left.
Mr. Wilson. If it crosses State lines, an Internet
transaction, you have a role in that regard.
Mr. Hice. That is not my question.
Mr. Kleine.
Mr. Kleine. Well, the very essence of what we are talking
about here is the Internet has such interstate complications.
As a local prosecutor, that's what we're looking for, is help
from the Federal Government, to say, ``Hey, we can't handle
this.'' And I'm not aware of any way, if I said--if Nebraska
said, ``We want to ban the Internet,'' there's no way it's
going to happen, people are going to have access to the
Internet. So we're looking for help here.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Lipparelli, what would you say?
Mr. Lipparelli. The technology exists to keep it within the
State border. So in your direct question, surely is that there
wouldn't be a role in that sense. There may be business ideas
down the line that may incorporate multistate activities, but
the quick answer to your question is they wouldn't have a role.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Mr. Campbell, are you aware of any
circumstances where the Georgia Lottery has failed to complete
with State or Federal law?
Mr. Campbell. As I sit here, I really do not have any
information about the Georgia Lottery in general, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, my time a wrapping up. But it just
seems to me that the Federal Government should not be dictating
to the States how they operate their State lotteries or
casinos, State-sanctioned casinos, if those States have chosen
to go that route. And, I mean, we have got to protect the 10th
Amendment whether or not we like the gambling issue as a whole.
And, frankly, if there is any legislation that infringes upon
states' rights in that regard, I believe it flies right in the
face of our Constitutions and the limited powers that the
Constitution provides.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Impressive timing.
The committee is with 5 minutes, 30 seconds left of the
vote, the committee will stand in recess. We will return no
sooner than 3:10, but be flexible as regards to--be a little
flexible in terms of when the vote series is concluded. We'll
stand in recess and we'll be back and continue from there.
[recess.][3:15 p.m.]
Mr. Palmer. [Presiding.] The chair recognizes Mr. Lynch for
5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I have enormous respect for the chairman and the sponsor of
this measure. I think, however, that we have different
expectations of the result of what would happen if this bill
were to go forward.
In Massachusetts, I use our own example, we have an
excellent, a smart, hard-working attorney general who handles
this matter for us, along with our secretary of state. And,
unfortunately, I think if the measure went forward as written,
it would take our attorney general and the other 49 attorney
generals off the field basically, off the battlefield, and they
would no longer be helping in this effort, as well as the
secretaries of state that carry responsibility in some States
and our gambling commissions.
So by preemption it would take that whole State framework
off the field. And to be honest with you, I would rather see a
situation where we had cooperation between the FBI and our
State gambling commissions, our attorneys general, and to use
the combined resources of those offices to get at this problem.
I think the end result of this legislation would basically
be to push the gambling offshore. And that's what we have right
now and we can't reach it. And so I think it creates a more
difficult problem. Again, I would rather see the FBI's office
working together with our State officials, State attorneys
general to get at this problem, and I think that would bring a
better result.
Also, I know that some States are working very hard on
this. I know that my colleague Ms. Titus from Nevada has put a
lot of work on this, she has got some good experience on it.
And I would say within this committee, within the Congress
she's probably an expert on this. So I think a good use of my
time would be to yield what time I have remaining, at least
these 3 minutes, to Ms. Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Lynch. Thank you
for those compliments and for yielding. And I thank the
chairman for allowing me to sit in on this committee.
As I've heard the testimony I have been pretty astounded
that Mr. Campbell could come representing the FBI to talk about
the problems of regulated Internet gaming and not be able to
cite a single case in which has been the problem or give us any
statistics that indicate it is a problem.
And, Attorney General, how you can use the 10th Amendment
argument to say that Federal regulation gives you more states'
rights is kind of jabberwocky to me. And also I wonder, if
you're so concerned about somebody in Nevada--I mean, in South
Carolina--gambling on a site that's located in, regulated by,
and limited to Nevada, what you're doing to protect those
teenagers with a cell phone in South Carolina from gambling
illegally and overseas.
But I'd really like to have my time spent by Mr. Lipparelli
sharing with us how our extensive background in regulation of
gaming in bricks and mortar has helped us to develop regulation
for online gaming and to answer some of the questions where
people say, well, if you're in South Carolina you can gamble on
a site that is located in Nevada, how when you cross the line
to California those sites turn off, how we can regulate those
sorts of things. Would you lay some of that out for the
committee?
And I would be glad to welcome any members of the committee
to come to Nevada for a tour and a visit and see how this
really does work.
Mr. Lipparelli. Thank you, Ms. Titus, for the question.
All of the gaming regulation that has been passed
throughout the United States essentially have four tiers. I
think it is important to highlight those. It is the statutory
framework, the regulatory framework, and most people understand
those two tiers pretty well. What many people don't realize,
that below those tiers are a series of technical standards. And
then beyond the technical standards are the interpretations of
those technical standards by staff.
So to represent that someone can anonymously play on a
regulated Internet site is completely inaccurate. You have
full-blown registration requirements that mandate people turn
over Social Security numbers, personal identification. And by
the way, all of their activity, all of their wagers, all of
their deposits, all of their withdrawals, all of their head-to-
head matches are all recorded within the system. So to suggest
that regulated sites can operate in anonymity or without
transparency I believe is completely inaccurate.
So in the case of illegal operators, that's very possible,
and that's been part of my testimony, is you have this
dichotomy of the illegal people that probably are exploiting
customers in South Carolina and I'm confident that they are
exploiting customers in every State in the country.
In the case of Nevada and New Jersey, and New Jersey's
probably a better example because they've adopted all forms of
gaming, those same stringent technical standards and rules
interpretations apply. So the technical people that are
assigned to approve these systems, this is a privileged
industry and you don't just get your product approved because
you submit it. The burden is always on the applicant to prove
that their system meets the technical standards. So there is no
free pass when it comes to deploying these systems.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Palmer. The chair recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am conflicted to some sorts as far as gathering all the
information today, being a big believer in the 10th Amendment
and making sure that we continue to operate with the individual
liberty that the States so guide us to do so, or the Founding
Fathers guide us to do so.
I am concerned about some statistics that I'm running
across. In the past in doing some work, maybe some of our
poorer communities, if you will, even some of the minority
communities, I was alarmed to find out that nearly 40 percent
of all online gamblers make less than $50,000. In fact, 14
percent makes less than $25,000. Are you aware of those
statistics, any of you gentleman, have you done--or you're just
now hearing it? Okay.
Fifty-four percent of all online gamblers are minorities,
which obviously this should cause us some concern because many
of these wonderful people live in some of these poorer
communities.
So I struggle with this, and I've got a couple questions I
want to get to, but I do want to lay something out in my time
that's allotted to Mr. Lipparelli. Several news sources have
noted Senator Harry Reid's attempt to place a provision in the
omnibus in the spending bill that would bail Caesars casino out
of bankruptcy. Others have also reported on Caesars' need for
more States to authorize Internet gambling so that Caesars can
get more players on its New Jersey site.
So my questions, so with the modified interpretation of the
Wire Act, is this what we're talking about? I guess the bottom
line question is, are we talking about helping bail out an
unprofitable casino?
Mr. Lipparelli. Thank you for the question, Mr. Walker.
The interpretation of the Wire Act has been a question
before 2011 and it remains a question now. That is one of the
areas in all forms of gaming development where that question
constantly is brought to the table. You have a situation now
where you have old law that hasn't kept up with innovation. So
the question of that I think is irrelevant to anything relating
to any one company's ambitions, that that interpretation of the
Wire Act is the same interpretation today as it was yesterday,
as it was in 2009, as it was in 2001 when we passed our law.
Mr. Walker. You may be correct. Time will tell. I can't
imagine that Senator Reid would try to do that into the
omnibus, but we'll see how that works out.
Mr. Campbell, is there a Federal agency that has the
resources and personnel necessary to place a patchwork of State
Internet gambling regulatory regimes, protect States that do
not do not permit Internet gambling, and permit the use of
Internet casinos and lotteries for moneys that are laundered or
other criminal activities? Any information that you could speak
to that?
Mr. Campbell. Well, again, I think it would harken back to
statements earlier about the importance of the Federal
agencies, including the FBI, working with State and local
agencies to identify where this illegal activity is occurring
and combining resources to do so. I think a couple of cases
that demonstrate effectiveness in that area, the Legendz Sports
case out of Oklahoma, which was a 10-year illegal gambling
activity, over $1 billion, victimizing Americans involved in
sports betting. And then also the Full Tilt Poker Sports case
as well, where there was a seizure of over $500 million related
to that as well. And of course there were international ties to
those cases.
So I think it's important that regardless of the landscape,
where the threat occurs, and where illegal activity is
occurring, by whatever individuals or organizations, it needs
to be a combined effort by many agencies to target that threat.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Let me follow up. In your earlier
testimony, I believe you mentioned something about the FBI may
have an investigation involving online gambling and terrorism.
It piqued my interest. Would you mind unpacking a little bit
more about that case to the committee, whatever you can share,
and why the FBI may be looking into such matters?
Mr. Campbell. Right. And we can provide you some more
specifics on that in future.
Mr. Campbell. But that was an investigation involving an
individual that was providing monetary support, and one of the
methods for that was money laundering through online gambling.
And so in regard to that particular threat, as the FBI pursues
investigations and we're targeting our top threats, which could
be within terrorism or transnational organized crime, we look
for whatever tools those bad guys essentially are utilizing
that can help promote their criminal activity to hurt
Americans. So it certainly is a priority for us.
Mr. Walker. I'd like to have more time, but my time has
expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Walker.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Lieu from California for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Kleine, for your public service.
Thank you for your testimony today. And I have no doubt you
believe in your testimony, but I do need to point out that
parts of your testimony were simply wrong when it comes to
technology.
Mr. Kleine, you had testified essentially that any
smartphone can be used for online gambling. That's virtually
impossible to pinpoint location.
And, Mr. Wilson, you said essentially that any smartphone
can you used as a virtual casino.
The notion that you can't pinpoint location is simply
incorrect. Just look at GPS next time on your smartphone, it
will tell you where you are relatively accurately. And if you
have lots of folks who are using these devices, they are going
to be able to do it within their own State, but not outside the
State in terms of online gambling.
When you look at the programs that these States have put
in, they are relatively effective. So we have a video that
we're going to show from one such geolocation company, it is
called GeoComply. We're going to show it. It's about a minute
and a half.
And as it's cuing up, I do want to know, the notion that
you have ordinary South Carolina citizens who are somehow
playing a Las Vegas online casino has no basis in reality or
fact, and that's because they can't access that. Las Vegas and
Nevada will block these things. So will New Jersey.
So we're going to show this one for GeoComply, which New
Jersey uses. And if we want to run the video, that would be
great.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
My colleague Mr. Mulvaney earlier today asked is there a
less intrusive way to solve this problem. We just showed it to
you. And there are ways to make sure that folks are not playing
illegally.
Now, is it possible that a very smart hacker could spend
countless hours trying to hack into one of these systems? Sure,
anything is possible. But then we have got much more to be
worried about, about that hacker than if that person from South
Carolina wants to play, for example, the Illinois State Lottery
online.
And then let me ask some questions for Mr. Lipparelli. In
Nevada, for someone to actually play online, they've got to
give their name, their address, their driver's license, their
bank account, and a whole host of our information, correct?
Mr. Lipparelli. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Lieu. But if they walk in a brick-and-mortar casino
they can walk in, put $5,000 on black on the roulette wheel,
win, and then walk out without giving their name or address or
driver's license, correct?
Mr. Lipparelli. They can do that, but the marketing
department at the casino would more likely track them down and
try to get that information from them.
Mr. Lieu. Right. So let's say they win a thousand. Now,
based on what you said earlier, it seems like with online
regulated gambling you have far more information on who it is,
what their bank account is. So they, in fact, were not
anonymous. In the same way we don't say online banking is
anonymous, we don't say online stock trading is anonymous.
This is not anonymous, this is almost the exact opposite.
You have so much information about these people who are online
gambling that this is exactly what law enforcement wants. And I
do want to suggest that what some of the witnesses are arguing
today are essentially that South Carolina should decide what
the over 49 States should do, that is wrong, that violates the
10th Amendment.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Sure. First for Mr. Campbell, just
hypothetically. Do you think States should have the right to
set the gambling policy within their own borders?
Mr. Campbell. I really can't speak to that. Again, we
simply pursue our investigations based on existing Federal
statutes. I would defer to our partners from the States in
regard to that answer.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Well, I'll ask you all. This is for any
one of the four of you to step forward.
I think the problem we address is a lot of States want to
limit gaming, and they want to limit gaming kind of for the
reasons that Congressman Walker said. They feel that it's
something that takes advantage of the poor, people who for
whatever reason have a weakness, and results in messing up
their lives financially.
Now, the last question pointed out there's all sorts of
information being gathered. Do any of you have anything that
you would like to add to my last comment? I mean, in your
positions do you see people mucking up their lives because of
Internet gaming? Do you have any anecdotal evidence or real
evidence you can tell me about? Any one of you four. Who is
ever the most aggressive can go first.
Mr. Wilson. I don't know if I'm the most aggressive, but we
have seen anecdotal evidence in South Carolina through a lot of
the sweepstakes situations we've had. We obviously had video
poker back in the '90s. Anecdotal evidence, children were left
in cars who died because the mother was in there gambling for
hours at a time.
I would like, if I may real quick, and I respect Mr. Lieu
who give his little video presentation, I'm not here today and
I confess I'm not prepared to litigate or debate whether or not
what he put in that video is provable and defensible. But what
I can say is, is that it is not a violation of the 10th
Amendment when Congress has the authority to regulate online
gambling under the Commerce Clause.
For 50 years the Wire Act, Wire Act enforcement and
precedent has kept gambling out of the air and on the ground
where States could better regulate it, whether they prohibit it
or regulate it or support it. When the prohibition was removed
unilateral by a lawyer at the Justice Department they put it up
in the air as well on the ground where States can't regulate it
as easily.
Removal of the online gambling provision of the Wire Act
has eroded the States' ability to prohibit or regulate however
they want the gambling in their States. And so my comment to
that is, if we don't past RAWA and no one here codifies what
was in that legal memorandum, then that legal memo amended
Federal law, they legislated from the Justice Department, and
that is only something that this Congress can do.
Mr. Grothman. As a practical matter--well, first of all, do
any other folks have anything to say on my question? No, okay.
So I'll give you this question. As a practical matter, as
this is left hanging out there, do you believe this is
resulting in a significant increase in gaming in States whose
public policy is probably to discourage that gaming?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, sir, I can take a stab at that. The
legalization of online gaming in Delaware, Nevada, and New
Jersey, there's lots of debate about whether those are
overlapping players or not. I would tell you that the growth in
online gaming on illegal sites occurred without respect to any
policy position taken by any government official. It grew out
of just the natural evolution of technology being exposed to
patrons.
So do I believe more people moved to mobile forms of
gambling that were made available by illegal operators? I
absolutely believe they did. That's why in our State and many
of the people in our industry want to see that become what we
traditionally support, which is forms of regulated industry
that are subject to fair forms of taxation and oversight.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I'll ask Mr. Kleine one final question.
You're here today, and I assume you're here today because
you have an interest in this topic. Anecdotally, in your State,
has this loophole or new rule or whatever you want to call it,
do you believe it has resulted in more gaming in Nebraska that
wouldn't have happened otherwise?
Mr. Kleine. Yes. Anecdotally, I will say that certainly we
have seen people who have problems with gambling generally, to
your question earlier. But is there a greater propensity if
people have access? Sure there is.
And to your point, to the Congressman's point about
geolocation, that's with regard to regulated areas. We're still
not talking about the illegal gambling sites that may be in
another country or whatever that people have Internet access to
it. And my understanding is this would give the FBI or the
Justice Department the ability to go after those folks. We're
still talking about the enforcement perspective about people
who are doing illegal operations, and that's what we're looking
to, is how do we enforce the law. And we need a law to be there
to be able to be enforced. Do you see what I'm saying?
Mr. Grothman. Right. And apparently Nevada has the opinion
that, you know, the more the better, as long as it's regulated.
But in Nebraska, you as a State, you gambling is something that
takes advantage of people's weaknesses, and you are familiar
with examples of people's lives who have been----
Mr. Kleine. Sure. We don't have casino gambling in
Nebraska. There is casino gambling in Iowa, which is right
across the Missouri River from Omaha. We have a multitude of
cases, criminal cases that come out because of the issues that
are caused when people go over and blow all their money in the
casinos in Iowa.
Mr. Grothman. It is Iowa, what can you expect?
Mr. Kleine. Right.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, thanks.
Mr. Kleine. Sure.
Mr. Palmer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from the Virgin
Islands, Ms. Plaskett.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ranking Member.
And thank you gentlemen for testifying on this very
important issue and attempting to give us some insight and
clarification as to your interpretation of the import of online
gambling and where in fact the line is clearly drawn.
So I have an interest in this because in 2001 the United
States Virgin Islands passed the Internet Gaming and Internet
Gambling Act, and over the past decade the Government of the
Virgin Islands has really been handcuffed by incorrect
interpretations, they believe, of the Wire Act. And I believe
that if the act was allowed to be implemented and regulated
properly, much needed revenue might be brought to many
different States that have this law in its place.
So I was really interested in a much more historical look
back on how this came about. I've worked at the Department of
Justice, worked in the Deputy Attorney General's Office, and
understand how long it takes for an opinion to come out of
Legal Counsel, the department of Legal Counsel. So the idea
that that was drafted and written and signed in middle of the
night to me is somewhat a difficult stretch of my imagination
knowing the inner workings of the Justice Department and how
long it takes for an opinion to come out.
So I wanted to look at the interaction between the Justice
Department and Congress over the many years in which before
that opinion was drafted.
So, Mr. Kleine, I understand that in 2002 there was a case
called in re: MasterCard in which the fifth circuit appellate
court ruled that the Wire Act applied only to online sporting
betting. Is that correct?
Mr. Kleine. That's my understanding.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay, that's your understanding. And that the
fifth court made that decision, that would have been 9 years
before the Department of Justice's legal opinion, correct?
Mr. Kleine. That's also my----
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. And since then, during that time, 2009,
even before that Congress has weighed in pretty consistently on
this issue, up until now, that there seems to be some question
about it.
So, Mr. Wilson, were you aware that between 1996 and 2006
Congress passed a series of bills to update the Wire Act and
made it clear that the act should not apply to online casino
operators duly licensed by a State to offer casino games to
people located in those States?
Mr. Wilson. Into which, I'm sorry, which States?
Ms. Plaskett. To any State. This was an act passed by
Congress.
Mr. Wilson. No, I'm not.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Are you aware that Representative
Goodlatte in the 106th, 107th, 108th, 109th Congress offered
legislation on this matter, Senator Jon Kyl, Representative
Leach as well?
Mr. Wilson. No.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. And that even though none of these laws
was enacted, the passage of those bills in both congressional
houses gave clear evidence, I would think, that there is
congressional intent on this matter.
So in 2006 Congress enacted the only law that deals
directly with Internet gaming. Are all of the witnesses, are
you familiar with the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement
Act, otherwise known as UIGEA? Are you all aware of that? I
take that as a yes?
Mr. Wilson. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. I don't want to go into lawyer mode.
Okay. Thank you. So I'd ask that the record reflect that all of
the witness said that they're aware of that.
And I have a slide that I'd like to show.
[Slide.]
Ms. Plaskett. Here is what UIGEA said, that the term
unlawful Internet gambling does not include placing, receiving,
or otherwise transmitting a bet or wager where a bet or wager
is initiated or received or otherwise made exclusively within a
single State.
And then it goes on to say the bet or wager and the method
by which the bet or wager is initiated and received or
otherwise made is expressly authorized by and placed in
accordance with the laws of such State.
And finally, and the law--State law or regulations include
age and location verification requirements reasonably designed
to block access to minors and persons located out of such
State, and appropriate data security standards to prevent
unauthorized access by any person whose age and current
location has not been verified in accordance with such State
laws or regulations.
Mr. Lipparelli, is that the correct pronunciation of your
name, sir?
Mr. Lipparelli. Yes, it is.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. I'm pretty sensitive to that myself. Is
it clear to you from the reading of this law that Congress
never intended to ban States from authorizing and regulating
online gambling within their own borders?
Mr. Lipparelli. The language debated in and around UIGEA
was intense, and I believe you're correct that that was the
intent.
Ms. Plaskett. The final intent and what the language of the
law itself says.
Mr. Lipparelli. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. And so, Mr. Lipparelli, did the State of
Nevada consider this language in drafting its regulations?
Mr. Lipparelli. It did. And I would remind the committee
that we actually passed our State law back in 2001, so the
adoption of UIGEA actually was part of what informed our
regulatory structure. The regulations are controlled by our
Nevada Gaming Commission. So clearly they, at the advice of our
attorney general, considered the elements within UIGEA when we
adopted our regulations.
Ms. Plaskett. So this legislation, which was passed,
incidentally, in a Republican-controlled Congress and signed
into law by President Bush, that the Department--it was--were
you aware this was--this precise language of UIGEA is what the
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel utilized in
determining that it was needed to update DOJ's position to
conform with Congress and with the courts?
Mr. Lipparelli. I believe that's correct.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. I think that I have in fact run out of
time, but I will ask that the record remain open that I could
put the rest of my testimony into the record.
Mr. Palmer. Without objection.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Mr. Palmer. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Buck.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Campbell, are there other statutes that the Federal
Government could use to prosecute the unregulated illegal
online gambling?
Mr. Campbell. Yes, that is correct. We use the Illegal
Gambling Business Act, the Travel Act, various money laundering
statutes, bank fraud, mail fraud, wire fraud, among others, in
order to target that type of threat, and of course
organizations and individuals involved in that activity.
Mr. Buck. And what's the purpose of the Wire Act being used
in this way then?
Mr. Campbell. I can only refer to the opinion itself and
the Department's interpretation of the statute.
Mr. Buck. Is there evidence of any regulated entities using
the gambling opportunities for money laundering?
Mr. Campbell. I'm sorry, the regulated----
Mr. Buck. The online gambling.
Mr. Campbell. Well, there is evidence of criminals
utilizing those forums potentially for money laundering
activity.
Mr. Buck. Have you prosecuted any cases? Has the Department
of Justice brought any cases based on that theory?
Mr. Campbell. I would have to refer to them and maybe
provide some other information related to that.
Mr. Campbell. I'm not--as I sit here, I can't define
specific cases involving the money laundering aspect.
Mr. Buck. And are there cases that criminals have used
brick-and-mortar casinos to launder money?
Mr. Campbell. Again, I'd have to refer back to provide you
some information regarding that.
Mr. Buck. Well, I can answer that one for you. I prosecuted
some of those. So it has happened at brick-and-mortar casinos.
Why would you need this statute then? Why couldn't you use
other statutes to prosecute these cases if you can in other--in
the brick-and-mortar situation?
Mr. Campbell. Well, certainly we are utilizing these
various statutes, that's correct, in regard to any criminal
activity, illegal activity relating to gaming. That is correct.
Mr. Buck. Mr. Wilson, do you worry that if the Federal
Government goes down this path that the Federal Government
could also go down the path of legalizing gambling in all
States?
Mr. Wilson. I mean, I suppose I haven't put much thought
into them legalizing gambling. That's always been the policy of
them, to leave that solely within the purview of the States.
That's always been the policy of the Congress, is give great
deference to the States in how to regulate gambling. I don't
see that changing, but----
Mr. Buck. Well, you're seeing it change now. I mean, we're
having a hearing based on----
Mr. Wilson. I'm seeing an erosion, yes, sir.
Mr. Buck. Okay. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Buck. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. Just to answer the question, I would
like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
Washington Post article. It is a little bit older, but it says:
``Three worked the Web to help terrorists.'' One line from the
sentence: ``Authorities also say the men laundered money from
stolen credit card accounts through more than a dozen online
gaming sites.''
I ask unanimous consent to enter that into the record.
Mr. Palmer. So ordered.
Mr. Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
New York, Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chair for calling the committee
and for all of the panelists on this important issue for being
here today and testifying.
I would really like to focus on the law enforcement aspect
of this. And the National Fraternal Order of Police submitted a
letter to the committee expressing their law enforcement
perspective on regulating online gambling. And I would like
unanimous consent to place their letter in the record.
Mrs. Maloney. And I'd like to quote from the letter. It
says, quote: ``It is imperative that States be able to reserve
the right to create a strong regulatory framework to allow law
enforcement to successfully protect consumers and to drive
illegal operators out of the marketplace.''
So, Mr. Lipparelli, as you have experience in this area,
would you agree that a strong regulatory framework for online
gambling would support law enforcement efforts, consumer
protections, and drive illegal operators out of the business
and the marketplace?
Mr. Lipparelli. Clearly, I believe that should be the
priority of both State and Federal law enforcement. This was an
issue prior to our State's legalization and regulation of
online gaming, and it only became more apparent once there were
economic interests quote/unquote, in the game, where they,
themselves, were able to analyze the impact of those operating
illegally without paying taxes and registering customers
without any form of serious confirmation. So, clearly, the
answer to that is yes.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Mr. Campbell, I'm guessing or assuming
that a strong regulatory framework aids the FBI's efforts if
investigating a player or transaction related to a regulated
online gambling operation or platform.
Mr. Campbell. Well, certainly both statutory law and
regulation can have an effect in regard to ensuring operators
continue their operations within the law. That is true.
Mrs. Maloney. And, Mr. Lipparelli, some States have
concerns about the difficulty and cost of regulating online
gambling within their State borders. Can you please share some
insight from your experience in Nevada drafting the State
regulations for oversight?
Mr. Lipparelli. I can certainly speak to our experience in
Nevada. I was chairman at the time we adopted these
regulations. And at that moment in time we added no new
resources in terms of human capital to our agency. We did it
within the confines of our existing staffing levels.
It's an important question. There was, I believe, some
cyber resources added in our just-passed legislative session. I
think the better question with regard to that relates to
empowering law enforcement potentially in other ways to
potentially go after the illegal operators. There are State
laws on the books today that clearly delineate those as illegal
activities, so there are tools in place already. But if there
is a desire to enhance that capability, you won't get any
disagreement from me.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. And how were you able to design a
regulatory structure that was easy to implement the various
oversight and enforcement aspects and manage the costs?
Mr. Lipparelli. I don't want to represent in any way that
it was easy. I would concur. I woud also suggest that my
colleagues in New Jersey at the time would probably also not
call it easy. Any regulation of any new technology presents
questions, concerns by the incumbent players. But this has been
the hallmark of gaming regulation since the late '70s. In the
1950s that foundation was laid. But beginning in the 1970s and
after, when technology really started to affect our business,
each and every time we've taken evolutionary steps--for
example, slot machines used to be mechanical devices, then they
became proprietary software written only by the people who
supplied that. Today most of it is PC technology. That's an
example of the evolution of the technology.
Each one of those presents risks and uncertainties. But in
each case I think the gaming regulators rose to the occasion,
created the right technical standards. And often we overcorrect
and then back off.
So I wouldn't characterize any of the work that my
colleagues have done over the years as easy, but they have
great experience in doing it.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, do you think that Nevada's experience
and Nevada's regulatory standards could be used as an example
for other States?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, clearly, I made those comments in my
prepared remarks. If compliance is the goal--and if you talk to
any regulator, that's always their desire, right, we want our
regulated people to comply with the rules and the regulations--
any time you diverge, having wildly different standards from
State to State, that creates potential conflicts and issues.
So to the degree that regulators cooperate, which they
often do, the industry, the players, the State, everyone
benefits from that. Wildly different standards can create
issues. But generally speaking, many States, Nevada, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Mississippi, have all been very
cooperative, and the independent test labs also contribute to
that base of knowledge that says, what's the most efficient way
to regulate, what can create the outcome?
And we're constantly at that effort. It never goes away.
Every time a new piece of technology comes along, it presents
new challenges. And I think the industry, to its credit,
deserves praise for the fact that you don't see widespread
scandal in our industry. I think that's something to be proud
of.
Mrs. Maloney. I would agree with you.
My time has expired. Thank you very much.
Mr. Palmer. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
One of my concerns is the harm that Internet gambling will
cause, particularly for adolescents. There's numerous studies
that indicate there's much higher rates of harm for
adolescents. There's a much higher prevalence of disorders
among adolescents as a result of gambling. Adolescent gambling
is linked to deviant behavior. A few years ago, the National
Academy of Pediatrics published a research paper and said that
there's a pandemic of gambling addiction, not an epidemic, but
a pandemic of gambling addiction among adolescents. And you
talk about being able to control access across State lines.
One of the things that I would like to explore here is what
is the legal liability that parents might have for their
children if they've gotten addicted to gambling or if they've
spent enormous amounts of money gambling?
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. I would argue that would be fact specific. I
mean, we have laws in South Carolina, contributing to the
delinquency of a minor, and obviously that would be fact
specific as to what the parent was doing in relation to the
child and were they putting them in that position, were they
encouraging it. It's very fact specific. But, yes, it could
actually exist in South Carolina where there could be some
criminal liability on part of the parent.
Mr. Palmer. How about civil liability?
Mr. Wilson. I would argue--I'm not a civil attorney, but,
yes, I think you could have civil liability.
Mr. Palmer. And there's examples of this already. The FTC
won a $325 million settlement from Apple because the company
billed consumers for millions of dollars in charges incurred by
their children who were using mobile apps without their
parents' consent. And one of my concerns is there's nothing to
prevent a nonparent, even a nonfamily member, to give a minor
access, you know, log on to an Internet casino on the phone,
give them the phone, or for them to get access to an adult's
logon information.
And, you know, when you're talking about South Carolina
didn't want it in South Carolina but North Carolina did, is it
the State's responsibility, North Carolina, to control that?
Again, is that going to be something that just has to be
litigated in civil cases or is there a criminal issue here?
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. I'm trying to understand the question, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Palmer. What are the limits? You know, how does one
State protect itself from another State that has introduced
something that is clearly hazardous to people?
Mr. Wilson. It is very difficult, and it is undefinable. I
don't think, if I had the balance of your time, I would eat
that up and a lot more. I don't know how I could define that.
But it would be extremely difficult to guard against that
between interstate laws and policies.
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask you this, then, General Campbell.
Should online gambling proliferate in the U.S., as it is
expected to as a result of the OLC opinion, do you believe the
burden of enforcing the newly established laws--and this is Mr.
Campbell, I'm sorry--and regulations in multiple States will be
a drain on your current resources?
Mr. Campbell. We're still targeting the most significant
threats. So, regardless, we're going to commit the resources
that we have available against those top threats and where
appropriate, partner with our--with other State authorities.
Mr. Palmer. Do you--or you, General Wilson--believe that
the Department of Justice took into consideration the right of
American families to keep online casinos out of their homes and
off their children's cell phones and tablets and laptops?
Mr. Wilson. I do not believe they did. No, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Would you like to comment on that, Mr.
Campbell?
Mr. Campbell. Again, I would simply refer to the opinion
itself and what's available there as far as the processes that
went into the development of the opinion.
Mr. Palmer. Should the government be in the business of
facilitating such an activity?
I have been involved in this from a think tank perspective
for years and studying this and looking at what happened in
South Carolina when you had the proliferation of electronic
gambling, video gambling. There were more places to gamble in
South Carolina than there were in Nevada. It got to the point
that the manufacturing association, the South Carolina Chamber
of Commerce joined with religious groups to get it out of their
State. It got to the point that it was hurting economic
development because companies didn't want to come in.
And that's one of my concerns about this, is proliferation
of this and how it's going to impact not only families, but the
ability to do business, the workplace environment. Those are
some serious concerns that I think need to be taken into
consideration as we go forward here.
My time has expired. Would you like to respond, General
Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman, I didn't have the opportunity
earlier. Representative Plaskett was mentioning UIGEA, and I
did not want--she ran out of time and another Member started
talking, and I was respectful of the balance of their time.
I want to just put on the record that she was mentioning
UIGEA may conflict with the Wire Act in allowing interstate
gambling. I wanted to just go ahead and put on the record that
the provision that she was referring to in UIGEA is intrastate.
It's a technical amendment put in UIGEA that would allow retail
lottery terminals or gambling terminals to communicate with a
processing center somewhere within the same State. It wasn't an
interstate gambling provision, it was intrastate. So it doesn't
conflict with the Wire Act. That was all.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, General Wilson.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Clay.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Chair, I'd like to
ask unanimous consent to enter 31 letters for the record
supporting States' rights to regulate online gambling.
Chairman Chaffetz. [presiding.] Without objection, so
ordered.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, along the same lines of questioning as Mr.
Palmer, and this is a panel-wide question, starting with Mr.
Campbell, is there a foolproof method developed by the States
or anyone else to prevent minors from online gambling? Is there
an app? Is there a method that has been proven by a State or
the Federal Government that can detect the age of the
participant at the online gambling site?
And I'll start with you, Mr. Campbell.
Mr. Campbell. At this time, I'm not aware of any particular
technology that can specifically do that.
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. No, sir, I'm unaware of any technology. And I
could probably bring an expert in here to contradict others.
Mr. Clay. Sure.
Mr. Kleine, are you aware of anything?
Mr. Kleine. I'm not aware of any.
Mr. Clay. Mr. Lipparelli.
Mr. Lipparelli. I have an affliction, having been in the
industry for 20 years. The goal of gaming regulation is always
to set the bar appropriately high. I don't think there's--I
haven't met that coder yet that can write perfect software. I
wish I could. It would have solved a lot of headaches for me in
the past.
But generally speaking, operators with respect to regulated
online space have set the bar unusually high. If the ambition
of a gambler is to access a site and they're going to go
through the panoply of requirements of a legal regulated site,
they'll probably get to the second or third entry point in the
site and move on back to their illegal site.
So the quick answer to your question is there are outlets
for those kinds of people to play today. Those are the illegal
operators. The legal operators put in a panoply of
requirements, and there's no guarantee that a minor could ever
access a site, but generally speaking, the standards are quite
high.
Mr. Clay. Now, you and I have heard the horror story of a
minor getting ahold to maybe a parent's credit card and running
up thousands of dollars' worth of debt on these sites. And it's
too late by the time the parent finds out about it. So, I mean,
that happens, that actually happens. And it gives me pause and
makes me wonder, do the States have a handle on the regulation
of this type of online gaming?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, this is where I go into my--usually
my commentary about that risk exists in all consumer businesses
to the extent you're transacting, and gaming is really no
different. The only argument I would make is that in the case
of gaming, typically the standards that we require are
significantly greater than what you would see in any consumer
transaction out there. You can buy all kinds of things online
and it doesn't require any of the kinds of protections that our
industry have put in place.
Mr. Clay. Sure. But it's easy for you to detect a person's
age in a brick-and-mortar facility, which is how gambling
originally got started in this country.
Mr. Lipparelli. And there are prosecutions each and every
year in the various States that allow brick and mortar for
minors violating that law.
Mr. Clay. For sure. But I'd just be curious as to how many
prosecutions occur in the online aspect of gambling.
Mr. Lipparelli. I know that the colleagues that I have
talked to have told me that, and it was my concern when we
adopted our regulations, in the conversations I've had with
them as recently within the last 30 days, they do not cite that
as an issue that's causing them distress. They have not been
warned. They have not been told of horror stories of that kind
of thing happening. So I can only go by what their personal
experiences are that they relayed to me.
Mr. Clay. Okay. Any other panelists have any anecdotal
evidence of----
Mr. Wilson. This is very anecdotal, Representative. My 7-
year-old is fond of hacking my iTunes account and downloading
video games. I don't know what would stop him if he had a
penchant for gambling on my iPhone if I had an app on there. So
that's more anecdotal than anything.
Mr. Clay. And probably with these new fantasy football
leagues and all of that, I'm sure that young people getting
excited about participating in that forum too.
Let me--yeah. Yeah. I'll yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
It is the intention of the chair to recognize Mr. Carter
and then represent myself and then we'll adjourn. Members are
advised that there is less than 13 minutes in an extensively
long vote series. And we'll go that direction.
Mr. Carter, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here. This a great panel. Certainly
an important subject. Certainly all of us are interested in it.
Mr. Campbell, let me start with you. Can you just briefly
describe a casino-grade geolocation system to me?
Mr. Campbell. No, I do not have information about that. I
cannot provide information on that.
Mr. Carter. On the casino-grade geolocation system?
Mr. Campbell. No, I am not familiar with that system.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Okay. Well, let me ask you, are you aware
that the Georgia Lottery Corporation conducts third-party
penetration testing of their geolocation and age-verification
solutions? And this is very important to me. I know it's
somewhat specific to my State, but the Georgia Lottery has been
very successful, and by statute all of those proceeds from that
go to education. So we're looking at potentially losing $10
million in revenue directly to education. So that's why it's of
concern to me.
Mr. Campbell. Certainly. No, I am not familiar with the
Georgia Lottery or its processes.
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Senator, let me ask you. If we were able to control--if we
were able to control where online lottery sales can be done and
the age of the person who purchases those tickets online, if
we're able to control that, then how is it the Federal
Government's problem? Why should the Federal Government be
getting involved in it?
Mr. Lipparelli. I'm not sure I'm totally tracking the
question. But the States that establish their statutes,
regulations, and technical standards, I have found over 20
years of experience, those local requirements, those local
technical standards usually address the resident issues that
crop up with those regulatory agencies. So in the case of an
online lottery business, there will be particular requirements
that may not be what you see in a traditional casino
environment. So if there are specific elements related to
lottery, I'm sure the lottery players in that game will
contribute to very detailed debates on what should and
shouldn't be included.
In the case of lotteries specifically, it's no different
than what we saw with our online accounts. The one difference
that they may decide to adopt is some of the registration
requirements that we required in our State. That may not be the
case, but that is one example that could bring greater
transparency. But those tools are available, and they're get
better and better each day.
Mr. Carter. So the tools to be able to identify where the
ticket is bought, where it's originating from, and the age, the
verification of the age of the person who's purchasing it?
Mr. Lipparelli. I don't see the difference between any
purchase transaction and any gaming transaction. It all comes
in the form of complete tracking. So that I think those are
very similar.
As it relates to age verification, those will be continued
challenges. There's more and more technology coming onboard.
But you probably shouldn't be able to register in the first
place for an online transaction unless you've provided your
identifiers, your personal account information, your access to
whatever card you're using to transact.
Again, building that wall as high as you can so that to the
extent that a parent is going to then turn over that account
information is no different than a parent being irresponsible
in any other consumer transaction.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Well, gentlemen, my concern is this,
okay? I don't want to lose $10 million in revenue to education.
I mean, it's very, very important to us in the State of
Georgia. It's worked well. And we feel like we're able to
control where that ticket originates from, where that purchase
originates from. We feel like we're able to control--to verify
the age of the purchaser.
So why come to Washington, D.C. and for me to say, ``No,
I'm not going to allow you to do it,'' if we're able to control
that?
Mr. Kleine.
Mr. Kleine. What you're talking about is intrastate, I
think. And what we're talking, I think, for the most part is
interstate issues with regard to gambling.
Mr. Carter. Well, let me get clarification then. Do you
have any problem with intrastate?
Mr. Kleine. I don't have a problem if Georgia has a lottery
and they run it intrastate and they regulate it intrastate.
Nebraska has a lottery also that we have intrastate and we get
the money and it goes to education. But I don't think--that's
not what I guess I'm talking about here.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Okay. I just want to make.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. We have a lottery too, Representative, and I
absolutely have no problem with that. This is absolutely within
the borders of each individual State. We're talking about cross
State borders online gambling.
Mr. Carter. Fair enough. I just want to make sure because,
quite honestly, I have concerns about that as well. But, again,
for the third time, I just don't want to interrupt something
that is working so well in our State and that we feel like we
have under control. So I just want to get clarification on
that, okay?
Mr. Chairman, that's all I had, and I'll yield back. Thank
you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, I thank the gentleman, and now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And the reason we're here is because the Office of Legal
Counsel issued an opinion reinterpreting what had been in the
books for more than 50 years. That's one of the issues that
we're here for.
There are some that believe--and the other point I'd make
is there are an untold number of gambling sites offshore. If
you really want to gamble right now you can go online and do
it. It's against the law. But what the administration is
talking about, what's showing up in this OLC opinion, which is
one person's opinion, gives some to think that they have legal
rights and reasons to bypass the States at the Federal level
and be able to offer their gambling sites in States across the
country.
Now, that poses a problem for a lot of States, States that
have legalized gambling, States like myself who have no gaming
and don't want to have any gaming. And I think it's naive at
best to think that you can put a wall on the Internet and just
say: Hey, this is just--you know, we're not going to be able to
penetrate this. You can't.
With gaming there are lots of issues other than just
location. Location is a big one. It's a core part of it. But it
also has to do with your age. It has to do with your
intoxication. It has to do with a whole host of things that can
be addressed with somebody in person at a physical facility.
And if an individual wants to--if an individual State wants
to move this direction, then look at the Federal law. But I
think we would both agree, certainly with the gentleman from
Georgia, that you don't just unilaterally change the law with
one OLC opinion. And the concern that's being expressed here
from a variety of different States is that this is a problem.
There's a reason why the second highest, as best I can
tell, revenue to the Department of Treasury through the
Department of Justice on fees and fines is because of gaming
issues. Now, a lot of that has to come with PokerStars and some
of those settlements that skewed the numbers exceptionally
high. But it is a problem. And we've had numerous attorneys
general, numerous governors saying: You can't do that to our
State.
If somebody wants to come in and pass a piece of
legislation and change the way we're going to do this, than
introduce a bill and pass it. But what we're seeing now is the
proliferation that is going to cause untold problems.
Mr. Lipparelli, I want to make sure that I'm just crystal
clear. You're very nice, very competent. You represent your own
personal views. You're not here representing the Nevada Senate,
correct?
Mr. Lipparelli. That is correct. That's why I made that
statement----
Chairman Chaffetz. You're not here----
Mr. Lipparelli. --at the beginning of my testimony.
Chairman Chaffetz. You're not here representing the gaming
board in Nevada?
Mr. Lipparelli. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. And it's very interesting to me, at
least with the piece of legislation that I sponsored, the wide
array of support on both sides of the aisle. On the one hand,
in the Senate you've had support from Dianne Feinstein and Mike
Lee, from Senator Graham to Kelly Ayotte to--I mean, you've got
a whole host of people. Myself and Tulsi Gabbard in the House.
You've got people from really the full political spectrum here
that are saying: This is a problem, we do need a bit of a
timeout.
But, Mr. Lipparelli, let me go back to your--I'm not sure
I'm following your logic here. You are arguing, you have said,
quote ``We can all agree that a world with 50 State-specific
standards would be a nightmare,'' correct?
Mr. Lipparelli. I made that reference with respect to the
technical standards.
Chairman Chaffetz. So do you want a national gaming board?
Is that what you're asking for?
Mr. Lipparelli. No. It comes down to the possible versus
the desired state. The desired state----
Chairman Chaffetz. So are you advocating that you should be
able to do gaming--that the residents of Nevada should be able
to gamble on the Georgia State Lottery?
Mr. Lipparelli. No, I'm not at all.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why not?
Mr. Lipparelli. That's controlled by Georgia law and Nevada
law.
Chairman Chaffetz. But why wouldn't the resident of Las
Vegas be able to gamble on the Georgia Lottery site? Why
wouldn't you advocate for that?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, the State law applies if--to your--I
would agree with you. If there is a national acceptance or if
thereis a willingness. And we've actually been in these
chambers before looking at the prospect of interstate online
gaming. There were a lot of potential arguments for why that
didn't pass and, you know, what were some of the impediments
that got that going.
But today in Nevada they define their gaming law, Georgia
would define whatever forms of entertainment or gaming they
want to define, and it doesn't necessarily hold that as a
result of that we should just have a national policy that says
everybody can gamble on each other's various State law's back.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you're okay with online gaming as
long as it's on an online gaming site within your State under
your regulations?
Mr. Lipparelli. Right. Or if there's a willingness among
various States to cooperate and enter into common contests. I
wouldn't object to that if those States desired to do so.
Chairman Chaffetz. So if you teamed up, you know, because
the majority, right, 47 of the States they don't have this,
they're not participating in it, you're okay with compacts that
would then regulate this.
Mr. Lipparelli. I am.
Chairman Chaffetz. And then you could essentially create
national gambling. You think that that's an avenue to go. And
who would regulate that?
Mr. Lipparelli. The question about compacts has been
addressed, at least in its first iteration, with the
connections between New Jersey, Delaware, and Nevada. I was a
part of that process before I left the Gaming Control Board,
and the prospect that States could come together similar like
they come together in the form of lottery, set common standards
that seem to be addressing the common issues between those
States.
Chairman Chaffetz. And, Mr. Campbell, how are you going to
enforce an expansion of gaming online? How many resources--he
was asked earlier how many resources you can allocate to this.
But if somebody in Nevada has a problem with the State in
Delaware, who's going to enforce that?
Mr. Campbell. Well, again, as we go about our intelligence
and information gathering, we assess for the most serious
threats that we would target that could be related to online
gaming from support to terrorism or transnational organized
crime and so forth. And then, again, as we do always, that's
how we would dedicate our resources and potentially incorporate
the State and local authorities in that effort as well.
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Lipparelli, you have been quoted as
saying that New Jersey should not be permitting PokerStars to
return to the U.S. market. Why did you take that position?
Mr. Lipparelli. I don't think I ever took that specific
position. The position that I took vis--vis PokerStars and
other companies like them who had entered the U.S. marketplace
in violation of State laws, including my own in Nevada, was
they should stand for suitability just like every other
applicant. If they can survive that scrutiny and they can have
an appropriate answer, it's for each one of these regulatory
boards to decide whether that's a suitable method of operation,
that if they were here before and settled their differences
with the Justice Department to the tune of hundreds of millions
of dollars, I think every gaming commission chairman or every
board member that authorizes licenses should take that into
consideration.
Chairman Chaffetz. You said, quote, ``Essentially
trading''--you said--your quote regarding PokerStars, your
quote: ``Essentially trading their credibility away. You might
as well not have a licensing process,'' end quote. So you've
changed your position since then?
Mr. Lipparelli. I take exception to the term
``PokerStars.'' What I made in that comment was if the bar
would be set so low by licensing boards to ignore the kinds of
activities that PokerStars was engaged in, then, yes, I think
there is a real question as to the validity of licensing if
that kind of activity is allowed.
Chairman Chaffetz. Fair enough. Okay.
I have gone past my time. We have zero time on the clock
with 300 people who have not yet voted on the Cole amendment on
the floor.
I want to thank you all for being here. You offer an
interesting perspective, the local region, the State
perspective, the Federal law enforcement issues. I do
appreciate all of you being here.
This is an important topic. It's something that is
permeating the United States. It's on a lot of people's minds.
There are various pieces of legislation in both directions out
there. And I do appreciate your participation. It was a good
hearing today.
At this point, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
