- REFORMING THE POSTAL SERVICE: FINDING A VIABLE SOLUTION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REFORMING THE POSTAL SERVICE: FINDING A VIABLE SOLUTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 11, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-135

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-499 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
Andrew Dockham, General Counsel
Jeffrey Post, Government Operations Subcommittee Deputy Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 11, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Megan Brennan, Postmaster General, U.S. Postal Service
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr.Robert G. Taub, Acting Chairman, U.S. Postal Regulatory
Commission
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26
Ms. Lori Rectanus, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    56
Written Statement............................................    58
Ms. Jessica Lowrance, President-Elect, Association for Postal
Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    78
Written Statement............................................    80
Mr. Fredric Rolando, President, National Association of Letter
Carriers
Oral Statement...............................................    97
Written Statement............................................   100

APPENDIX

Oxford Strategic Consulting G-20 Postal Services 2016, Submitted
by Mr. Lynch, can be accessed..................................   160
RESPONSE Postmaster General to Chairman Chaffetz QFRs 2016-06-09.   161
RESPONSE Lowrance-PostCom to Chairman Chaffetz QFRs 2016-06-02...   176

REFORMING THE POSTAL SERVICE: FINDING A VIABLE SOLUTION

----------

Wednesday, May 11, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Duncan, Jordan, Walberg,
Amash, Farenthold, Lummis, Massie, Meadows, DeSantis, Buck,
Walker, Blum, Hice, Russell, Carter, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer,
Cummings, Norton, Clay, Lynch, Connolly, Kelly, Lawrence, Lieu,
Watson Coleman, DeSaulnier, Boyle, Welch, and Lujan Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Good morning, and thank you for being here. This is an
important topic that affects every American, and it is a vital
part of our commerce in the United States of America. We are
here to discuss the future of the United States Postal Service
and to address options for ensuring its long-term viability.
Each year, more than 40 percent of the world mail volume is
carried through the United States Postal Service. The Postal
Service employs more than 400,000 full-time workers spread
throughout the country. It is also the backbone of more than a
trillion-dollar mailing industry that employs more than 7.5
million people.
However, due to the ongoing changes in the way Americans
use the mail, the Postal Service faces an unprecedented
financial crisis. Since 2006, mail volume has declined more
than 25 percent or about 60 billion pieces of mail annually. As
a result, the Postal Service has lost money for 9 straight
years. With nearly a decade of running behind, the Postal
Service faces mounting long-term financial challenges. The
agency has $125 billion in unfunded liabilities, including $54
billion for retiree health care, and has exhausted its $15
billion statutory debt limit.
Further, the Postal Service lacks the funds it needs for
critical infrastructure investments. Chief among those is the
purchase of a delivery fleet projected to cost roughly $6
billion. Think about all those millions and millions of postal
boxes that need somebody to come actually deliver the mail to
them. It is a miraculous thing, I think, in this country that
for less than 50 cents you can put a stamp on an envelope and a
day or 2 or 3 days later, that is going to show up at another
address within the country. It really is truly amazing. But if
you are going to purchase new delivery vehicles and prepare for
the next decade or two, you are going to need some money, and
it is something that the Postal Service does not have.
In the meantime, they must manage a delivery fleet of
vehicles, which on average is 24 years old and costs $1 billion
a year in maintenance. That is just the maintenance cost. While
the Postal Service has made efforts to cut cost and streamline
its operations, it is not enough.
I think it is important to note that many of the unions
have been very helpful in actually working with the Postal
Service and making cuts, but they don't want to keep continuing
to cut the number of personnel, and neither do I. We want to
see a growing, vibrant, thriving Postal Service.
So today, we are going to hear from representatives of five
key stakeholders within the postal community, including the
postmaster general, the Postal Regulatory Commission, the
Government Accountability Office, private industry, and one of
the more important postal unions. There are a number of postal
unions. I wish we could have them all up at the same time, but
we have one here with us today.
The witnesses will discuss reforms as needed, as well as
how certain reform proposals would work. One of the things that
is most critical in dealing with this has to do with Medicare,
and I look forward to hearing from the Postmaster General
Brennan and the NALC union President Rolando about a joint
proposal to require the Postal Service retirees to fully enroll
in Medicare in order to receive Federal health care benefits in
their retirement.
Since 1983, postal workers have paid some $29 billion, $29
billion they have paid into Medicare. Currently, postal
retirees have a choice in enrolling in Medicare. As Federal
retirees, they can continue their sole enrollment in Federal
employee health care plans, or they can enroll in both a
Federal plan and Medicare. While three-quarters of retirees
already enroll in both Medicare and the Federal plan, the
Postal Service and its retirees could see significant savings
if all retirees were duly enrolled.
I look forward to hearing more about this proposal. It is
one of the most key elements, biggest elements in our drafting
and coming forward with a reform package that has a vibrant and
sustainable Postal Service. Let me just say I think it is
important to note the approach that we are taking here.
Are there costs to be cut? Yes. Are there things that we
can do to become more effective, more efficient? Yes. But I
also do believe that the Postal Service is a vital tool of
commerce, and a thriving, vibrant, productive Postal Service is
essential to our economy. We cannot ignore this.
Think about the world of the internet. Think about the way
commerce is moving. Think of the way we communicate. Think of
how we send bills and communicate as nation. You have to have a
vibrant, thriving Postal Service in order to achieve all of
that. That is why I think so many people are here today, and it
is one of the most important things that our committee will be
addressing and taking care of. That is the goal, and that is
what we are trying to achieve.
And thank you all for being here. We should have a good
hearing today.
Chairman Chaffetz. With that, I will now recognize the
ranking member, my good friend Mr. Cummings of Maryland.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I,
first of all, want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your hard
work and staff on both sides working so hard for a long time to
try to resolve the many complex issues that Postal Service
faces. And I want to thank the Postal Service community and all
of those affected by it because there is a genuine effort to
try to come to some type of resolution that is a win-win-win-
win for everybody. And I express my appreciation because it
helps us as we move along.
I also want to thank our witnesses for being here to
discuss ideas for addressing the significant challenges facing
this very critical institution. Since its establishment more
than 240 years ago, the Postal Service has served as the
critical link that touches each one of our lives and connects
us all together, our families, our businesses, and our
communities.
Through more than 32,000 post offices staffed by more than
600,000 people, the Postal Service delivers more than 150
billion pieces of mail a year to more than 150 million
addresses. Since the last postal reform legislation was enacted
some 10 years ago, the Postal Service has encountered deepening
financial challenges. As a result of the increasing popularity
of one-line communications and transactions, the volume of mail
handled by the Postal Service has fallen by more than 25
percent since 2006, and this trend is expected to continue.
The cost of the Postal Service's operations have also risen
in part because the Postal Service is required to provide
universal delivery service to every address in the United
States. Every year, about 900,000 new addresses are created in
this country, and the Postal Service, its network and
facilities, letter carriers and workers must expanded to
deliver to every single new address.
Congress has also imposed substantial burdens on the Postal
Service that have nothing to do with providing universal
service. The Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2006
required the Postal Service to fully prefund its liabilities
for retiree health care costs, a requirement that no other
Federal agency or private sector company faces. These
liabilities, together with unfunded pension liabilities,
currently amount to about $125 billion, which is almost double
the agency's annual revenues.
Since 2006, the Postal Service has instituted many cost-
saving measures, including the following: cutting 200,000
positions through attrition, cutting work hours by 331 million,
consolidating more than 360 facilities and 20,000 delivery
routes, and changing retail operation hours in approximately
13,000 post offices to match customer demand and reducing the
number of administrative areas and districts.
And let me say this. I have said it to their faces; I have
said it behind their backs. I think the unions have bent over
backwards trying to work with the Postal Service and have
done--I mean, of all the committees I have sat on and dealt
with, I think here we have a genuine effort by unions to
understand what is going on, to make sure that they do right by
their members, and at the same time make sure that we have a
viable and strong postal system. And I want to thank them.
The Postal Service reports that these initiatives have
saved the agency some $15 billion a year. However, there are
significant legal restrictions that limit the Postal Service's
ability to cut costs and introduce new products to counteract
its deteriorating financial condition. As a result, despite its
diligent efforts, the Postal Service has reported a net loss of
$5.1 billion for fiscal year 2015, its ninth consecutive year
of losses. The Postal Service projects $5.9 billion in net
losses for fiscal year 2016.
Only Congress can modify the nature and the structure of
the funding obligations imposed by statute on the Postal
Service's health care and pension programs. Of course, these
problems are not new, and we have gone far down the road of
developing reform legislation in previous Congresses. But
Congress has been unable to reach a final bill. The time now is
to act.
And so I want to again thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
commitment to working on a bipartisan basis, and it truly has
been bipartisan with me and other colleagues to develop a
realistic reform proposal. I am encouraged by our discussion
and hopeful that we will be able to help put the Postal Service
on a viable and sustainable path.
I believe that any postal reform legislation that this
committee considers should do the following, as I close:
alleviate the burdensome requirement for prefunding retiree
health benefits, allow the Postal Service to have separate
postal-only health plans that integrate fully with Medicare,
allow the Postal Service to offer non-postal financial services
such as post-office-to-post-office money orders and certain
types of gift cards, and require the Postal Service to create a
new chief innovation officer charged with developing new,
innovative products, as any other business.
And so we need to work together to address the problems
facing the Postal Service, and we need to treat the employees
of the Postal Service fairly and compassionately. Waiting until
the Postal Service runs out of cash is simply not an option.
The Postal Service is an institution on which all Americans
rely.
And finally, I want to thank Mr. Connelly and Mr. Lynch for
their hard work on this effort. We have met many times trying
to get through this, and we will.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, we simply cannot fail. We
simply cannot kick the can down the road. The time to act is
now, and I do believe that we are well on the road to
accomplishing that.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I think it is important to note the good work that Mr.
Meadows of North Carolina, Mr. Lynch, and Mr. Connelly have put
into this, and I concur with my colleague Mr. Cummings that if
we are going to do this and actually pass it all the way to the
President's desk, it does need to be a bipartisan bill. And
that is the goal and that is the intention.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
But we would like to recognize our witnesses here today. We
are honored to have the postmaster general of the United States
Postal Service, Ms. Megan Brennan. We have the Honorable Robert
Taub, acting chairman of the United States Postal Regulatory
Commission. We have Ms. Lori Rectanus, who is the director of
physical infrastructure issues at the United States Government
Accountability Office; Ms. Jessica Lowrance, executive vice
president of the Association for Postal Commerce; and Mr.
Fredric Rolando, president of the National Association of
Letter Carriers.
We welcome you all, and thank you for being here.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify. If you will please rise and raise your
right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Let the record reflect that
all witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
it if you would limit your oral comments to no more than 5
minutes. Your entire written statement will be made part of the
record.
We thank you for your participation. We will now recognize
the postmaster general for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF MEGAN BRENNAN

Ms. Brennan. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you,
Chairman Chaffetz, for calling this hearing. I'm proud to be
here today on behalf of the dedicated men and women of the
United States Postal Service, who work hard every day to serve
the American public.
The Postal Service currently operates with a business model
that is unsustainable. In the past decade, total mail volume
declined by 28 percent, and first-class mail, our most
profitable product, has declined by 35 percent. To put this in
perspective, the annual value of the revenue lost as a result
of this volume decline is $21 billion per year. Nevertheless,
the Postal Service is required to maintain an extensive network
necessary to process and deliver the mail to every address 6
days a week.
The cost of that network is largely fixed or growing,
regardless of volume. However, less volume and limited pricing
flexibility means that there is less revenue to pay for that
network and fund other costs imposed upon us by law.
We continue to make difficult but necessary decisions
within the constraints of our business model to adapt to our
rapidly changing marketplace. We have streamlined our
operations, restructured our networks, and improved
productivity for 6 consecutive years. As a result of these
efforts, we've achieved annual cost savings of nearly $15
billion. We have also been successful in stabilizing marketing
mail revenues and growing our package delivery business, which
together enable America's e-commerce.
However, all of these actions cannot offset the negative
impacts caused by the continued decline in the use of first-
class mail. Since 2012, the Postal Service has been forced to
default on more than $28 billion in mandated payments to the
Treasury for retiree health benefits. Without these defaults,
the deferral of capital investments and aggressive management
actions, we would not be able to pay our employees, our
suppliers, or to deliver the mail.
Without legislative and regulatory reform, our net losses
will continue to grow regardless of our ongoing efforts to grow
revenue and improve operational efficiencies. If allowed to
continue, this will have a devastating impact on the future of
the organization and the customers we serve.
Mr. Chairman, we need legislation now. Over the past year,
we have been working with postal stakeholders to identify key
reforms capable of achieving broad support and which would
return the Postal Service to financial stability. The
legislation we are seeking reflects the results of these
discussions and includes the following four provisions: require
full Medicare integration for postal retiree health plans,
restore our exigent price increase for market-dominant
products, calculate all retirement benefit liabilities using
postal-specific salary growth and demographic assumptions, and
provide additional product flexibility.
By enacting legislation that includes these provisions, the
Postal Service can achieve an estimated $32 billion in combined
cost reductions and new revenue over the next 5 years.
Enactment of these provisions, favorable changes to our rate-
setting system by the Postal Regulatory Commission, and our
aggressive efficiency and revenue initiatives will return the
Postal Service to financial stability.
Medicare integration is the most important of the
legislative provisions we recommend. As the second-largest
contributor to Medicare, our proposal allows the Postal Service
and our employees to fully utilize the benefits for which we
have already paid. By requiring full Medicare integration for
Postal Service retirees, we will essentially eliminate the
current unfunded liability for retiree health benefits.
We are also seeking to restore the exigent rate increase as
a permanent part of our rate base. In April, the Postal Service
was required by the PRC to eliminate the exigent surcharge and
to reduce our prices. This will reduce our revenues this year
by $1 billion and by approximately $2 billion annually, further
worsening our financial condition. Reinstating the exigent
surcharge is critical to the Postal Service's financial
stability.
Mr. Chairman, our financial challenges are serious but
solvable. The proposals we are advancing today are fiscally
responsible. They enable the Postal Service to invest in the
future and to continue to provide affordable and reliable
delivery service. Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with
this committee and our stakeholders to restore the financial
health of the United States Postal Service.
This concludes my remarks. I welcome any questions that you
and the committee may have. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Brennan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Chairman Taub, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT G. TAUB

Mr. Taub. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, good
morning. I'll hit a few key points of the committee's very
detailed written testimony.
In 2015, the Postal Service had a total net loss of $5.1
billion, which is an improvement from 2014. However, this is
the ninth consecutive net loss since 2007 and has increased the
cumulative net deficit since then to $56.8 billion. These
continuing losses have negatively impacted liquidity, requiring
the Postal Service to use all of its $15 billion statutory
borrowing capacity and causing total liabilities to far exceed
total assets by $50.4 billion.
In the past 5 years, the Postal Service has not made any of
the required prefunding payments to the retiree health benefit
fund. This accruing nonpayment into the fund has skewed the
Postal Service's current liabilities in relation to its assets.
To reduce its debt ratio to historic averages, the Postal
Service would have to significantly increase its current cash
position or investments in capital assets and reduce its
obligations to the retiree health benefit fund.
Low liquidity levels in recent years have impeded the
Postal Service's ability to make capital investments in
infrastructure. It now operates an aging vehicle fleet,
increasing the need and consequently the costs for maintenance
and repair. Also unmet is the need to invest in sorting and
handling equipment to fully capitalize on business
opportunities in the growing package delivery markets.
Total mail volume in 2015 dropped to levels not seen in
more than 27 years, and the Postal Service anticipates further
reductions in total volumes for 2016. The continuous decline in
first-class mail seriously jeopardizes the Postal Service's
ability to cover its fixed overhead costs.
Recent increases in revenues and subsequent higher
liquidity are largely due to the temporary market-dominant
product exigent surcharge. The additional revenue from
competitive products, which are mainly parcels, is not
sufficient to offset the future revenue loss resulting from the
termination of the exigent surcharge, which was removed April
10. In order to maintain the operating net income it is
currently achieving, the Postal Service would have to make up
the loss of that revenue, which is approximately $2.1 billion
annually.
With the growing liability of retiree health benefits, the
inability to borrow for needed capital investments and the
continued loss of high-margin, first-class mail revenues, the
important task of improving the financial condition of the
Postal Service is daunting.
Despite the financial news, there is still strength in the
system. The Postal Service is the one government agency that
touches every American on a daily basis. It is an organization
that literally serves 155 million American households and
businesses on a typical day. It facilitates trillions of
dollars in commerce. The fundamental problem is that the Postal
Service cannot currently generate sufficient funds to cover its
mandated expenses and also invest in critically deferred
capital needs.
Where can we look for answers? I would argue the starting
point is to look at ourselves. What do we as a nation need from
postal and delivery system and what is its cost? What exactly
is universal mail service in the United States?
The Commission has determined that, unlike other countries,
the universal service obligation, or USO, in the United States
is largely undefined and instead is comprised of a broad set of
policy statements with only a few legislative prescriptions.
The Commission estimates the cost of providing universal
service to be more than $4 billion annually. When assessing the
current state of the Postal Service, policymakers should look
at this fundamental issue and decide exactly what we as a
nation need from the Postal Service and, most importantly, how
those expectations are to be funded.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, thank you for
holding this hearing today and shining a spotlight on this
critical part of our nation's infrastructure. I know you deeply
appreciate the importance of these issues. There are no easy
answers, but answer we must, and the Commission stands ready to
help you in the search for solutions.
On behalf of all for commissioners and the entire
hardworking agency staff, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Taub follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Taub.
I would now recognize Ms. Rectanus of the GAO. Did I
pronounce your name properly?
Ms. Rectanus. Yes ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
Ms. Rectanus.--you did. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF LORI RECTANUS

Ms. Rectanus. Good morning. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee, I'm pleased to
be here today to discuss the Postal Service's financial
challenges.
The Postal Service is a critical part of the Nation's
communications system, but its financial situation is dire. We
placed the Postal Service on our high-risk list in 2009 where
it remains today.
Today, I will discuss the factors affecting the Postal
Service's deteriorating financial condition, the status of
unfunded liabilities, and choices Congress faces to address
these financial challenges.
The Postal Service's financial struggles are well-
documented. Beginning in 2007, expenses began consistently
outgrowing revenues, and it has lost over $56 billion since
then. This situation is primarily caused by decline in mail
volume, particularly in profitable first-class mail
commensurate with an increase in expenses, largely because of
salary increases. Increases in compensation and benefits alone
will add over $1 billion in additional cost in fiscal year
2016. The gap between revenue and costs continues despite the
significant efficiency initiatives undertaken by the Postal
Service.
Regarding unfunded liabilities and costs, they are a large
and growing burden on the Postal Service. At the end of fiscal
year 2015, the Postal Service had about $125 billion in
unfunded liabilities and outstanding debt, which accounted for
182 percent of its revenues. Retiree health benefits account
for $55 billion of the unfunded liability due in part because
the Postal Service stopped making required payments in 2011 and
is not expected to make the required 2016 payment.
Given this history and future events, it is not likely that
the Postal Service will be able to make its required retiree
health and pension payments in the near future. Beginning in
fiscal year 2017, the Postal Service will be required to start
making annual payments for health benefits on top of annual
pension payments. Using available data, we determined these
payments could total about $11 billion. Although this is less
than what was required in fiscal year 2015, it is about $4.6
billion more than what the Postal Service paid that year. And
the expiration of the temporary rate surcharge and the lack of
major cost-savings initiatives will further stress the Postal
Service's ability to make these payments.
Having large unfunded liabilities for postal retiree health
and pension benefits places taxpayers, employees, retirees, and
the Postal Service itself at risk. If the Postal Service does
not adequately fund these benefits and Congress wanted these
benefits to continue, the Treasury, and hence the taxpayer, may
need to step in. Alternatively, unfunded benefits could lead to
pressure for reductions in benefits or pay. For the Postal
Service, unfunded benefits endanger its future viability by
saddling it with bills later after employees have already
retired.
Postal Service actions alone under its existing authority
are insufficient to achieve financial solvency. Comprehensive
legislation is needed. In doing this, Congress faces several
difficult decisions and tradeoffs in key areas. First, what is
the level of postal services needed in the 21st century, and
what are we willing to pay for those services? Given how
communication is changing, Congress could consider what postal
services should be provided on a universal basis and the best
way to provide those services.
Second, what is the appropriate level of compensation and
benefits that should be paid in an environment of revenue
pressures? Congress could consider revising the statutory
framework for collective bargaining to ensure that the Postal
Service's financial condition is considered in binding
arbitration.
And third, what is the continued viability of the Postal
Service's dual role of providing affordable universal service
while remaining self-sufficient? In assessing any alternatives
to the current structure, Congress should consider costs that
might be transferred from the Postal Service, which is financed
by ratepayers, to the Federal Government, which is funded by
taxpayers.
In conclusion, we must take a hard look at what level of
postal services we need in the future and what we can afford.
The status quo is not sustainable.
This concludes my prepared statement. Chairman Chaffetz,
Ranking Member Cummings, and members of the committee, I would
be pleased to answer any questions you have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Rectanus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Lowrance, I will now recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA LOWRANCE

Ms. Lowrance. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, and
the members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today about postal-related issues facing the
mailing industry.
The mailing industry provides over 7.5 million jobs and
accounts for $1.4 trillion in economic activity. While the
mailing industry is a vital part of the Nation's economy and
surpasses in size both the airline industry and the oil and
natural gas industry, it is one that faces significant
challenges. Not only are there policies, issues that must be
considered, but also economic issues that balance the
infrastructural needs of the American economy and the public
welfare.
Mail is and will remain a vital part of the American
economy and the manner in which the Nation communicates and
does business. Despite all that has transpired over the last
several years, market-dominant mail still consists of over 154
billion pieces or 97 percent of the Postal Service's business.
The American mail system is a sender-paid service. As
volume continues to decline, however, the Postal Service is
pressed to find new ways to help lessen its financial burden.
From our perspective, there are several fundamental matters
that need immediate attention, including the need for
predictable, affordable mail services; complete, accurate, and
transparent costing of products and services; and reliable,
consistent mail service.
At the end of this calendar year, the Postal Regulatory
Commission, as directed by the PAEA, will be reviewing the
current system of rate regulation. Although the Postal Service
has expressed displeasure with the price cap, the CPI-based cap
has operated substantially as intended to the benefit of all
postal customers, Postal Service, and the general public.
For business customers, the cap provides customers with an
assurance of postal rate stability and predictability, which is
key to the decision as to whether to continue to invest in mail
as a business communication and commercial vehicle. For the
years it has been in effect, this inflation-based price cap has
served as an effective restraint against abuse of the Postal
Service's monopoly power. The Postal Service has been required
to focus more closely on the elimination of postal waste and
inefficiencies in a manner that would not have happened in the
absence of the cap.
Unfortunately, there are obligations such as the prefunding
mandate and the nonparticipation of postal retirees and
Medicare that has made operating under such a cap a challenge.
The need for costing transparency has never been so apparent as
it is today. The mailing industry has consistently called for
greater clarity and transparency in the reporting of postal
costs. This lack of transparency has resulted in other Postal
Service decisions that have imposed additional cost on mailers
without creating corresponding efficiencies in the postal
network.
The Postal Service, its customers, and the Postal
Regulatory Commission would benefit greatly by an upgrading of
postal costs and modeling systems. The Postal Service should
move without dispatch to an informed visibility-based system.
This would enable costs to be tracked in an automated fashion
similar to how it tracks service performance throughout the
Nation.
For business customers, the quality of mail delivery is a
key component of the value of mail. Timeliness, consistency,
and reliability are extremely important to these users and
recipients of the mail. The Postal Service's inability to
provide consistent and reliable service is causing many
enterprises to look to other means as their preferred method
for communicating and doing business.
Legislative reform is just one of the many tools that would
need to be leveraged in order for the Postal Service to be, and
remain, fiscally viable. At the very least, mailers urge
Congress to address those issues that are solely within its
power to do so. One, fix the mandated prefunding requirements;
and two, allow for fuller postal employee participation in
Medicare.
With the upcoming 10-year review of the current rate
regulation system, mailers need an accurate accounting and
understanding of the cost of the products and services they
receive from the Postal Service. The Commission should not be
required to judge the performance of the existing system on the
basis of data that are inadequate for sound decision-making. It
is imperative that the Postal Service be directed to use the
many data-driven tools such as the intelligent mail barcode and
informed visibility to supply the data the Commission so sorely
needs to make the informed decisions about the current system
of rate regulation and how to move forward in its review.
At the end of the day, the mailers need reliable,
consistent mail service and affordable, predictable prices in
order to continue to invest in mail for business communication
and commerce.
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and the members
of the committee, this concludes my prepared statement. I can
answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Lowrance follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Rolando, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FREDERIC ROLANDO

Mr. Rolando. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz and Ranking
Member Cummings and members of the committee, for inviting me
to testify today.
You've asked me to focus on the urgent need for postal
reform legislation and the provisions that we believe are
necessary. I'm pleased to do that today, but before I do, it's
important that we take a moment to recognize the current
reality of the Postal Service. It is no longer 2009 when the
Great Recession sent mail volume plummeting and the prefunding
mandate crushed the Postal Service's finances, raising doubts
in some quarters about the viability of the agency. Postal
employees never doubted the viability of the Postal Service,
but we worked hard to help the Service to adapt and survive as
it shed more than 200,000 jobs and we boosted productivity
dramatically.
The Postal Service has returned to operational
profitability, now earning $4.4 billion over the past 2-1/2
years, our pension funds are healthy and better funded at 92
percent than most private sector pensions, and we have set
aside some $50 billion for retiree health when most large
private companies have not set aside a dime.
Thanks to the growth of direct mail and booming e-commerce,
total mail volume recovered and stabilized in 2015, increasing
the Postal Service's revenue to $69 billion.
There's no question that the Postal Service remains a vital
part of the Nation's economic infrastructure. In 2015, we
delivered more than 150 billion letters, magazines, and
packages, 6 and even 7 days a week. The Postal Service's
revenue is just a small part of the $1.4 trillion of the GDP
accounted for by the U.S. mailing industry, which now employs
7-1/2 million Americans.
With an 84 percent approval rating for the American people,
we believe the Postal Service can thrive in the 21st century
with the right public policies. Now is not the time to weaken
this treasured agency through service and delivery reductions,
especially those that have failed to attract congressional
support in the past. Instead, this committee should offer
sensible and targeted reforms that would provide financial
stability and allow the Postal Service to innovate.
Specifically, it should address three specific legislative
and regulatory burdens that severely hinder the Postal Service.
First, the Postal Service is required to massively fund future
retiree health premiums decades in advance, regardless of
financial conditions facing the agency or the country. No other
public or private enterprise in America faces such a mandate,
and most firms don't prefund at all. This mandate by itself
accounts for nearly 90 percent of all reported losses since
2007.
NALC has suggested numerous ways to address the prefunding
mandate over the years. As part of an overall reform effort
that does not weaken our networks or diminish services to the
public, we support reforms to the FEHBP program to maximize
participation in Medicare among eligible postal retirees. This
would almost eliminate the $50 billion unfunded liability for
future retiree health while raising Medicare spending by less
than 2/10 of 1 percent annually. Given that the Postal Service
and its employees have contributed $29 billion to Medicare,
this approach is fair and appropriate.
Second, Congress should consider the policy that requires
100 percent of postal retirement funds be invested in low-
yielding treasury bonds. Together, the Civil Service and FERS
postal pension accounts, along with the postal retiree health
fund, hold nearly $350 billion in treasury securities. That
makes the Postal Service and its employees the third-largest
creditors of the U.S. Federal Government just behind China and
Japan. No other company in America would invest its retirement
assets in such an unsophisticated way, especially during a
period when treasuries are yielding 2 to 4 percent annually.
Starting with the retiree health fund, we should apply
private sector best practice by investing in well-diversified
portfolios of private stocks, bonds, and real estate, as well
as government bonds. Current policy forces the mailing industry
to give Uncle Sam a low-cost loan instead of sensibly investing
to cover future health-care liabilities. It makes no financial
sense to invest in assets that yield less than the rising cost
of care.
My submitted testimony makes the case for prudent
investment change, addresses common objections to it, and
explains how several independent agencies invest successfully
in private securities.
By changing the investment policy, Congress could raise the
long-term rate of return on the assets, reduce the burden of
prefunding, offset the cost of postal Medicare integration,
relieve upward pressure on postal rates, and reduce the
misguided impulse to slash service.
Third, in my full testimony I address the postage rate-
making process, which the PRC will formally review in 2017.
There's a remarkable degree of stakeholder consensus about the
principles of successful postal reform. All four postal unions,
the Postal Service, and a wide range of companies and postal
trade associations have agreed on reform principles for your
consideration. And these principles were outlined in a letter
sent to the chairman yesterday, and it urged legislation that
would mandate postal-specific assumptions, satisfy--not
eliminate--satisfy the prefunding burden by reforming FEHBP to
maximize Medicare participation, invest the retiree health fund
sensibly, permit the Postal Service to provide non-postal
products in limited circumstances, and adjust the market-
dominant rate base to ensure adequate revenue through the PRC
review if necessary.
Our coalition's recommendations are grounded in common
sense and best practice. They represent the measures on which
we could agree while remaining confident that they would
stabilize the Postal Service while allowing it to innovate to
meet the evolving needs of our country. NALC and our sister
postal unions remain committed to helping this committee find a
fair and equitable path forward that does not damage our
network of universal and affordable service or the employees
that make that network special.
Thank you very much again for this opportunity to testify,
and am happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Rolando follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you all. We will now
start by recognizing the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
General Brennan, I have an article here from the Los
Angeles Times that says, ``after peaking in 2006, total mail
handled by the Postal Service has declined 27 percent.'' Is
that fairly accurate, and is mail volume still slowly
declining?
Ms. Brennan. That's correct.
Mr. Duncan. All right. And do you feel like you have taken
every step you can do thus far to adjust to that decline?
Ms. Brennan. Congressman Duncan, you're correct in terms of
the decline in total mail volume. The challenge for us is the
continued decline particularly in first-class mail, which pays
the bills, defines our network requirements, hence, our actions
to right-size the infrastructure and take cost out of the
system. There are still opportunities, but I think as noted,
we've reduced our annual cost base by $15 billion.
Mr. Duncan. I will tell you a little story. About 4 years
ago they had an article about me and my dad in the Knoxville
News Sentinel, and I got the nicest handwritten letter from
Peyton Manning about that article. He said he could tell from
that article I had the same kind of relationship with my dad
that he has with his dad. Well, 2 or 3 months later my chief of
staff saw Peyton Manning one night and told him how much I
appreciated that, and he said Peyton Manning told him that his
mother told him once that if you wanted to really make an
impression on people nowadays, send them a handwritten note or
letter. Maybe you should try to get more people to follow the
Peyton Manning method of impressing people because it made a
big impression on me, I can tell you.
Ms. Brennan. I would agree with that, Congressman.
Mr. Duncan. Maybe you should get him to do an ad for you or
something.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Duncan. Let me ask you this. Would it make any
difference, or how much of a difference would it make if you
went to 5-day-a-week service?
Ms. Brennan. We've spent the better part of the past year,
Congressman, on trying to build consensus with key
stakeholders, a narrower group of provisions, high value, that
would generate more than $32 billion in cost reductions and
savings over the next 5 years. The reality is in my discussions
with public officials, members of this committee, there's no
congressional consensus for moving to 5-day delivery.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Ms. Brennan. The Postal Service is looking at, how do we
leverage our infrastructure, which is an asset? How do we grow
profitable revenue? How do we look to fill the mailbox and fill
the truck? That's what we're focused on.
Mr. Duncan. Many companies in the private sector that had
pension plans that they saw they couldn't afford anymore, they
stopped giving those pensions to their new hires. Have you
considered doing something like that, reducing the pension
benefits for new hires, and would that make any difference?
Ms. Brennan. Congressman Duncan, I would say that we have a
plan forward. There is a way to resolve these legacy costs and
these liabilities, and that's by permitting the Postal Service
to integrate with Medicare. It's universal practice. Our
employees, as noted by the chairman and the ranking member,
have paid more than $29 billion in Medicare taxes, and we
should benefit from that opportunity. There is a way forward
without looking at diminishing benefits to either current or
future employees.
Mr. Duncan. Ms. Rectanus, when you looked at this, these
figures are so staggering. I saw some figure that $56 billion
in total losses over the last several years or something. What
did you find or what do you consider to be the most troubling
aspect of the entire financial condition of the Postal Service?
What is the worst problem or the biggest problem?
Ms. Rectanus. Fundamentally, what we have found is the
Postal Service's business model that relies on revenue to cover
its costs is no longer working. Certainly, the unfunded
liabilities, particularly the RHB, have contributed to that,
but there is a broader problem, and that is the fundamental
business model of mail volume that the Postal Service has been
using isn't working anymore. And to their credit, they have
been trying to right-size their network and make changes.
But what we would argue is it's even beyond the unfunded
liabilities. Even if you take those out, the ability of the
Postal Service to raise its--to reduce its costs to align with
the revenue, they just don't have the ability to do that right
now without comprehensive reform. As one example, their
controllable income, which is what they talk about the income
before they account for their unfunded liabilities in fiscal
year 2015 was less than it was in fiscal year 2014 even though
in fiscal year 2015 they had the exigent for the full year. And
that's just an example of even when there is an influx of
money, the operating costs are still growing such that their--
it's harder and harder for them to get ahead of their costs.
Mr. Duncan. Well, the unfunded liability problem is a
problem for the entire Federal Government. It is more than just
the Postal Service. It is staggering.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr.
Cummings for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
You know, the Postal Service has come up with methods to
save some $15 billion per year, is that right, Ms. Brennan?
Ms. Brennan. That's correct, Congressman Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. And I have always been concerned about making
sure that we save as much money as possible. At the same time,
I was hoping that we could find ways to bring in more money.
So, Ms. Rectanus and Mr. Taub, do you agree that in order to be
financially viable long-term it is important for the Postal
Service to develop innovative products and services?
Ms. Rectanus. We do support the Postal Service's continued
ability to be innovative and develop products and resources
that people need. The challenge that you run is trying to find
that sweet spot between areas in which the Postal Service will
be profitable since they can't afford to lose money, but you
don't want them to be able to compete unfairly because of their
unique status, or conversely, lose money because of their
unique status.
Mr. Cummings. And so you end up in a no-spot?
Ms. Rectanus. We believe ----
Mr. Cummings. You know, it is kind of hard. On the one hand
we want them to be able to bring in more money, but then we tie
their hands and shackle their feet and say we don't want you to
do this and don't want you to do that. So what do you recommend
that they do? I mean, what would you--and, Mr. Taub, you
certainly are--you look like you are anxious to join in on
this, so I would like to hear what you all have to say because
it becomes very frustrating ----
Mr. Taub. Yes.
Mr. Cummings.--for the Postal Service and for us. So I am
just wondering what you see there.
Mr. Taub. Yes. From the--again, this is a cost-and-revenue
issue. I would say the first ----
Mr. Cummings. I am talking about things that are going to
be profitable. I don't want anything that is not profitable,
and I think Ms. Brennan would--that doesn't even make sense.
Let's take that off the table.
Mr. Taub. Right.
Mr. Cummings. We are talking about profitable things. Let's
go from there.
Mr. Taub. Yes. The 2006 law took a very hard line in saying
the Postal Service could only offer what are defined as postal
products, what you can think of as traditionally hard-copy
delivery letters, packages. So clearly, the law would need to
open that aperture if you're going to move beyond that.
The Postal Regulatory Commission in 2011 in a report to
Congress and the President laid out a variety of
recommendations. One of them was to suggest that if that
aperture were to be open, the Commission now has this
experience as the regulator to call balls and strikes and
ensure fair competition issues, ensure that cost coverage is
there.
I would note, though, as I indicated in my opening
statement that this also is part of that larger question of
what is it that the United States Postal Service should do as a
government institution, and I think that's an important
understanding. What are the boundaries, as opposed to simply
looking for revenue opportunities that may not be in their core
competency. But if the financial issue of that fire in the
house can be put out and the--we can start rebuilding it and
look in that holistic way.
Mr. Cummings. Now, Postmaster General, you have been in
this position for a little while now, and I am just wondering,
you know, talk about what you all have been trying to do and
how that has worked out and with a more perfect situation what
you would like to be able to do.
Ms. Brennan. Yes ----
Mr. Cummings. In that regard.
Ms. Brennan. Yes. If I may just say, sir, we are innovating
at the core in the mail by giving mail a digital reflection to
stabilize it and look to grow advertising mail. In the package
arena we've partnered with large e-commerce retailers to
customize delivery solutions, same-day, next-day, Sunday
delivery, delivery of other products, groceries as an example.
And I think as Commissioner Taub mentioned, it's innovating
for us at the core. Our core competency is delivery. How do we
leverage that delivery network? We've partnered with other
government agencies to do in-person proofing. We did a pilot
test in Arizona to on-board census workers. We think there's
some opportunity for us in the future with other government
agencies to do ID verification whether it's at a local retail
or on the doorstep with the enhanced technology we have
embedded in our mobile delivery devices.
Mr. Cummings. You know, I visited the Amazon plant--as a
matter of fact, the chairman and I went--in Maryland, and it
was amazing to hear them talk about the last mile and how much
they couldn't do their job unless the Postal Service was a part
of it. How much is that helping you ----
Ms. Brennan. Very much ----
Mr. Cummings.--financially?
Ms. Brennan. I would say this. The growth in package
volume, Congressman Cummings, over the past year or past 5
years I'll cite, 49 percent growth in package volume, more than
1.5 billion more packages in the system. The Postal Service now
delivers roughly 30 percent of all packages in the country.
Credit to President Rolando and President Dwyer of the
National Rural Letter Carriers Association who worked with us
to enable us to have greater flexibility with the workforce to
be responsive to the customer requirements of an Amazon and
others that we're working with.
Mr. Cummings. I mean, what do you see--what do you project
in the future with regard to that? Do you see an expansion of
that? It seems like this online shopping--and I literally go,
you know, to the mall myself, but apparently that is old-
fashioned now. So do you see that expanding more?
Ms. Brennan. Yes, Congressman Cummings ----
Mr. Cummings. Not my thing, I am talking about the ----
Ms. Brennan. Absolutely.
Mr. Cummings.--online.
Ms. Brennan. No, I--hyper growth, hyper growth. But the
challenge it's a very competitive delivery space. We compete
for customers every day. It's the value proposition,
competitive pricing, the transit time, performance, and
certainly visibility. And the Postal Service has made
investments in all of those components to ensure we improve our
competitive standing.
We need to recognize that while our strength is last-mile
deliver, we're challenged there. The so-called Uberization of
package delivery, it's a very competitive space, so we
recognize we've got to compete for that business.
The challenge, though, ultimately for us, the package
growth alone won't offset the losses in first-class volume,
hence the need to address the legacy costs, specifically
looking at Medicare integration as the cornerstone of our
legislative ask.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Farenthold, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to follow up on a couple of things that the
ranking member talked about, Ms. Brennan. You used the phrase
``give mail a digital reflection.'' What does that mean?
Ms. Brennan. Yes. Yes, Congressman. We created a catalog
called Irresistible Mail that imbeds in the catalog new
technologies well beyond QR codes to include augmented reality
near-field communications, so you open that catalog, it comes
to life, so making it more creative and making it more relevant
to the end consumer.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay. Super. And I think you also touched
on the amount of work that you guys do for Amazon, and I think
that is a great revenue opportunity, but I am afraid it is a
short-term problem. I imagine there are a lot of people who
spend their day at Amazon looking for ways to deliver packages
faster and more efficiently. For instance, here in Washington,
D.C., I have got about an hour and 5 minutes to order something
that will be waiting for me when I get home tonight, and that
isn't you all that are doing the last-mile delivery on that.
I work on the Transportation Committee. Amazon is talking
about developing drones to deliver packages. One day in the
not-too-distant future they are going to say bye-bye to you
guys, and how are you all preparing for that? I mean, you are
saying they are 41 percent of your package volume.
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, I would say this: As I noted, it
is a very competitive delivery space, so we've got to compete
for that business. The term ``coopetition'' exists whether it's
with Amazon, who's a valuable customer as well as business
partner, or UPS and FedEx who are traditional competitors, also
business partners for us. So, again, it comes down to
delivering the best value, and that includes service and price.
Mr. Farenthold. And let's talk about service and price for
a second. I live in Corpus Christie, Texas, and we were the
unfortunate victims of a consolidation of a mail processing
center. So now, instead of mailing something to my neighbor
across the street and having it processed in Corpus Christie
and delivered the next day, it is trucked to San Antonio,
processed, and maybe delivered in 3 days at the same price. At
some point, you know, companies like Amazon want it there
quicker. As you cut the quality of your service, especially on
your lead program or your lead product, first-class mail, it
starts to become less valuable and makes email look like a
better alternative.
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, the consolidation was in response
to that decline in single-piece first-class mail, which is down
more than 35 percent over the last decade. The service standard
change and consolidation did not impact the delivery of
packages, which is the growth product. We did the responsible
thing, which was right-size the infrastructure, address the
latent capacity, and look at how to better utilize our assets.
Now, service is foundational and it is key to growth. We
recognize that.
Mr. Farenthold. And so we also spent a little bit of time
talking about some of the--and I think almost everybody on the
panel had a wish list of postal reforms that would make things
better. Obviously, you know, shifting people to Medicare where
it is a taxpayer responsibility instead of a postal
responsibility makes sense, and it is probably fair, even
though I hate to see even, you know, what is it a 2/10 of a
percent increase in the Medicare cost? It is so big anyway, we
are talking a lot of dollars.
Postal reform that has been talked about in past Congresses
included other things, things like cluster boxes, curbside mail
instead of delivery to the door and, you know, no junk mail on
Saturdays but maybe the higher revenue packages and the like.
Why are we still talking about those?
Ms. Brennan. Why are we still or not talking about ----
Mr. Farenthold. Or why are we not talking about those?
Ms. Brennan. Yes.
Mr. Farenthold. Why did they make sense a year ago ----
Ms. Brennan. Yes.
Mr. Farenthold.--yet nobody is bringing them up today?
Ms. Brennan. Again, Congressman, my approach in the past
year was to try to build consensus around provisions, high
value likely to generate broad support.
Mr. Farenthold. So there is something about--you know, it
would be difficult for--we will take my family, for example. If
we don't have the money to do anything, it is hard to generate
consensus about not taking a vacation, but we are not taking a
vacation because we don't have the money. I mean, that is just
an example. So at some point you are going to have to make, I
think, some hard choices, and you are not going to walk away
with everyone happy. And I think that is what we were elected
to do here in Congress not just with the Postal Service but on
a government-wide basis and say, okay, we can't afford that, so
let's pick the stuff that is important and to pick the stuff
that will work and make those hard decisions.
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, we have made the hard decisions.
You just noted one, the consolidations. The accelerated pace
with which we ran was because of our dire financial situation.
Mr. Farenthold. But you all have stopped the consolidations
now and are looking at other things. A report says they are
going to be no more consolidations this year. Is that ----
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, we deferred the consolidations
until we stabilized the network because service is our mission,
and service was not where it needed to be. It has since
improved and we're showing positive trends in that regard.
I would offer--your comment about mode conversation,
cluster boxes, for all new delivery, based on the delivery
characteristics of that environment, we either effect delivery
through box-on-post or centralized delivery. And of the more
than 900,000 new possible deliveries that we added last year,
over 70 percent were centralized or box-on-post. So we're
making the right business decisions.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. I see I am out of time. Thank
you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch. Microphone? Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Is it working? Oh, I am sorry. Okay. There we
go. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to thank Mr. Cummings
and Mr. Connolly and Mr. Meadows for all their work. We have
done a lot of work on the side here to try to coordinate our
efforts up here. And I am very pleased to see that the same
thing is happening down there. I mean, we have a new postmaster
general, along with the National Association of Letter Carrier,
rural letter carriers, mail handlers, the clerks, supervisors,
and then the PRC, as well as the mailing community and the GAO,
inspectors general, everybody on the same page. And so it
troubles me that we can't move this ball forward.
I do want to focus on one key aspect of this, and that is
the coordination of benefits between the FEHBP--I hate these
acronyms--but the Federal Employee Health Benefit Plan and
Medicare. So, Postmaster General Brennan, the situation we have
right now, as has been noted by the chairman--and the chairman
deserves a lot of credit because he has really been the one
that has brought us all together with the ranking member and
has us all working together, and it has been completely
bipartisan and really--we do a lot of work up here, and this
effort has been really bipartisan.
But the way this works right now, the Postal Service is the
second-largest contributor to Medicare, and the largest--and as
the chairman and the ranking member noted, your people, the
postal employees paid in $29 billion so far to Medicare. And
the largest group is DOD, I believe, and they have a TRICARE
wraparound with Medicare. And they are the largest. But when
folks come out of the military and go on benefits, they are
required to use Medicare as their primary insurer, so that is a
good way to reduce their costs.
And we don't do that at the Postal Service. We have about
25 percent of our employees that are relying solely on FEHBP
and are not using, as they could, as they could because they
have paid in--they are not using Medicare as their primary
insurer. This in fact would--and I think President Rolando
mentioned this in his testimony. It would basically eliminate--
out of that $50 billion in unfunded liability, it would just
about eliminate all of it, is that right?
Ms. Brennan. That's correct.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. And I have been listening closely, you
know, because you have different groups out there. The only
criticism that I have heard so far is that postal employees who
pay into Medicare might actually use it. That is the only
criticism I have heard, that people who pay into Medicare will
use it, and some people see that as a negative. But I think it
is entirely fair and reasonable to expect that people who paid
in $29 billion might actually use some of those benefits, so I
really don't see that as a realistic criticism.
The second opportunity in this--and you have done a great
job with this proposal, and I think it ought to be adopted, and
we ought to move this as quickly as possible in the form of
legislation, more this forward. I really do think--and I
realize we can't fix everything, but just because you can't fix
everything doesn't mean you shouldn't fix something. And we can
help. We can help up here. With a major piece of legislation
here, we can help the post office immediately. We got other
problems we will have to deal with, but that is for another
day.
The other thing I think that might be done quickly is,
President Rolando, you mentioned the corpus of our health
benefit trust fund. And right now, we are required, I believe,
to hold that in treasuries, which for the past few years has
been dismal in terms of what it returns, you know, to the fund.
And I know part of the proposal suggests that maybe 50 percent
of that fund might be managed by a commission. Could you talk
about that a little bit?
Mr. Rolando. Yes. What we were talking about doing is
having, you know, a board that would govern this that could
invest 50 percent, up to 75 percent in something like the
thrift savings plan lifecycle funds.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Rolando. We looked at the period going back to 2007
where we were earning, I don't know, somewhere about 4 percent
with Treasury securities. Had it been invested in a lifecycle
fund--and again, keep in mind this would have been through the
worst recession in 80 years--we would have earned somewhere
about 7 percent, which would have raised the fund another $10
billion just as an example.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. All right. I think we have to be careful
with that, but I think that is a reasonable compromise.
Okay. I think my time has expired, and I will yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman, and I appreciate
Mr. Lynch's work and passion on this issue and look forward to
continuing to work with him on it.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank each of you.
As we enter into this, I want to start out, Mr. Taub, by
saying thank you for your work. It was good to visit with the
PRC and all the dedicated employees that work there.
Mr. Rolando, I want to just say I know I was not on your
Christmas card list. I do appreciate the fact that you have
been willing to work with me in an open-minded way. That was
your commitment to me, my commitment to you, and I want to
thank you.
Ms. Brennan, thank you so much for being here. Obviously,
as we look at this, this is an interesting time and so for all
the postal workers, you know, I just want to say thank you.
I have been a secret shopper because, you know, I am not
shy about my criticism either. And so in Spruce Pine just the
other day, I went into a place--actually, I sent my wife in
because now I start to get recognized in some of these places.
And the service that Debbie Calloway gave my wife was nothing
less than spectacular. And she didn't know who she was, and we
went in. And so I went back in to thank her for her service.
And that is what we need to do in terms of service standards.
As a fiscal conservative, one of the things that you are
asking me to do is get rid of a prefunding requirement that
was, you know, part of a previous deal, and so why should I do
that? Make a very short, compelling case on why I should do
that.
Ms. Brennan. First, I would say, Congressman Meadows, it's
the right thing to do to ensure that our pensions and the
retiree health benefits is funded. It was the accelerated pace
of that funding that created a large part of the challenge, but
now we're beyond that come this fall. The issue now is it's a
system that's unaffordable for us. And, again, going back to
we've paid more than $29 billion into the fund. Our employees
should benefit ----
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you are saying that you paid $29
billion, we ought to do that. So I am willing to take the leap.
Now, we have heard all kinds of different testimony. That
doesn't get us where we need to go, does it?
Ms. Brennan. In and of itself, it's not enough ----
Mr. Meadows. Yes, it is about 2.8, $3 billion of a $5
billion deficit, so we need some other areas. We can't make it
up in volume because part of what is concerning me is that it
indicates that we are just going to raise rates, that this is a
revenue problem. And at $69 billion, it is not just a revenue
problem, it is a management problem, so how do we take this
without raising rates as being the ultimate answer and really
fundamentally reform it and make it work? Are you in support of
safe and secure delivery, you know, through cluster box? Is
that something that you would support wholeheartedly?
Ms. Brennan. Depending on the characteristics of the
delivery environment, yes. We currently do affect delivery to
cluster boxes ----
Mr. Meadows. Would you support expanding that in a
meaningful way, understanding that we may have to grandfather a
lot, but we have been discussing is really looking at safe and
secure delivery, which you may get some pushback from Mr.
Rolando and some of those on that side, let's recognize that,
but we have all got to come together to figure this out. Are
you supportive of that? Yes or no?
Ms. Brennan. Yes. And, sir, what I--if I may, the comment I
made earlier about new delivery and based on the delivery
characteristics, what we would not recommend is mandatory
conversion of existing door delivery, of which we have over
37.5 million businesses and residents that get door delivery --
--
Mr. Meadows. Well, so let's say if we grandfather some of
those in and we start to work--because I have been working with
Mr. Lynch in an area that is different than mine. If we work
through that, you are asking me to go ahead with the prefunding
and jump off a cliff, I am asking you, are you willing to work
with us to make sure that we implement safe and secure delivery
in a meaningful way?
Ms. Brennan. Yes. And if I may also comment, management has
demonstrated a willingness to address operational efficiencies
and to reduce costs, and we'll continue to do that ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So ----
Ms. Brennan.--in our ----
Mr. Meadows. Go ahead.
Ms. Brennan. I apologize.
Mr. Meadows. I ----
Ms. Brennan. If I may, Ms. Rectanus mentioned that we don't
have any major cost reductions initiatives planned. We do. We
have more than $5 billion in cost reductions embedded into our
5-year plan, and we continue to look at opportunity to drive
operating efficiencies. That's our responsibility.
Mr. Meadows. But most of the opportunities we have talked
about actually have been with increasing service, you know, or
trying to increase a portfolio, whether it is banking or
anything else, and that just doesn't--I have only got a few
seconds left, so here is my concern. We are talking about all
of this, and we are missing out on service standards. It is the
number one thing that I get calls about, you know, why is my
meal not being delivered, why are we having a problem?
And even me, you said, you know, that first-class mail that
is your bread and butter, and this first-class mail actually is
all postmarked in December. I got it in April. Now, that is not
a funding problem. That is a management problem. And it is not
just here. It is not just in my district because in Peachtree
City we have the same thing where we mailed actually wedding
invitations for my son that took 8 weeks to get to another
Member of Congress.
And so what we have to do is put this together and make
sure that we have a service standard that doesn't just increase
costs, and I am willing to work in a bipartisan way to do that,
but we have to make sure that we do it in a way that serves the
best interest of the public. And are you committed to do that?
Ms. Brennan. I am committed. And if you would, if you'd
give me those envelopes, I will look at that.
Mr. Meadows. I don't want to get somebody fired but ----
Ms. Brennan. No. No, you won't ----
Mr. Meadows.--we just need to ----
Ms. Brennan.--because--Congressman ----
Mr. Meadows. But I will give them to you. Actually, I had
about 40 different pieces of mail that came to me that had the
same problem.
I will yield back.
Ms. Brennan. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman,
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I just want to note, now I know
why my wedding invitation wasn't ----
Mr. Meadows. You are always invited there, Mr. Connolly.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to say every
time we have a postal hearing I text my brother because he
works for the post office, so I ask him did he have any
questions that he wanted me to ask you. But one thing I wanted
to say as far as the consolidations, I am glad that you thought
enough, even though they might be necessary to slow it down
because service does come first, and that is some of the things
that he has spoken about because of all the closed stations,
the long lines, and not enough clerks in the window. So I am
glad that you are still putting service first and taking that
into consideration because people will go other places if they
don't feel like they are getting good service. And we
definitely want the post office to thrive.
Ms. Brennan, one of the elements of the joint postal reform
proposal put forward by the Postal Service, the postal unions,
and certain elements of the mailing industry is the use of
postal-specific demographic assumptions when calculating
pension liabilities. The proposal would also require any
surplus resulting from those calculations to be used to pay
down the Postal Service's debt to the U.S. Treasury.
Intuitively, it makes sense to use the demographic and
salary growth statistics of the postal workforce when
calculating the Postal Service's pension liabilities. What is
it about the demographics of the postal workforce compared to
those of the government's entire workforce that you believe
will result in lower cost?
Ms. Brennan. Specifically, Congresswoman, the salary wage
growth. And we estimate over a 5-year period that to be valued
at roughly $3.2 billion.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Has the Postal Service calculated how much
in savings would result from the use of postal-specific
demographic assumptions?
Ms. Brennan. Roughly $3.2 billion over a 5-year period.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Ms. Rectanus, GAO has done a significant
amount of work on postal pension funding issues in recent
years. In 2014, the GAO supported the use of the most accurate
actuarial assumptions for postal pension liability
calculations. Do you agree with Ms. Brennan that the Postal
Service should use postal-specific demographics when
calculating pension liabilities?
Ms. Rectanus. Yes, we support it because if it is the most
accurate data, then that should be used to get a better number
of what the liability is.
Ms. Kelly. And do you have any views on the amount of the
potential savings that may be available if that is used? Do you
agree or do you have different ----
Ms. Rectanus. We have not done the calculation so I can't--
and we haven't looked at the Postal Service's data so I can't
comment on that.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you. And I yield back my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Connelly. Would the gentlelady ----
Ms. Kelly. Yes, I will yield. Yes.
Mr. Connelly.--yield? I thank my friend. And I want to
thank you all for being here. And I have got to say, Postmaster
General Brennan, you represent a breath of enormous fresh air.
I mean, I want to say publicly how much I appreciate working
with you. We have been able to forge a bipartisan coalition.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership and bringing us
together to do that.
And I share the sentiments of my friend Mr. Lynch from
Massachusetts and am very hopeful we are going to get postal
reform, not everything but a big chunk of what we need to be
addressing so thank you.
Ms. Brennan, what does it mean for the Postal Service to
lose the exigent rate, which expired, I think, in April, right?
Ms. Brennan. Yes, Congressman Connelly. This year, we
estimate that impact to be up to a billion dollars this fiscal
year and roughly $2.1 billion going forward, worsening our
financial situation.
Mr. Connelly. And, Ms. Rectanus, in your testimony you
state, ``The Postal Service's financial condition continues to
deteriorate'' and you attribute that to ``declining mail volume
and growing expenses at the same time,'' is that correct?
Ms. Rectanus. Yes, that is.
Mr. Connelly. And yet do you believe that some of the
elements of the reform we have been talking about, freeing up
the Postal Service to, you know, engage in some other lines of
business that may be profitable like other postal services
around the world do, so lifting some of those restrictions,
lifting the burden of a unique prepayment requirement, as Mr.
Rolando pointed out, unique to the Postal Service. No other
Federal agency, no other private corporation in America is held
to that standard in terms of that prepayment. And it is, you
know, whatever it is, $5 billion plus, plus the Medicare reform
I think we have been talking about, which I wish Mr. Farenthold
were still here. That is not a taxpayer giveaway. Postal
workers have paid $29 billion for a service they don't
participate in, benefit from yet. Those things, could they turn
around that financial description you have offered in your
report?
Ms. Rectanus. GAO has not taken a position on specific
elements in that proposal. However, we have supported
appropriate restructuring of the ----
Mr. Connelly. Well ----
Ms. Rectanus.--retiree health benefits ----
Mr. Connelly.--if I may because I am running out of time, I
am not asking you for your position; I am asking you for your
analysis. If those things were adopted, would your numbers and
your prognosis change?
Ms. Rectanus. Certainly they would benefit the Postal
Service. What we would not want to see, however is not an equal
focus on cost reduction and right-sizing and trying to get the
house in order so that whatever revenue is generated is
appropriate and people understand that solutions are trying to
be gotten in both areas.
Mr. Connelly. If the chairman will allow the postmaster
general to comment on that as well, and then I will be done. I
thank the chair.
Ms. Brennan. Thank you, Congressman Connelly. And it
relates to the questions from Congressman Meadows. We need the
legislative reform, a favorable resolve of the rate-setting
process, and management actions need to continue to drive
operational efficiencies and grow profitable revenue. All the
above would put us on firmer financial footing, have manageable
debt, and have the ability to invest.
Mr. Connelly. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Connelly. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
Chairman Chaffetz. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Brennan, I think I heard this; I just want to clarify.
How many employees at the Postal Service total?
Ms. Brennan. We have about 498,000 career and 136,000
flexible or non-career employees.
Mr. Hice. Okay. What was the 7.5 million referred to twice,
Ms. Lowrance, you and Mr. Rolando both.
Ms. Lowrance. That is the entire mailing industry, so it
includes private sector, as well as the Postal Service.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So more or less, what, 550,000, 600,000? I
didn't tally that.
Ms. Brennan. Yes, roughly 634,000.
Mr. Hice. Six thirty-four, okay. And yet we all understand
we have got a declining industry as a whole because of a
variety of factors, digital and so forth. Does the Postal
Service have too many employees?
Ms. Brennan. We have a requirement, our universal service
obligation, to deliver to all 155 million delivery points, 135
million of which are physical delivery points. The other 20 are
post office boxes. So that requires an extensive network, and
that network includes employees, facilities, vehicles and
equipment ----
Mr. Hice. I understand that, but is it top-heavy? Do we
have too many employees?
Ms. Brennan. No. I would say that we consistently look at
how to rebalance and where there are opportunities. And if you
look at the reduction in overall complement, we've reduced more
than 168,000 employees over the last decade.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So we have 634,000 employees, we have a
declining business, but you don't think we have too many
employees still?
Ms. Brennan. The challenge, sir, is the workload content
associated with package delivery, as an example ----
Mr. Hice. No ----
Ms. Brennan.--is ----
Mr. Hice.--I understand that.
Ms. Brennan. There's ----
Mr. Hice. But that problem is why we have a declining
business. The result of a declining business--what would a
private company do? If a private company is losing money month
after month, year after year, quarter after quarter, what would
they do?
Ms. Brennan. What we did, sir, in terms of rationalizing
the network, consolidating facilities, adjusting retail hours
at post offices to match customer demand, some of the same
management actions that I've been recently criticized for.
Mr. Hice. But we are still losing money. And I will go on.
You said a few moments ago that your goal is to fill mailboxes
and trucks. Is that your strategy to turn this thing around?
Ms. Brennan. Our strategy is far more complex than that,
Congressman.
Mr. Hice. I would hope so.
Ms. Brennan. I was trying to simplify.
Mr. Hice. Well, but that is what you said was your goal.
Ms. Brennan. It's--you don't want to--you can't cost-cut
your way to prosperity. There are opportunities for us,
certainly, to drive efficiencies. There are opportunities for
us to look at overall operating expense, and we do that every
day, but we also need to look at opportunity to grow. There are
opportunities to grow. Mail still works. We delivered 154
billion pieces of mail last year and 150 billion was mail, 4
billion packages ----
Mr. Hice. But you continue to lose money. That is the
issue, and it seems rather unrealistic when you have a
declining industry to think that somehow the goal of simply
filling mailboxes and trucks is going to be successful in the
long run.
Ms. Rectanus, you mentioned earlier that the Postal Service
has been on high risk since 2009. And you summarized the
reason--two basic reasons: less mail and higher salaries. Do
you see an opportunity without cutting, be it the workforce or
whatever, for the Postal Service to turn this around?
Ms. Rectanus. We have proposed that it's really got to be a
balancing act between generating revenue and aligning costs. We
do believe that there's more right-sizing that the Postal
Service can do, and that's addressing where they have excess
capacity but then putting that where they do need capacity,
certainly exploring some of the workforce issues that they
have, and they--Ms. Brennan is right. They've done a great job
over the past several years to manage their workforce, but
we're starting to see it creep up again in fiscal year 2015,
and looking at the delivery mechanisms.
Again--and you need to do that by also looking at the
revenue, but you have to look at both of them. And, yes, part
of it is what does the mail picture look like today and in the
future and what type of services are going to be required, and
how do we want to provide those services, which is what we
would like to see through comprehensive postal reform.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, let me springboard off of that and
come back to you for my final question, Ms. Brennan. What is
the Postal Service's long-term plan for addressing the
declining industry?
Ms. Brennan. Let me first, if I may, Congressman, address
your comment earlier about the losses. The majority of the
losses are tied to the prefunding mandate.
In terms of our long-term plan, it is addressing
infrastructure, how to leverage that, repurpose that to support
the growth, address the latent capacity ----
Mr. Hice. Support what growth?
Ms. Brennan. Package growth, sir. We've grown our packages
49 percent over the past 5 years. We will right-size the
infrastructure, as we've been doing with where we need to
consolidate with the decline in letter volume. We'll continue
to look at every opportunity to improve operating efficiencies.
We have a number, as I mentioned, of over $5 billion of cost
reductions identified in our 5-year plan.
Mr. Hice. Thank you. I think it is time for the Postal
Service to act as private business has to act in similar
situations of constantly losing money without relying upon the
taxpayer. At some point we have got to change.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lieu, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Postmaster General Brennan, last October the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service issued a release about mail theft. And it
says that these crimes are increasing and that mail theft from
collection boxes and customers' mailboxes is a big problem. It
also said in most cases of mail theft from centralized mailbox
units involved counterfeit master keys.
So two questions for you. One is when you talk about right-
sizing, are you reducing U.S. Postal Inspection Service members
at all, and does that have an effect on mail theft? And second,
as you move to more and more cluster boxes, doesn't that also
increase mail theft because you just need one master key and
then you have access to a whole lot of mailboxes?
Ms. Brennan. To your first question, no, we are not
reducing. In fact, we have two classes currently and in
training to increase the postal inspection staffing.
And in terms of the theft, particularly as you're aware in
your district, Congressman, we've got a postal inspection task
force that's working with local authorities and the community
and taking some proactive measures to address that. I'd be more
than happy to brief you in detail given the sensitivity of
those corrective measures.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I would appreciate that.
Ms. Brennan. Certainly.
Mr. Lieu. Second, in terms of trying to raise revenue, what
is your view of postal banking as a way to generate revenue and
also serve communities that may not be served as well by banks
or may not have a trust of private banks but may trust the post
office?
Ms. Brennan. Fundamentally, we're open to any new product
and service that would generate profitable revenue. That said,
we do provide some banking services now. We provide money
orders, electronic money transfers, and cash treasury checks.
We would need to look at that through a business prism. Can we
execute effectively? Can we grow profitable revenue? And is
this a service that is not offered in the public sector?
Mr. Lieu. Okay. We have had a number of difficulties with
service in my district, so the first point I want to make is
when we contact your office, they have been enormously
responsive and they are able to help cases. About 97 percent of
cases get resolved. The problem is we continue to get more and
more cases, and now it looks like it is a systemic issue in
western L.A. County. A councilmember in west L.A., his office
had not gotten any mail for an entire week. We just checked
again, and even when they get mail, it is sort of spotty, so
this past Monday and Tuesday they are not getting any mail. We
get complaints from Santa Monica and Redondo Beach.
In the city of Beverly Hills it got so bad that the local
newspaper did an entire series on it. So last August, for
example, they printed a story saying, ``residents agree,
Beverly Hills post office fails to deliver.'' Last September,
``post office acknowledges crisis and meeting at Congressman
Lieu's office.'' Last December, ``Beverly Hills post office
issues continue.'' And then this January from Beverly Hills
Courier, ``Beverly Hills post office ends year with more
customer woes.''
And with the indulgence of the chair, if I could submit
these for the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
I would just like your commitment that you will work with
our office to look into these issues. I am elevating it because
you happen to be here, but also, we have tried with the local
folks on numerous occasions. And what will solve individual
cases, systemically, they just keep on coming in. I think there
needs to be a systemic fix.
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, absolutely. And if I may just
address Beverly Hills, which I am familiar with specifically,
we did make some adjustments in transportation and staffing to
improve the performance out of that particular facility, and
I'll be glad to talk to you and follow upon the other issues.
Mr. Lieu. All right. Thank you. And then my last point, one
of my colleagues said that the Postal Service should be run
more like a business. You don't actually set the rates for your
products, correct?
Ms. Brennan. Products that generate roughly 76 percent of
our revenue are capped at household inflation.
Mr. Lieu. Right. And in fact, if you actually set your
products at market rates, you would be getting a lot more
revenue. Isn't that correct? Potentially?
Ms. Brennan. We have an opportunity in 2017 with the review
by the PRC of the rate-making process to look at the present
price cap, is it meeting its objective as outlined in PAEA,
which was to ensure that revenues cover our expenses and to
ensure the financial stability of the Postal Service. We think
there's opportunity there. We think a rigid price cap is
fundamentally unsuited in an environment where you have
declining workload and fixed or growing infrastructure costs.
Mr. Lieu. My view is if people want the Postal Service to
run like a business, they need to give it tools to make it run
like a business. Otherwise, they should stop saying that. I
yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, panel, for
being here today.
A lot of this to me is about the perception's trust in the
post office as a whole. And just going back and looking at the
numbers over the last few years, 2015, $5.1 billion lost; 2014,
$5.5 billion; '13, $5 billion; 2012, $15.9 billion; 2011, $5.1
billion; 2010, $8.5 billion. At some point the people are
saying what is going on here? So this is just a perception.
This is the reality of a major trust issue. I have 5 minutes to
speak. In those 5 minutes, the approximate amount that the post
office will lose is $47,564. That is a huge issue.
And I have heard today from some of the witnesses that we
are working hard or some of the members, the colleagues, that
they are working hard to try to do things better, but I have a
couple specific questions in regards to this rate increase that
we are beseeching Congress on. If you did receive this rate
increase, can you tell me about where this extra money would be
reinvested, General Brennan?
Ms. Brennan. In terms of if we were granted ----
Mr. Walker. If you were granted a rate increase, where
would that money go? Where would ----
Ms. Brennan. Well, one ----
Mr. Walker.--you invest it?
Ms. Brennan. First of all, we would look to pay down debt
if we were to--able to address these long-term liabilities. And
the net losses that you cited, Congressman, are in large part
due to the prefunding requirement. The past 3 years we have had
controllable income, which is revenue less expense, that which
was--is within our control.
Mr. Walker. Would you agree with this statement that the
Postal Service could run out of money between 6 months and a
year at the most?
Ms. Brennan. What we will do, our fiduciary responsibility
would be to make decisions and prioritize which payments to
make to ensure that we would be able to continue to deliver the
mail and pay our employees and our suppliers.
Mr. Walker. My concern with that statement is that wasn't a
recent statement. That statement was from over 3 years ago, and
we have seen continuing beseech of Congress as far as more and
more funding, this isn't working out.
I want to hone in today on something, though, specifically
about packages versus the mail. And I want to make sure that I
am clear on this, as we have done some research on this lately.
The increases that you are requesting, would they be used to
subsidize the package area of the post office business or would
it be to increase the mail delivery? Can you expound on that a
little bit today?
Ms. Brennan. Yes. In terms of the cross subsidization
issue, the PRC annually reviews to ensure that there is no
cross subsidization, that our competitive products cover their
cost, and also that they contribute a minimum of 5.5 percent to
institutional costs. The PRC has found annually since the
inception of PAEA that that is in fact happening.
Mr. Walker. Well, you have stated that Postal Service has
made consolidations to respond to the decline in the mail, but
you have also stated that you are investing in package
delivery. I believe you just said that just a few minutes
earlier. And that as a result of those investments, package
delivery was not slowed by the consolidations. But Title 39,
section 101, subsection (e) states that ``in determining all
policies for postal services, the Postal Service shall give the
highest consideration to the requirement for the most
expeditious collection, transportation, and delivery of
important letter mail.'' Do you think that the Postal Service
is following both the spirit and the letter of this law given
your current actions?
Ms. Brennan. I do believe we're following the spirit of
that law.
Mr. Walker. Well, if that is the case, then, the annual
compliance report suggests that the post office, the Postal
Service is routinely prioritizing competitive products over
market-dominant products. Do you disagree with that?
Ms. Brennan. I'd have to see that, sir, in terms of what
you're actually referring to.
Mr. Walker. Well, I believe it is your annual compliance
report that once again ----
Ms. Brennan. That says ----
Mr. Walker.--suggests that the Postal Service is routinely
prioritizing competitive products over market-dominant
products. Can you expound on that?
Ms. Brennan. No, I believe that may be the PRC's comment
that it suggests--I'm not sure what you're referencing there.
If I can talk about the annual compliance ----
Mr. Walker. Sure.
Ms. Brennan.--report and annual compliance determination,
we're very transparent about performance in terms of transit
time performance, in terms of volume growth, and in terms of
investments within the organization.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the time.
Thank you, General Brennan, and I will yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Boyle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Boyle. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was struck by the fact that--I don't know when this was;
I know it was recent--that Pew Research did a poll of
favorability ratings of different, various government agencies,
and the post office came out the highest at 84 percent, which I
can't remember where Congress was, but I think Postal Service
was slightly higher than where Congress ended up, significantly
lower than that. That is made all the more remarkable by the
fact that you have had a decade where there are 200,000 fewer
employees than there were just a decade ago.
My question, though, is regarding the rather unique
requirement the Postal Service lives under where essentially
you have to prepay 75 years of obligations within a 10-year
window. Can you talk about the effect that that has had on the
balance sheet? And do you know of any other government agency
or for that matter private sector company that has to live
under such a unique requirement? I will leave that to anyone
who wants to grab in. If you would like to go ahead.
Ms. Brennan. I'll be happy to, Congressman. In terms of the
prefunding requirement, my understanding is it's--would be
unique to the Postal Service. There is some responsibility with
the Department of Defense in terms of prefunding. My
understanding is that their amortization payments are over a
longer period of time, plus they are appropriated and
integrated with Medicare.
Mr. Boyle. If anyone else would like to add something?
Mr. Taub. Yes, Congressman, this was enacted as part of the
2006 law in a bipartisan way with the best of intentions. Of
course, the next year, our economy went into the deepest
recession since the Great Depression, and with that the mail
volume accelerated and caused these challenges. The postmaster
general is correct.
I would point out when the 2006 law was enacted, there was
zero dollars prefunded for future retiree health benefits.
Today, as we speak, there's more than $50 billion that has been
prefunded. There's still an outstanding obligation of roughly
half that amount, but we have gone from nothing prefunded to
$50 billion today.
Mr. Boyle. If you would like to add something.
Mr. Rolando. Yes, I would. Thanks. Yes, this is unique to
the Postal Service, but I'd like to point out that the
proposals that the consensus group has put together, we would
not only fully fund the retiree health fund, we would be
overfunded if you took all the components that something else--
something that nobody else is able to do.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you. I would just add that my great
concern is, particularly as we have this conversation of going
from 6-day to 5-day mail, that we continue to be in this
negative cycle of cutbacks and closures that is really a self-
fulfilling prophecy. That can be very destructive to
communities and neighborhoods. I represent a largely suburban
and urban residential district. When we went through even just
a rumored closing of our post office in the 19116 zip code,
that set off a firestorm. And maybe not for people my age but
for those who are of an older age, having that local post
office there is an important part of the community.
So as we look at these decisions, and certainly dollars and
cents plays a major role, I think we also have to put a value
on what the local post office means to the community. And if
that is the case in a neighborhood and in a suburban area, I
think it is only more so the case in a rural area, which tends
to be more remote.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. If the gentleman would yield for just a
second?
Mr. Boyle. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. I want to make sure it is clear. We are not
talking about 5-day delivery. I mean, I don't want that to be
the headline that comes out of this hearing because your point
is well-taken. So whether it is in a suburban area or a very
rural area, I don't want the phone calls to start coming in.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. I agree with Mr. Lynch ----
Mr. Boyle. Yes. Okay. Thank you ----
Mr. Meadows.--and so I thank ----
Mr. Boyle. And if I could ----
Mr. Lynch. Would the gentleman ----
Mr. Boyle. Actually, if I could reclaim my time ----
Mr. Lynch. Sure.
Mr. Boyle.--and then will yield briefly to Mr. Lynch, I
would say that while that might not be the point of today,
there have been numerous proposals about going to 5 days, and
it has me very concerned and a number of our constituents for
the reasons you described.
I will yield now to Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Yes. Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, and
I thank the gentleman for yielding.
I know there was some implications here that the postal
workers were not doing their part or that, you know, costs are
creeping up and things like that. I just want to read you
something. In 2011, the American Postal Workers Union, which is
the largest union, and the Postal Service reached a voluntary
agreement that resulted in a sea change of significant and far-
reaching concessions. The 2002-2015 agreement contained wage
freezes for year 1, wage freeze for year 2, and that is within
a 5-year contract, followed by a 1 percent raise, a 1.5 percent
raise, and a 1 percent raise cost of living, and it was
deferred to the third and fourth year.
So extremely, extremely, extremely modest increase on the
part of the employees, including 2 years of a wage freeze in a
5-year contract. So, you know, just people should bear that in
mind. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And for the record I
want to say that my wife and I love our postman. He does a
great job.
Ms. Lowrance, it was mentioned earlier about some of the
things that are being done in the private sector. I would like
to ask you what cost-cutting initiatives has industry had to
implement in the wake of the evolving postal world as we know
it?
Ms. Lowrance. So we've seen a great consolidation in our
industry. We have seen some of the larger print houses kind of
eat up all the little ones to get rid of access capacity. We've
seen plant closures and layoffs and those sorts of things in
order to kind of compensate for the decline in mail volume
that's seen across the industry.
Mr. Palmer. If you had to guess, what cost-cutting efforts
would the Postal Service have to take or be taking if it were a
private company?
Ms. Lowrance. Well, I think that the Postal Service has
shown an ability to cut costs in the extreme conditions that
they've been functioning under. I mean, I'm not really at
liberty to say that layoffs should happen or anything should
happen to the common employee of the Postal Service. I think
that there are great lengths of additional price signals and
cost efficiencies that they could gain through working with the
industry. I think the industry has done more and more in the
form of work share to take work hours out of, you know, the
postal facilities and continue to rely on the industry to do
things that they do very well.
Mr. Palmer. I want to bring up a couple of things that have
come to my attention that I think might be helpful. For
instance, there is an economic analysis from a group called
Keybridge you might be familiar with Ms. Brennan that says the
Postal Service could save over $2 billion on the delivery
vehicle procurement that you are planning, which is expected to
cost over $6 billion. How do you respond to that?
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, I'd have to read that report. In
terms of the actual cost, we have some estimates about the
cost, but a number of factors will determine the cost of the
vehicle fleet replacement.
Mr. Palmer. You are correct in that. There are a number of
factors, and that is one of the reasons why your costs are so
high because you are buying vehicles that you plan to keep in
place for a number of years and your fuel costs, your
maintenance costs are exorbitant compared to what other private
companies would be doing. And I highly recommend that you take
a look at that Keybridge analysis. And if you have trouble
finding it, I think if you will let the committee know, we can
find that for you, get that for you.
There is also an issue, Ms. Brennan, that in November the
inspector general put out their semiannual report and found
that there was $1.8 billion in funds that could be put to
better use and $455 million in questionable costs from April to
September of 2015 alone. I would like to know how you responded
to the IG's report.
Ms. Brennan. Well, Congressman, that's a compilation of
literally probably hundreds of audits and/or studies, so I
would need to look at them in separation or in isolation to
address that. Currently, the OIG does valuable work for us and
identifies opportunity. Oftentimes, it is work that we are
currently undertaking and working through, so I would certainly
acknowledge that there is opportunity for process improvement
and additional efficiencies that will help drive down costs.
Mr. Palmer. Well, considering the environment that you are
in right now and, you know, these two combined would be
somewhere in the range of $2.3 billion and that you could save
another $2 billion in your vehicle procurement, you know, it
gets you a little over $4 billion, I think that ought to be a
couple of things at the top of your list for consideration.
And then I am not for layoffs either, but I also am
concerned about the public perception of the post office and,
again, for the record, we think the world of our postmen. But
there was a survey done by Accenture, evaluated 24 government-
operated postal organizations and two private companies that
together deliver 75 percent of the world's mail and found that
the post office ranked last as the lowest-performing postal
agency or commercial operator in the world. And my concern is
it is not just with the cost-cutting but the public perception
of what the post office does and yet you add the poor
performance, and I think because of the labor contract you are
under, the inability to remove poor-performing workers and then
these losses, the post office has got to really address these
issues to improve its image and to make it a viable industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from Michigan, Mrs.
Lawrence, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you.
It is an honor to be here today, and thank you, Chairman
and the ranking member, for calling this hearing.
I wanted to be clear for the record that I had a 30-year
career with the Postal Service starting as a letter carrier, so
I have a lot of respect for Mr. Rolando.
I also want to say no other organization in America is
compelled to prefund future retirement benefits at the level
that is done by the Postal Service. It is clear that pushing a
public agenda which operates with no taxpayer funds--so there
was some allusion earlier that we are using taxpayer dollars.
The revenue that we generate from the sale of our products is
what we fund and operate our business with. And so often it
seems to get confusing in debate when we start talking about
the Postal Service as if we are using taxpayer dollars. So it
operates with no taxpayer funds to the brink of financial
crisis by forcing it to assume the financial burden assumed by
no other agency or company is the height of the financial
irresponsibility of Congress, and Congress should fix this
problem that we created.
Today, as we are having this debate about the future of the
Postal Service--and yes, there are some issues that we need to
work with. And, Ms. Brennan, I have been very clear with you in
private conversations, and, you know, trusting you to continue
to keep delivery standards as one of the primary objectives,
and as I look here with our postal customers and mailers who
depend on us.
But one of the things I wanted to talk about is the
downsizing commitment that has been made by the Postal Service,
reducing your workforce by 200,000 careers since 2006, reducing
your work hours by 331 million, changing operation hours. Can
you, Ms. Brennan--and I would like Mr. Rolando to weigh in on
this as well, and my mailers if you have time--how has this
consolidation and reduction of workforce aligned with the phase
1 and phase 2 of the Network Rationalization plan or
initiative?
Ms. Brennan. Yes, if I may start, Congresswoman, we
completed phase 1. Phase 2 we completed 17 of the projected 82
consolidations. So we have additional consolidations that we'll
revisit. We'll redo the economic analysis, given that that is
now 5 years old, and would make the appropriate notifications
before we resume those consolidations.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Rolando, how is it affecting the day-to-
day ----
Mr. Rolando. Well, first, I'd just like to say keep in mind
a lot of this is in reaction to the prefunding itself. I keep
hearing over and over, what would you do if you were a private
company, and if we were a private company, we wouldn't have $50
billion of resources tied up in a fund for 75 years into the
future. It would certainly affect the standards, it would
affect service, it would affect rates, it would affect
vehicles, it would affect infrastructure, it would affect all
kinds of things.
So I think the takeaway from all of this is we're not
allowed in that way to act like a private company. We do have
to prefund. There's no appetite in Congress for us not to
prefund, so that's why we've put together this coalition to
find a way to satisfy that mandate. We've come up with a way to
do it. And moving on from then, then we can act as a private
company or as a Postal Service in a rational and efficient
manner moving forward.
Mrs. Lawrence. And I just want to add, it is about being
competitive. We are in a very competitive market, the Postal
Service, and if you truly want this company to be efficient and
competitive, then we as Congress must recognize how we are
tying the hands of the Postal Service.
And so I say to my colleagues very passionately that we
absolutely want to the Postal Service, which is covered--you
know, when I was employed, I had to take an oath that I would
protect the mail and make sure that it is protected from
foreign agencies and how important and special it was to be an
agent of the Postal Service. But then we tie their hands and
then we criticize them.
And one of the things that I want to talk about is the
future of these packages. We know that drones in other
industries are coming, but we consistently tie our hands and we
see the other industries moving forward to embrace the ability
to be competitive, to reduce costs, but we in the Postal
Service--we, I am saying we because I am a retiree--those in
the Postal Service continuously fight against these
restrictions, so we as Congress must step up and take ownership
of what we have created. And we have amazing opportunity now to
remove some of those barriers as we hold the Postal Service
accountable for filling their role of delivery.
And I am over, so thank you.
Mr. Meadows. [Presiding] I thank the gentlewoman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let me start with Ms. Rectanus. Do you know of any
other government agency or private sector company that has to
fully prefund the health care costs of its retirees?
Ms. Rectanus. The issue you're asking about is whether
anybody's quite like the Postal Service, and the issue is they
are a unique organization that were designed to be a Federal
entity, an independent agency within the Federal Government.
And so they are designed to be self-sustaining. So that's why
they are in a different situation than other organizations.
Mr. Clay. But the 2006 Postal Accountability Act imposed
that requirement on the Postal Service, correct?
Ms. Rectanus. That's correct.
Mr. Clay. How much money has the Postal Service been
required to pay in, and has it been able to make all of these
payments?
Ms. Rectanus. To date, the Postal Service has paid about
$18 billion on top of the original money that was put in
originally. They have missed $28 billion in payments as far as
the retiree health benefits program ----
Mr. Clay. And so $28 billion is the value of the unfunded
liability?
Ms. Rectanus. No, sir. That's the amount of money the
Postal Service has not put in. The amount of money that is
unfunded is about $54 billion.
Mr. Clay. I see. Ms. Brennan, I understand that 86 percent
of the losses that the Postal Service accumulated between the
years '07 and '11 are attributable to this prefunding
requirement. Is that right?
Ms. Brennan. That's correct, Congressman Clay.
Mr. Clay. Do you believe that the prefunding mandate is
unfair to the Postal Service, and do you agree with Mr.
Rolando?
Ms. Brennan. I agree with Mr.--President Rolando's
comments. I would say that it's responsible to prefund. The
challenge for us in the recent past was the accelerated payment
schedule. Going forward, though, the challenge for us is to
ensure Medicare integration.
Mr. Clay. Is modifying this prefunding requirement an
essential part of the joint reform proposal to which the Postal
Service, postal unions, and certain mailers have agreed?
Ms. Brennan. Yes, Congressman. Given that the prefunding
requirement ends this fall, the challenge now is to address the
larger issue of an unaffordable system for the Postal Service
and our retirees.
Mr. Clay. And how much money do you think this would save
the Postal Service?
Ms. Brennan. Fully integrating with Medicare for all of our
retirees 65 and older would save us over $17.5 billion over the
next 5 years.
Mr. Clay. I see. Is it true that the Postal Service's
retiree health care fund is already 50 percent funded?
Ms. Brennan. That's correct, Congressman. We're better
situated than most.
Mr. Clay. And do you know what the current balance in that
fund is?
Ms. Brennan. The current assets are over $50 billion in the
RHB fund.
Mr. Clay. Wow. The prefunding requirement may have made
sense back in '06, but it no longer makes sense to have the
Postal Service comply with a requirement that would force it
into insolvency.
And just one question for Mr. Rolando. Give me your overall
sense of how the morale is among Postal Service workers today.
Mr. Rolando. The overall morale, we deal really in four
different avenues if you will with the Postal Service depending
on the level of engagement of each of the probably employees,
organizations. We deal in a collective bargaining arena whereby
obviously we're addressing things that are going to affect
morale in terms of pay and benefits and working conditions.
We work together in an arena of growing the business and
making sure that service is what it needs to be so that we can
face our customers every day. Obviously, that can be rewarding
and frustrating at the same time.
We deal together in a legislative arena, as we're doing
today, to make sure that the Postal Service is here to serve
the American people for many years to come.
And then we deal in another arena that I will call the
culture of the Postal Service. And I think that's an important
thing that's been embedded for a long time in the way it exists
that we certainly have the commitment from leadership in the
Postal Service and the unions to address that. And all those
things contribute to the morale of postal workers all over the
country in different ways.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
May I yield of the rest of my time to the gentleman from
Massachusetts?
Mr. Lynch. Just quickly, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
I just want to push back a little bit on a suggestion that
was made earlier by one of my brothers across the aisle about
the comparative value or the comparative performance of the
United states postal system versus some of the international
competition. There is a great report out by Oxford University.
It is Oxford Strategic Consulting, and they measured the
efficiency of the postal services in the top 20 countries, in
the G-20, and the United States Postal Service came out the
best, and remarkably, it is the only system in that top group
that does not receive taxpayer funding. So ours is doing better
than all the rest, contrary to the statement made earlier.
And remarkably, the United States Postal Service scores the
highest for efficiency even as it delivers far more letters per
employee, 268,894 in the last study period, than any other
service in the G-20. Japan came in second, and it is less than
one-third of that.
And also we have universal service, which a lot of these
other countries don't have, so we deliver to every single
location. And the only criticisms that the British study had
was that, unlike in Siberia where their post offices actually
sell groceries, ours do not. But we have grocery stores that do
that.
But I just want to push on--we came out the best in the
study. It was a very credible study, and ----
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the ----
Mr. Lynch.--it was reported by CNN. I would like to enter
this as part of the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. His time is
expired.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you much.
Chairman Taub, one of the objectives of the current system
and any new system that comes out of the rate review is to make
sure we have high-quality service standards. And right now,
there is some indication that we are struggling in that regard.
If the Postal Service continues to have problems in that area,
what action do you think the Commission will take?
Mr. Taub. Congressman, the Commission by law has what's
called the annual compliance determination where annually we
look to ensure that rates and fees that were in effect in the
last year were in compliance, as well as service standards were
met. We just issued our most recent one just about a month-and-
a-half ago, and we did find that service standards indeed
weren't met. All the first-class mail did not meet their
targets, both parts of periodicals mail, most of standard mail.
We directed the Postal Service to come back in 120 days
with a comprehensive plan particularly on the--what's called
flats, the periodicals and the standard and the first-class
flats, a 90-day report on first-class letters and cards. So
once we get that back, we'll assess next steps. But it was a
very directed study, did bring attention, which has been a
trend that unfortunately hasn't been trending in the right
direction.
So that's why this year we took, shall we say, a little bit
more of an aggressive stance to ask the Postal Service to come
in with a more comprehensive focus as to what are the pain
points, what are the pinch points, how do we get past this
because service, as the postmaster general said, is the basic
standard that has to be met.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I have a question for Ms. Brennan here.
You know, we talked a lot about how the volume of mail has
dropped over the last 10 years from 213 billion to 154 billion.
And we use 2006 as the base year. But do you know what it was
like 10 years before or 20 years before that?
Ms. Brennan. Off the top of my head, I don't, Congressman.
I'll get that information for you.
Mr. Grothman. Was it going up? I mean, the point I am
trying to make is it ----
Ms. Brennan. It was growing, sir, yes.
Mr. Grothman. So it might have been 154 billion in 1986 or
1990? Two thousand and six was the high point in terms of total
volume in the system.
Mr. Grothman. So what I am getting at here is I wonder if
you are creating kind of an artificial cause for a problem by
grabbing the higher at 213 and say we are at 154 so of course
we are going to have a crisis? Maybe we were at 154 in 1980 and
you weren't having a problem. You know what I am saying?
Ms. Brennan. I understand your point. I ----
Mr. Grothman. But you don't know the answer?
Ms. Brennan. I would tell you that it's not artificial, the
challenges that we face.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. One of the biggest capital investments
you have--and we had a hearing on this before--is replacing the
aging vehicles. What is the current status of that situation?
Ms. Brennan. Congressman, we're currently in the technical
review phase for the prototype vehicles. The plan is that we
will determine one or more suppliers with multiple vehicle
types that will test over roughly an 18-month period different
topographies, different climates, and that will help inform our
decisions as we move to the production timeline.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Last time you guys were in here on this
topic you said you were going to buy 120,000 vehicles. Is that
still the plan?
Ms. Brennan. That would be the upper bound in terms of
replacement, and clearly, given our financial situation and
certainly the suppliers' capability, we would be looking to
purchase and deploy roughly 20 to 25,000 year.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So you are going to try to spread it
out maybe ----
Ms. Brennan. Correct, multiple years ----
Mr. Grothman.--over 6 years ----
Ms. Brennan.--Congressman, yes.
Mr. Grothman.--5 or 6 years. Okay. Next question. What is
the pay if I go to work for the post office, start out either
deliveryman, one of the guys and/or gals in the office? What is
the starting pay for that?
Ms. Brennan. I would tell you the average work hour rate
that I have off the top of my head is $41.
Mr. Grothman. Pardon?
Ms. Brennan. Average work hour rate, fully loaded, $41. If
it was a non-career employee, roughly $15 an hour.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So if I get a job--and I know you have
got to work part-time in the first place. If I get a job as--I
don't know that you start out as a mailman or not, but what do
I expect starting as far as my pay?
Ms. Brennan. It would depend on the craft. If you were a
letter carrier, roughly $15 an hour for a supplemental non-
career employee.
Mr. Grothman. How about a career employee?
Ms. Brennan. It would depend again on if you were new,
roughly probably 20, $25 an hour. I'll get you the exact,
Congressman.
Mr. Grothman. Twenty-five dollars an hour, plus--do those
people get overtime? Do you have overtime?
Ms. Brennan. Yes, absolutely. More than 8 hours in a day or
40 hours in a week, consistent with the FLSA rules.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. And is that common?
Ms. Brennan. Overtime can be in certain locales. It's
seasonal. It depends on employee availability, mail volume, and
the like.
Mr. Grothman. What's your average mailman make right now?
Ms. Brennan. Average salary?
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
Ms. Brennan. Again, let me--I'll provide that for the
record.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. My time is up. I will yield the
remainder of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Wow, thank you, impressive. Let that be
a lesson to all of us that are still sitting here.
We will give 6 minutes to the gentlewoman from New Mexico,
Ms. Lujan Grisham.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate that.
I am going to change up what I was going to do a little bit
because I really appreciate the comments that my colleague Mr.
Lynch made, although I don't need that report. If you want to
see the efficiencies of the post office, go visit and do a
ride-along with a letter carrier, and you will have no doubt
that it is one of the most efficient systems in the world. And
so thank you very much for that honor. And I plan to do more of
that, particularly in the area that another one of my
colleagues as already mentioned, Mrs. Lawrence.
But in this effort, because of budgetary issues, that we
were consolidating, and, Ms. Brennan, I heard that that is on
hold. But given the fact that that has really hurt rural and
frontier areas, disabled and senior population who are
traveling distances to get prescription drugs, I am very happy
to hear that that is on hold.
But in addition to that and the numbers that have already
been talked about, 200,000 employees, more than 360 facilities
consolidated, there is now a 2011--so it is a little bit
dated--but that GAO report says that, look, when you reduce the
level of your services, you are actually hurting your revenue
stream. So it is counterproductive.
And as you look at these issues, I would love it if you
would give us further information in writing to this committee
about your efforts in modernizing services and addressing these
issues given your, I think, unfair mandates, that there is a
healthy balance and we want to make sure in fact that we are
building a revenue stream and at the same time continue to take
appropriate actions to protect the populations who need the
Postal Service in a way that I think is different than the
average person receiving mail. So if you would do that, I would
appreciate it.
Ms. Brennan. Yes.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. And thanks for that update.
The second thing that I want to talk about that is, I
think, a bit may be different than what my colleagues have
addressed, but in my community, unfortunately, in my district,
in my State we are seeing a high number of vandalism and mail
theft. I want to thank you for your work, particularly in
Albuquerque, but I am concerned that with lack of personnel we
have a backlog in those investigations. You don't get those
investigations, we don't deal with the perpetrators. If we
don't deal with the perpetrators, soon we have this--we are on
a merry-go-round in this situation as well so that it continues
to occur at much higher rates than around the country.
And I will tell you that given, you know, our poverty
issues and our other public health issues, which I will address
later today in terms of substance abuse, it is a significant
problem. And so it also creates safety issues for folks who are
not dealing with this appropriately. Because of those backlogs
and investigatory issues, we are not replacing those damaged
mailboxes.
And I would love for you to give me a sense about what you
can do differently or if you have had any thoughts or what do
you need from Congress to make sure that you can address these
what I am going to call hotspots if you will so that we can do
something about it.
Ms. Brennan. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman. In terms of in
Albuquerque and the effort we have again with the Postal
Inspection Service partnering with local law enforcement and
community members, we've got an antitheft prevention type
campaign. I'll be happy to come up and brief you in more detail
because it is important to us.
And as we deploy centralized boxes, we need to ensure that
they are secure and that we can minimize any potential theft
there. But I'll be happy to come up and give you more
specifics. Given the sensitivity ----
Ms. Lujan Grisham. And I would like you to really--and I am
happy to do that, but I really want you to think about and talk
about if I have got more time--although I am happy to give it
back to the chairman because he is so good to me, and I meant
that genuinely--that I think it is important to think about it
in a policy mechanism because the truth is--and again, in my
community, I love my community and I love my State and I love
my district, but we have real challenges.
You know, I have got a police force that is under consent
decree that also has one of the lowest staffing in the country
and is in real trouble in terms of recruitment and staffing. So
leveraging there is not leveraging.
And the reality is is that we are not keeping up and we
have a real public safety issue, and we have got a confidence
issue. And it needs to be addressed, so what else can we be
doing? And you ought to take into account all those kinds of
circumstances. So the reality is, because those boxes are still
damaged and we still have a problem, people don't have access
to their mail.
Ms. Brennan. We need to correct that, whether it's holding
mail at the post office or looking at other ways to affect
delivery. We don't want disruption in service.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. And it is recognizable when you see all
these damaged boxes in my community. It is a huge problem.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the rest of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I thank the gentlewoman and I
appreciate it.
I have some comments and questions, and then Mr. Lynch, and
then we will wrap up.
Mr. Taub, give me your perspective on the PRC. We are
looking at a reform package. How would you reform or adjust
what the PRC does or doesn't do? What reforms are you looking
for?
Mr. Taub. Mr. Chairman, I think the most important thing,
of course, is the financial balance sheet. That's the house
that's on fire that has to be dealt with.
In terms of the Postal Regulatory Commission, attached to
my testimony is a study that mandated by law at least every 5
years the Commission looks at the entire Postal Accountability
Act of 2006, as well as the whole law, and offers
recommendations for changes to the President and Congress. We
did that in 2011. We're in the midst of doing that report right
now. The 2011 report did suggest a variety of possible
opportunities where the Commission ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Pardon me, but when do you anticipate
that will be complete?
Mr. Taub. We should have that complete by the end of the
year. My hope is that this would be delivered to Congress ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Can you have it by the end of May?
Mr. Taub. I wish we could. We just issued a few weeks ago a
call for public input and comment on that, a baker's dozen of
issues. We asked the public to input by June 14. So when the
public gives us the input, then we have to put that together.
So we will strive to ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Any preliminary suggestions?
Ms. Brennan. Yes ----
Chairman Chaffetz. As the chairman of this committee, let
me give you an outline of where we are headed with this. We do
anticipate introducing a discussion draft of a bill soon. I
anticipate that that will be available for perhaps 2 weeks
unless there is some major hiccup, and then the intention is to
introduce a bill, mark it up.
We are actively trying to address the prefunding issue. We
are obviously, as we have heard from across the whole spectrum
of the board, trying to deal with the Medicare portion of that.
It is amazing that, you know, $29 billion has been paid in
since 1983, and that has to be adjusted.
If there are structural adjustments or suggestions or ideas
that any of you have, we need to have those now. We have been
meeting and hearing and listening and now we are having a
formal hearing, but we need those as soon as possible.
From the GAO's perspective, I want to go to the Board of
Governors. And it is a little unfair to put any of you on the
spot but the GAO, you know, we can put you on the spot. How
many Board of Governors are there?
Ms. Rectanus. At this point there is--well, there's one
Board of ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Out of?
Ms. Rectanus. Nine.
Chairman Chaffetz. That is the right answer. There is one
out of nine. Quite frankly, I can't figure out what in the
world the Board of Governors does. It is almost never fully
staffed. One of the things that we are looking at doing is
fusing the Board of Governors and the PRC into one entity. If
somebody has a problem or a challenge with that or has a
different suggestion than that, let us know, but to have two
separate groups, one of which is never fully staffed and
literally has one person, they don't have a quorum, they can't
operate. And yet nobody seems to mind. I don't get any
complaints.
So that is one thing that I am looking at that I am just
saying to the world if you have a suggestion on that, let us --
--
Mr. Taub. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes?
Mr. Taub. Just to make a personal observation from having
been involved in this for so long, the current structure of the
statute sets the Commission up as a regulator, not the
operator, the Postal Service. Nineteen seventy when the old
Post Office Department was abolished, the current governors and
board was created to exercise the power of the Postal Service
and represent the public interest generally.
I would simply observe that, to the extent they are
together, making sure thinking through these issues of
regulator versus operator, but beyond that observation ----
Chairman Chaffetz. I still see a role of Congress, I still
see the role of the postmaster, and I still see the role of the
PRC, but this extra layer does not make a lot of sense to me.
Postmaster General, do you have a comment?
Ms. Brennan. If I may ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Ms. Brennan.--Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your offer for
insight on this, and we'll be happy to share it. I think
Chairman Taub outlined it well in terms of the differentiation
of responsibility.
My only caution is that it would be problematic for the
regulator to become the operator, so that would just be the
caution. But we're happy to provide some additional insight.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you want to triangulate the issue,
but at the same time, it is problematic when there is not a
functional group, and there hasn't been for a while, and there
doesn't seem to be any desire to get one. And so I am just
looking at structurally changing that. But duly noted. You
don't want your regulator to also be your operator, and there
does need to be an arm's length distance. But there is also a
role of Congress, and we have to serve in some of those
functions as well.
Mr. Rolando, kind of walk us through--I don't know what
time frame--but the unions have--I mean, the enrollment is way
down because in large part the reductions in staff. If somebody
is watching this for the first time, give them a perspective of
how the unions have stepped up and have helped to address this
problem. And there have been quite a number of staff reductions
along the way.
Mr. Rolando. Well, Mr. Chairman, as far as reductions, yes,
there's been a loss of 200,000 jobs in the last 10 years. I
think for the majority of the collective bargaining agreements
now, no new employees come in as career employees. They come in
as non-career employees ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Right.
Mr. Rolando.--without any benefits, much lower pay, and
have to wait for a career position to become available for them
to be eligible for that.
As far as--and then the collective bargaining itself, it's
a process that's worked well for a long time in terms of
negotiating agreements, whether by settlement or through
interest arbitration.
And as I mentioned before, there's other arenas that we
deal with with the Postal Service, for example, in the
legislative arena. That's an extremely, I think, important
thing that we do, along with the mailing industry, to be able
to get a consensus together to move something through Congress
that's going to preserve the Postal Service in the future.
So we have--and again, I talked briefly before about being
involved in the growth of the business and service and the
networks and the value working together to do that, you know,
to the point of bringing in business to the Postal Service. And
again, the fourth arena is just the whole culture of the Postal
Service.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Ms. Lowrance, let's talk
about what you would like to see first and foremost out of
Congress. And we have your testimony and you have answered some
questions, but give me the best synopsis you have on what you
need people in Congress to do.
Ms. Lowrance. We need predictable and reliable mail
service, so if you're going to say it's going to take 3 days,
take 3 days to get there, right? We have planning purposes from
business mailer perspectives that we do to interact with the
Postal Service and have the most efficient manner possible.
We need predictable, stable Postal Service prices, right?
If we see rate shock or extreme conditions to raise revenues in
order to cover the existing cost, mail will leave faster and
faster and faster and they'll find other means to communicate.
And then lastly, transparent costs. And I know both pricing
and costing can be done currently at the regulator, and we're
looking at the 10-year review to see if that--if the current
pricing mechanism is the right fit under the conditions.
So, I mean, if Congress were to do anything, I would say
releasing some of the liabilities on the balance sheet is
really what would help mailers going into the rate review, as
well as help the Postal Service alleviate some of the pressures
on the cap and be able to really concentrate on service since
that seems to be a large message that came across today.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you, and I appreciate it.
The Postal Service, as I said at the beginning, serves a
vital element of our commerce here in the United States. They
have a monopoly, and they have high fixed costs. When you have
high fixed costs, you don't reduce services and raise rates and
expect to solve your problems. What you need to do is move
volume. You have got to make the post office more relevant in
people's lives so that there is more volume that can move
through the system. So again, raising rates and cutting
services is not the way we are going to necessarily get there.
Now, I can tell you personally I have migrated a long way
the more I have studied this where initially my inclination was
the outlet is, you know, 5-day service, that sounds good, let's
increase the number of postal holidays, that sounds good, but
the more you dive into it, the more you realize that is not the
way the economy is moving. What is happening is there is more
e-commerce out there and people want to have their packages and
goods delivered right to them right now. And so you see the
Amazons of the world and others that consumers are starting to
expect Saturday and even Sunday delivery, and the post office
is in a unique position but they are not monopoly to produce
that.
Personally, I feel very strongly that the post office
should not be participating in business that is also found on
Main Street. Selling coffee and T-shirts, with all due respect,
other services that you can find it down the street, I don't
think that is necessarily the role of somebody who has a tax
advantage, has a monopoly, and I have very deep concerns about
that.
The one thing that I haven't heard in the last couple hours
of this hearing that I continue to harp on and it is incumbent
upon us but also I think the post office itself is the
government-to-government business. When I think of where do I
go to get my passport, I think of the post office. That type of
business arrangement needs to expand. It does at the State
level and it should at the Federal level. It drives me crazy to
no end that we go out and spend all this money FEMA to try to
remap the United States and have all these drug distribution
facilities.
We already have got post offices and letter carriers and
others that already know their community. They could walk the
streets without the street signs. They don't need their own
special map. We have already done that with the Postal Service,
and yet we spend hundreds of millions of dollars, if not
billions of dollars, doing that. We have disaster with FEMA and
others that happen, but we have to be prepared for that, but it
is your post office and your postmaster that probably
understands the area and the community better than anybody.
I visited Montezuma Creek, Utah, a small place down on a
Navajo Indian Reservation, a dilapidated building, but that
local postmaster had been there for more than 20 years. She
knows her community. She knows all the people. She knows people
who speak English, who don't speak English. She knows who rides
in on a horse to come get their mail. She knows the community.
That is the type of effort that the rest of the Federal
Government should be engaged in.
Also, I want to continue to look--and this committee has
jurisdiction on the census. We are going to go out and spend
billions of dollars on the census to try to recreate what the
post office already has in place. And I can tell the postmaster
is itching to speak here, so please.
Ms. Brennan. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I did just want to--a
proof point to your comments, too, if I may. One was working
recently with a Midwestern city to provide information on
vacant buildings through our address management system.
Another you mentioned, the census, we did a pilot I
mentioned earlier in the hearing out in Arizona on-boarding
census workers, but we think there's an opportunity for us with
the actual conducting of the census given in-person proofing at
the facility or on the doorstep with the technology we now
have.
Chairman Chaffetz. Your local letter carrier is going to
far more understand that there aren't 15 people living in this
house. I have been walking the street going to their door for
the last 7 years and there aren't 15 people in this building.
That type of thing and insight, they are going to spend the
billions of dollars. Let's spend it smartly. And I hope this
committee will further look at this.
I have gone way over my time here, but I am excited to move
this forward and again appreciate the work that Mr. Meadows,
Mr. Lynch, Mr. Connelly, and certainly Mr. Cummings.
And as we wrap up, I think, Mr. Lynch, did you have--let me
yield to Mr. Lynch and ----
Mr. Lynch. Very briefly. And I think there is a wonderful
opportunity there with the Postal Service and the census. We
are walking those streets already, so there is a way to, I
think, maximize the skills and the expertise that the Postal
Service has.
I do want to push back a little bit again. You know, I
cited the Oxford report that said the United States Postal
Service was the best in the world, and one of my colleagues
indicated his belief that--I haven't seen the study--but that
we were the worst in the world. I think that the best judge of
this is actually the customer, is the American citizens.
And, you know, the Pew Research Center polled Americans
about their government. And I think Mr. Boyle brought this up,
but the people of the United States in that poll said that the
most trusted government employees in the United States today is
the United States postal worker. And that is a tribute to you,
Postmaster General, and also to the unions and the people who
do that work every single day.
So, you know, I just want to say that they rank you, I
think, 84, 84 percent. You are the highest of any government
employees. Congress was also in that study, and we were around
6 percent between swine flu and the Taliban. That is where
Congress came in. So ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, this committee competes with the
Zika, so we are way down there.
Mr. Lynch. Amen to that. But, you know, it is indeed ironic
that we have a member of a body that has 6 percent approval
criticizing the employees who have 84 percent approval rating
in the eyes of our constituents.
So I will yield back. I will leave it at that. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I recognize Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. I want to thank you all for your testimony.
I just think that we have got to get this done. I mean, we
can go around this circle forever and ever and be in the same
place 10 years from now. Again, I want to thank all of you all
for coming to the table.
But I am interested in what the chairman said about
government-to-government. Do you see that, I mean, growing or
going, Postmaster General?
Ms. Brennan. Sir, I do see opportunity there. I think
another example that ----
Mr. Cummings. And how will we get there? I mean, how would
you ----
Ms. Brennan. We may need some support from you and the
chairman on that, but I think some of the outreach effort we
have had with some of the other agencies is a starting point,
leveraging our infrastructure.
I think another example is the TSA pre-verification for
frequent fliers. There is an opportunity, I think, for us to
handle some of that work as well.
Mr. Taub. Mr. Chairman, if I may, Mr. Ranking Member
Cummings, I just--I think one of the key pieces if the Postal
Service is going to go down this road is also the funding
associated with that, and that goes to that larger issue of
what is it that we want this government institution to do. And
I know with a house on fire financially we need to put that out
and the legislative process doesn't always lend itself to the
ability to get to first principles. But if there is some way,
whether in this round or the next, to think about what it is
that this government institution must do and what are the costs
associated with that and where does the revenue come in.
My only concern would be the extent they take on more
responsibility in this area, there's costs there, and if the
associated funding doesn't go to it, then we're adding more of
a burden to the Postal Service.
Ms. Brennan. Yes, hence my comment, Robert, about needing
need some assistance from the chair and the ranking member.
Mr. Taub. I was just trying to get a little more ----
Ms. Brennan. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings. Certainly, we would not want you to go into
something that is going to not yield a sufficient profit. That
doesn't make any sense. And we certainly don't want to burden
you with more obligations when the yield is simply to cost
more. That is ridiculous. But I am hoping that we will be able
to resolve some of these things and, as I said, resolve them
soon.
Again, thank you very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. The final point I would make on the
government-to-government is that, yes, these other agencies are
funded with resources to execute on these things, and if they
are going to spend money on them, they should be spending them
and looking at the option of doing it to the Postal Service.
I think the unions would appreciate that. They have got the
physical infrastructure unlike any other entity. They would be
able to do that whether, again, passports, census. You are
going to get a request from us to look at the financials of how
the whole passport business has worked, but I look within my
own district, the Department of Motor Vehicles, you know, there
are other State opportunities, not just the Federal Government
opportunities, where they need a physical location that is safe
and secure and that people know where it is.
So we have had a good, healthy hearing. We appreciate your
participation. I hope the men and women of the Postal Service
know that we care about them and that we are trying to do the
best thing, but I agree with Mr. Cummings. It is time to do it
sooner rather than later.
With that, the committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
Ms. Brennan. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
