- ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGY AND POTENTIAL U.S. POLICY RESPONSES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGY AND POTENTIAL U.S. POLICY RESPONSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-143

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-879 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Chief of Staff
David Rapallo, Minority Chief of Staff
Troy Stock, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Information Technology
Sarah Vance, Staff Assistant

------

Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 29, 2015...................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Amy Hess, Executive Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. Daniel F. Conley, Suffolk County District Attorney,
Massachusetts
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18
Mr. Kevin S. Bankston, Policy Director, New America's Open
Technology Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Written Statement............................................    27
Mr. Jon Potter, President, Application Developers Alliance
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45
Dr. Matt Blaze, Associate Professor, Computer and Information
Science, School of Engineering and Applied Science, University
of Pennsylvania                                                    53

ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGY AND POTENTIAL U.S. POLICY RESPONSES

----------

Wednesday, April 29, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:32 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blake Farenthold
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hurd, Farenthold, Walker, Blum,
Chaffetz, Kelly, Connolly, and Lieu.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology will
come to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
Good afternoon, everyone. And thanks for attending today's
hearing. And I appreciate your flexibility with time. Votes
always come at the inopportune moment.
In September of last year, Apple and Google, the largest
mobile device manufacturers in the United States, announced
that they would implement increased security measures on their
products in an attempt to strengthen privacy and data security.
These developments were met with concern from some law
enforcement entities, such as the FBI, who were worried that
this increased level of encryption would lead to an inability
to access data on specific devices and that, despite obtaining
a warrant, investigatory efforts could be hindered by this.
As a former CIA officer, I understand and appreciate the
need and desire for law enforcement to access digital
information in a timely manner. However, I also understand the
protections afforded to Americans provided by the Constitution,
and I have taken an oath two times to protect and defend these
rights.
I firmly believe that law enforcement officials must gain
the trust of the very people they are trying to protect in
order to be successful, and I remain concerned that a
government-mandated back or front door on U.S.-based mobile
device manufacturers might undermine that trust.
Today's hearing will involve testimony from a variety of
experts and stakeholders and representatives on ways to balance
law enforcement needs with privacy and security concerns. The
hearing will also explore the impact of this debate on domestic
privacy, American consumers, and U.S. technology manufacturers.
As technology continues to evolve and encryption
capabilities become a part of everyday life for all Americans,
this debate will only grow larger. I believe we can find a way
to protect the privacy of law-abiding citizens and ensure that
law enforcement have the tools they need to catch the bad guys.
I welcome the witnesses and look forward to today's
discussion.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to now recognize my friend and the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms. Kelly of Illinois, for
5 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses for appearing on today's
panel.
Recently companies like Apple and Google have announced
plans to incorporate automatic encryption for their mobile
devices. Encryption will become the default privacy feature on
their mobile devices, making their content unreadable and
inaccessible without the user's selected pass code.
As a society, we rely on mobile devices to manage and
protect many aspects of our lives, personal, professional, and
financial. Privacy on our smartphones is critically important.
Hackers are concerned, as is unrestricted government
surveillance.
According to a May 2014 study on trends in U.S. smartphone
industry, Android and Apple control 52.1 and 41.9 percent share
of the market. Their move towards automatic encryption will
have a significant effect on the industry standard for privacy
protections.
The move towards automatic encryption has been criticized
as seriously hindering law enforcement operations. Criminals,
like noncriminals, use mobile devices to manage the many
aspects of their lives, some of which can provide evidence of a
crime.
Today many criminal cases have a digital component and law
enforcement entities increasingly rely on the content of mobile
devices to further an investigation or prosecution of serious
crimes of national security threats. The FBI, local law
enforcement departments, and prosecutors have all expressed
concern with automatic encryption.
They envision a number of scenarios in which the inability
to assess data kept on mobile devices will seriously hinder a
criminal investigation. They do not want to be in a position to
tell a victim of a crime or the family of a victim that they
cannot save someone or prosecute someone because they cannot
access the content of a mobile device. There is a balance to be
struck here.
It is important that the Government's policies approach
ensures privacy protections and it is important that law
enforcement, under tightly controlled circumstances, have the
ability to investigate and prosecute crimes. I look forward to
today's hearing and your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to continue working
with you to examine policy issues related to advancement and
information technology.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
I am now pleased to recognize Mr. Chaffetz of Utah, the
chairman of the full committee, for an opening statement.
Mr. Chaffetz. I thank the chairman.
And I appreciate your passion on this topic. It affects
literally every American. It affects people all across the
world.
I think one of the great questions that needs to be posed
to our society and certainly our country as a whole is how to
find the right balance between personal privacy and national
security. And I, for one, am not willing to give up every bit
of privacy in the name of security. So how do we find that
right balance? It is not easy to find.
In response to recent moves by Apple and Google mentioned
by Chairman Hurd, the FBI Director Comey recommended, quote,''a
regulatory or legislative fix,'' end quote, which would force
companies to manufacture their mobile devices in such a way
that law enforcement can access the data on those devices
without a warrant or court order.
I have three general concerns about Director Comey's
proposal:
First, it is impossible to build just a back door for just
the good guys, you know, just the good guys can get this. If
somebody at the genius bar can figure it out, so can the
nefarious folks in a van down by the river.
As Alex Stamos, Yahoo's chief information security officer,
recently explained, all of the best public cryptographers in
the world would agree that you can't really build back doors in
crypto. That is like drilling a hole in a windshield.''
The Commerce Department's National Institute of Standards
and Technology's chief cybersecurity adviser agreed, saying,
quote, ``There is no way to do this where you don't have an
unintentional vulnerability,'' end quote. And I worry about
those unintentional vulnerabilities.
We have a wide variety of experts on the panel today to
help us examine some of the potential economic, privacy,
security, and geopolitical consequences of introducing a
vulnerability into the system.
Second, we already live in what some experts have referred
to as the, quote, ``golden age of surveillance,'' end quote,
for law enforcement. Federal, State, and local law enforcement
never had more tools at their disposal to help detect, prevent,
and prosecute crime. It seems that we hear every day there is
new, often-startling stories about the United States
Government's ability to track its own citizens.
I recognize technology can be a double-edged sword and many
pose challenges for law enforcement as well, but we are
certainly not going to go dark, and in many ways we have never
been brighter.
Third, strong encryption prevents crime and is a part of
the economy. People keep their lives in their mobile phones. A
typical mobile phone might hold a person's pictures, contacts,
communications, finance schedule, and much more personal
information, in addition to my Words with Friends, which is
critical to my daily sanity.
If your phone is lost or stolen, you want to know your
information is protected, and encryption does that. There is a
reason the world's largest technology companies are
increasingly developing stronger and more frequently used
encryption technology. It is not because they are anti-law
enforcement. On the contrary. It is because sophisticated cyber
hacks are nearly daily events.
No one is immune from digital snooping, from the White
House, to corporate America, to private citizens. The
opportunity brought to us by the modern technologies are near
limitless, but not if the system is compromised. Strong
encryption helps ensure data is secure and allows companies and
individuals to operate with confidence and trust.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today. But we
have choices to make. Do we allow the 99 percent of Americans
who are good, honest, decent, hard-working, patriotic people to
have encrypted phones or do we need to leave a back door open
and create vulnerability for all of them?
Because vulnerability is--it is all or none, folks. It is
not just a little bit, not just for the good guys. And that is
why we are having this hearing today. I appreciate Chairman
Hurd and what he is doing. And I appreciate and thank you all
for being here as witnesses today.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
I am going to hold the record open for 5 legislative days
for any members who would like to submit a written statement.
We will now recognize our panel of witnesses.
I am pleased to welcome Ms. Amy Hess, Executive Assistant
Director of the Science and Technology Branch at the Federal
Bureau of Investigation; Mr. Daniel Conley, District Attorney
of Suffolk County, Massachusetts; Mr. Kevin Bankston, Policy
Director at New America's Open Technology Institute; Mr. John
Potter, President of the Application Developers Alliance; and
Dr. Matthew Blaze, Associate Professor of Computer and
Information Science of the School of Engineering and Applied
Science at the University of Pennsylvania. Welcome to all.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. So please rise and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Mr. Hurd. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be
made part of the record.
And, Ms. Hess, we will start with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF AMY S. HESS

Ms. Hess. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Chaffetz,
Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear here
today and for your continued support of the men and women of
the FBI.
The Bureau has undergone an unprecedented transformation in
recent years to address and prevent threats to our national
security and our public safety. But as those threats continue
to evolve, the FBI must evolve as well. Today's FBI is a
threat-focused, intelligence-driven organization, and we must
continuously challenge ourselves to stay ahead of changing
threats and changing circumstances.
As you know, technology has forever changed the world we
live in. Our phones and computers have become reflections of
our personalities, interests, and our identities. And with that
comes the need to protect our privacy and our data.
But technology can be used by some very dangerous people,
and the FBI has a sworn duty to keep every American safe from
harm while simultaneously protecting their constitutional
rights and preserving their civil liberties.
Moreover, we recognize our national interests in promoting
innovation and the competitiveness of U.S. companies in the
global marketplace, as well as freedom of expression around the
world.
But the evolution of technology creates new challenges for
law enforcement. It impacts our ability to access
communications pursuant to court orders, which means those of
us charged with protecting the American people aren't always
able to access the information we need to prosecute criminals
and prevent terrorism, even though we have the lawful authority
to do so.
To be clear, we obtain the proper legal authority to
intercept and access communications and information, but we
increasingly lack the technical ability to do so. This problem,
which we refer to as ``going dark,'' is broader and more
extensive than just encryption, but for the purposes of today's
testimony, I will focus on the challenges of the evolving use
of encryption.
We encounter encryption in two overlapping contexts. The
first is legally authorized realtime interception of what we
call data in motion, such as phone calls, emails, and text
messages in transit. The second concerns legally authorized
access to data stored on our devices or what we call data at
rest.
First let me address court-ordered interception of data in
motion. In the past, there were a limited number of
communication carriers conducting electronic surveillance and
it was more straightforward. We developed probable cause to
believe a suspected criminal was using a target phone to commit
a felony. We then obtained a court order for a wiretap on that
phone. And under the supervision of a judge, we collected the
evidence we needed for prosecution.
Today there are countless providers, networks, and means of
communicating. We have laptops, smartphones, and tablets. We
use multiple networks and any number of apps. And so do those
conspiring to harm us. They use the same devices, the same
networks, and the same apps to make plans, target victims, and
concoct alibis. Thousands of companies now provide some form of
communication service, but most do not have the ability to
isolate and deliver particular information when urged to do so
by a court.
Turning to court-ordered access to data at rest, we know
that encryption of stored data is not new, but it has become
increasingly prevalent and sophisticated. And the challenge to
law enforcement and national security officials has been
heightened with the advent of default encryption settings and
stronger encryption standards.
In the past, the consumer had to decide whether to encrypt
data stored on his or her device and take action. But with
today's new operating systems, a device and all of the user's
information on the device can be encrypted by default. Further,
companies have developed encryption technology which makes it
impossible for them to decrypt data on devices they
manufacture, even when lawfully ordered to do so.
Although there are certainly good reasons to support these
new uses of encryption, such decisions regarding system design
have a tremendous impact on our ability to fight crime and
bring perpetrators to justice. Like the general population,
criminals are increasingly storing such information on
electronic devices and, if these devices are encrypted, the
information they contain may be unreadable to anyone other than
the user. The process of obtaining a search warrant authorized
by a court of law to seek evidence of a crime could be an
exercise in futility.
To be clear, we in the FBI support and encourage the use of
secure networks and sophisticated encryption to prevent cyber
threats. We know that adversaries will exploit any
vulnerability they find, but we believe that security risks
associated with the implementation of lawfully authorized
access are better addressed by developing solutions during the
design phase rather than resorting to a patchwork solution
after the product or service has been deployed.
Just as we have an obligation to address threats to
national security and public safety, we likewise have an
obligation to consider the potential impact of our
investigations on civil liberties, including the right to
privacy. We must always act within the confines of the rule of
law and the safeguards guaranteed by the Constitution.
We also believe that no one in this country should be
beyond the law. The notion that a suspected criminal's closet
could never be opened or his phone could never be unlocked,
even with properly obtained legal authority, is troubling.
We will, of course, use every lawfully authorized technique
we have to protect the citizens we serve, but having to rely on
those other tools could delay criminal investigations, preclude
us from identifying victims and coconspirators, risk
prematurely alerting suspects to our investigative interests,
and potentially put lives in danger.
Thank you again for this opportunity to discuss the FBI's
priorities and the challenges of ``going dark.'' The work we do
would not be possible without the support of Congress and the
American people. I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Hess follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Ms. Hess.
Now we recognize Mr. Conley for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL F. CONLEY

Mr. Conley. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Dan Conley, and I'm the
District Attorney in Boston and a member of the National
District Attorneys Association, the largest association of
prosecutors in America. Thank you for the invitation to testify
today here today on this critical issue.
Last year, when Apple and Google announced their new
operating system, they touted that the technology would not
allow law enforcement, even with a court order, to access
information on its mobile devices.
In America, we often say that none of us is above the law.
But when corporate interests place crucial evidence beyond the
legitimate reach of our courts, they are, in fact, granting
those who rape, defraud, assault, or even kill a profound legal
advantage over victims in society. So I'm here today to ask
Congress to intervene.
As a prosecutor, my most important duty is to ensure that
evidence we present in court is gathered fairly, ethically, and
legally. If it's not, if a search is improper, a court will
suppress that evidence and exclude it.
We, as Americans, enjoy a presumptive right to privacy that
may only be abridged under clearly defined circumstances, such
as when there are specific articulable facts that would lead a
judge to believe that the place to be searched will yield
evidence of a crime. In decades past, these places were car
trunks and safety deposit boxes. Today they are mobile devices.
We undertake those searches to solve crimes. We don't
wander to Web sites where people visit or aggregate data about
people's personal health, wealth, or shopping habits. That,
frankly, is the purview of companies like Apple and Google.
Their nominal commitment to privacy rights would be far
more credible if they were forbidding themselves access to
their customers' interests, search terms, and consumer habits.
But, as we all know, they are taking full advantage of their
customers' private data for commercial purposes while building
an impenetrable barrier around evidence in legitimate court-
authorized investigations.
For over 200 years of American jurisprudence, our courts
have balanced the rights of individuals against society. But,
in this case, in one fell swoop, Apple and Google have upended
it. They have created hiding places not merely beyond the reach
of law enforcement, but beyond the laws that define our Nation.
Let me give you an idea of what this means in practical
terms. In every big city, there's a mass transit system and a
disgraceful practice of snapping photographs up women's skirts
has taken place. If the offender's phone cannot be searched
pursuant to a warrant, then the evidence won't be recovered and
this practice will be an unchargeable crime. This isn't even
the worst of it.
Three years ago we were investigating a child pornography
case. We just thought a teacher was trading child pornography.
Turns out, after we got a warrant and examined his mobile
devices, he was not only collecting photographs, he was
actually abusing children. After a multijurisdictional
investigation, he's serving 45 years in prison. If those
devices were encrypted today, he would be free to continue what
he's doing on our streets.
Human trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of
children is also aided and abetted by the same technology with
victims, including children, advertised for sale on Web sites
accessed through handheld devices. With these operating
systems, those devices would become warrant-proof and the
evidence they contain unreachable by investigators.
Now, I don't believe Apple or Google set out to design an
encryption system to protect human traffickers, but this is the
result. When we talk about warrant-proof encryption, it is the
perpetrators of every violent sexual or financial crime in
which handheld technology is used who benefit. This isn't
rhetoric. This is reality.
Like most Americans, I am a customer of these companies and
I hold my privacy interest dear, and I understand and I
strongly encourage the use of secure encryption technology to
prevent hacking, theft, and fraud. And I think most people
recognize that there must be a balance struck between
individual's privacy rights and the legitimate interests of our
society to bring dangerous criminals to account. Apple and
Google need to recognize this as well.
I will conclude today by pointing out that, for the past
several weeks, in Boston and around the country, individuals
have all been following the trial of one of the individuals who
was a terrorist in Boston 2 years ago and, through his actions,
left four people dead and hundreds more grievously injured.
Cell phone evidence, much of it volunteered by people, but some
of it obtained by warrant, was critical to understanding what
happened, how it happened, and who did it.
Were law enforcement blocked from obtaining that evidence,
the apprehension of those responsible for the Boston Marathon
bombings might have been very much in doubt. So, again, I don't
think Apple or Google intended to create a safe space for
terrorists to do their deeds. But make no mistake. This is the
result and those are the stakes.
I therefore respectfully urge Congress to help us find a
reasonable, balanced solution that protects privacy while also
ensuring that there are reasonable means to gain lawful access
to crucial evidence. I thank you for your time and attention,
and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Conley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Conley.
Now I would like to recognize Mr. Bankston for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN S. BANKSTON

Mr. Bankston. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member Kelly,
members of the subcommittee.
District Attorney Conley is absolutely right that
encryption is one of the most critical law-and-order issues of
our time. However--and with respect and thanks for his and the
FBI's work to keep us all safer--he has got it exactly
backward. Strong encryption is absolutely critical to the
preservation of law and order in the digital age much more than
it is a threat to it.
Some have framed this debate as a choice between safety and
privacy, but that is a false choice. The debate over whether to
allow strong encryption without back doors is really a choice
between safety and safety, a little more safety against some
isolated crimes or much more safety for many more people
against countless other concrete criminal and national security
threats, be they street criminals looking to steal our phones
and laptops, ID thieves and fraudsters and Russian hackers and
corporate spies trying to steal our most valuable data, or
foreign intelligence agencies trying to compromise our most
sensitive national security secrets.
The ultimate question isn't what will make law
enforcement's job easier in some investigations. The ultimate
question is what will prevent more crime, which will make law
enforcement's job easier overall and will keep us all safer.
The answer to that question is more strong encryption, not
less.
I won't deny that encrypted devices or end-to-end encrypted
communications will, in some cases, inconvenience law
enforcement. Notably, however, the Government has yet to
provide a single specific example where such encryption has
posed an insurmountable problem. That's likely because there
are often a variety of other ways for law enforcement to get
the evidence that it needs.
The FBI is concerned that it's ``going dark.'' But, all in
all, the digital revolution has been an enormous boon to law
enforcement, what some have called a golden age of
surveillance.
More and more of our interactions with others and with the
world are moving into the digital realm, being quantified and
recorded, an unprecedented and exponentially growing cache of
sensitive data about all of us, and most of it available to law
enforcement.
Think about the massive archives of private email and
instant messages and text messages and photos and videos and
the vast public records of our social network activities, most
of which didn't exist or weren't available just 15 years ago,
most of which are stored in the Internet cloud and are easily
accessible to law enforcement, and much of which is backed up
from the very same encrypted phones that the Government is
concerned about.
Think of all the new metadata revealing when and with whom
all those messages were exchanged, where and when those photos
and videos were taken. And think especially about all that new
location data generated by our cell phones and by our mobile
apps, creating extensive records of our movements regardless of
whether those phones are encrypted or not.
Think about all of that when law enforcement says it is
going dark. I would counter that, by most measures, they are
going bright. And in those few cases where they are in the dark
and they truly need the data on an encrypted device, even then
there are options.
They can in many cases ask the Court to compel the owner to
decrypt the device under threat of contempt or even remotely
hack into the device over the Internet, a technique that is
somewhat worrisomely being used more and more often.
Admittedly, I have some serious constitutional concerns
about both of those law enforcement techniques, but I am much
more concerned that, in order to address those rare cases, law
enforcement seems to want Congress to take steps that would
undermine everyone's security rather than targeting an
individual suspect.
Make no mistake. Attempting to mandate encryption back
doors will undermine everyone's security, as Professor Blaze
will testify. That is the unanimous conclusion of every
technical expert that has spoken publicly on this issue.
And, as Mr. Potter will make clear, surveillance backdoor
mandates would also undermine our economic security and prompt
international customers and many American consumers and even
many of the bad guys that we're trying to stop to turn away
from the compromised products and services offered by U.S.
companies.
It's true now, just as it was true during the so-called
crypto wars of the 1990s, weakening encryption is a bad idea.
That is why a majority of the House of Representatives at the
time, including four current members of this Oversight
Committee, including Ranking Member Cummings, co-sponsored
Chairman Goodlatte's Security and Freedom Through Encryption
Act, which would have reaffirmed Americans' right to make, use,
and distribute strong encryption products without back doors.
That is why a majority of the House just last year voted
for the Sensenbrenner-Massie-Lofgren Amendment that would have
prohibited the NSA from demanding or even asking that companies
weakenthe security of their products. And that is why this
Congress should similarly reject any short-sighted backdoor
proposals in favor of preserving our long-term national and
economic security.
Thank you very much. And I look forward to your questions,
in particular, any questions about the 10 specific arguments
laid out in my written testimony. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bankston follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Bankston.
Mr. Potter, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JON POTTER

Mr. Potter. Thank you, Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly,
members of the subcommittee.
The 3-year-old App Developers Alliance includes more than
200 companies and more than 35,000 individuals worldwide. Thank
you for inviting me to speak today about the challenges app
developers and our digital industry partners face if we are
required to both protect privacy and provide Government with
privacy-breaching back doors.
First, it is important to highlight that protecting digital
data through innovative security-based products is
unquestionably good for businesses and consumers. In contrast,
back doors make apps less secure and less trustworthy.
Second, we must remember that data protection is not only
about civil liberties and privacy. Encryption prevents
cybercrime, which threatens fundamental economic interests that
operate digitally, including health care, transportation,
banking, and manufacturing. Encryption also prevents identity
theft, which has been consumers' top complaint to the Federal
Trade Commission for 15 consecutive years.
Third, nearly every digital business wants to be global,
but mandatory government back doors may spark a trade war and
imprison businesses in their home country.
Fourth, Government's conflicting messages about data
protection create uncertainty about business expectations.
Uncertainty creates risk, inhibits growth and job creation, and
especially harms startups and small business. Handling customer
data securely is an essential business commitment. Customers
worldwide demand this.
The media routinely report on data breaches and organized
cybercrime. In response, and strongly encouraged by government
agencies, including the FBI, developers have prioritized
security.
Given the magnitude of cybercrime and of government
resources committed to fighting it, law enforcement criticism
of encryption is perplexing. For several years law enforcement
has routinely encouraged and even required encryption to
protect sensitive data.
Until recently, the FBI Web site recommended all
organizations, quote, ``encrypt data so the hacker can't read
it,'' end quote. Quizzically, that recommendation was deleted
from the FBI Web site just a few weeks ago. In contrast, the
Federal Trade Commission continues to advise that, quote,
``encryption is the key to securing personal information
online.''
Government mixed messages about privacy and security, slow
product development, inhibit investors, worry customers, and
harm all companies, especially startups. Every digital business
opportunity is global. So the worldwide impact of mandatory
government back doors is important. Unauthorized U.S.
Government collection of global communications has created
international outrage and backlash that is already costing
American companies billions of dollars.
Mandating back doors that weaken encryption will exacerbate
global distrust, and we should expect two reactions. First,
international governments will demand their own security back
doors. Second, U.S.-based apps will be deemed noncompliant with
international privacy laws and be locked out of those markets.
Developers will have to build many versions of apps to
serve many markets with different law enforcement demands and
privacy laws or risk being blocked from those markets. Building
multiple versions of any product increases costs and runs
contrary to every rule of digital business.
Additionally, for good reason, some might be concerned if
other countries or particular countries demand their own back
doors. If markets become inaccessible to U.S. Apps because of
mandatory back doors, then a digital trade war could break out.
The App Developers Alliance membership is global because
apps create jobs and deliver value globally. Closed markets may
benefit some of our members in the short term, but the large
majority of our members recognize that encryption and privacy
trade war is substantially negative.
Finally, the basics of technology, security, and privacy
are critical. Any security opening creates vulnerability. You
can't build a back door that only the good guys can walk
through. Hackers know it. The FBI knows it. And increasingly
customers know it.
Forced insecurity harms consumers in all industries, but it
especially harms startups and small innovators because building
back doors that are only slightly ajar is technically
challenging and very expensive.
There are situations that justify law enforcement access to
our cell phones, to our apps, to the cloud, but there are many
legal methods to accomplish this with court approval. Congress
must insist that law enforcement and national security agencies
utilize these processes. This is fundamental to America's
civilian government.
In closing, please remember that encryption technologies
are a market response to well-founded consumer, commercial, and
government demand. When an app developer builds a thriving
business model around security and consumer trust only to be
told the FBI wants the product to be secure, but not too
secure, this disrupts the marketplace. It is bad for
innovation, for business, and for consumers. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Potter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Potter.
Dr. Blaze, 5 minutes to you.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW BLAZE, Ph.D.

Mr. Blaze. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a technologist, I am finding myself in the very curious
position of participating in a debate over the desirability of
something that sounds wonderful, which is a security system
that can be bypassed by the good guys, but that also reliably
keeps the bad guys out.
And we could certainly discuss that. But as a technologist,
I can't ignore a stark reality, which is simply that it can't
be done safely. And if we make wishful policies that assume and
pretend that we can, there will be terrible consequences for
our economy and for our national security.
So it would be difficult to overstate today the importance
of robust, reliable computing and communications to our
personal, commercial, and national security. Modern computing
and network technologies are obviously yielding great benefits
to our society, and we are depending on them to be reliable and
trustworthy in the same way that we depend on power and water
and the rest of our critical infrastructure today.
But, unfortunately, software-based systems, which is the
foundation on which all of this modern communications
technology is based, are also notoriously vulnerable to attack
by criminals and by hostile nation-states.
Large-scale data breaches, of course, are literally a daily
occurrence, and this problem is getting worse rather than
better as we build larger and more complex systems. And it's
really not an exaggeration to characterize the state of
software security as an emerging national crisis.
And the sad truth behind this is that computer science, my
field, simply does not know how to build complex large-scale
software that has reliably correct behavior. This is not a new
problem. It has nothing to do with encryption or modern
technology.
It has been the central focus of computing research since
the dawn of the programmable computer. And as new technology
allows us to build larger and more complex systems, the problem
of ensuring their reliability becomes actually exponentially
harder with more and more components interacting with each
other.
So as we integrate insecure, vulnerable systems into the
fabric of our economy, the consequences of those systems
failing become both more likely and increasingly serious.
Unfortunately, there is no magic bullet for securing software-
based systems. Large systems are fundamentally risky, and this
is something that we can, at best, manage rather than fix
outright.
There are really only two known ways to manage the risk of
unreliable and insecure software. One is the use of encryption,
which allows us to process sensitive data over insecure media
and insecure software systems to the extent that we can. And
the other is to design our software systems to be as small and
as simple as we possibly can to minimize the number of features
that a malicious attacker might be able to find flaws to
exploit.
This is why proposals for law enforcement access features
frighten me so much. Cryptographic systems are among the most
fragile and subtle elements of modern software. We often
discover devastating weaknesses in even very simple
cryptographic systems years after they are designed and
fielded.
What third-party access requirements do is take even very
simple problems that we don't really know how to solve and turn
them into far more complex problems that we really have no
chance of reliably solving.
So backdoor cryptography of the kind advocated by the FBI
might solve some problems if we could do it, but it's a
notoriously and well-known difficult problem. We have found
subtle flaws even in systems designed by the National Security
Agency, such as the Clipper Chip two decades ago.
And even if we could get the cryptography right, we'd be
left with the problem of integrating access features into the
software. Requiring designers to design around third-party
access requirements will basically undermine our already
tenuous ability to defend against attack.
It's tempting to frame this debate as being between
personal privacy and law enforcement. But, in fact, the stakes
are higher than that. We just can't do what the FBI is asking
without seriously weakening our infrastructure. The ultimate
beneficiaries will be criminals and rival nation-states.
Congress faces a crucial choice here: To effectively
legislate mandatory insecurity in our critical infrastructure
or to recognize the critical importance of robust security in
preventing crime in our increasingly connected world. Thank you
very much.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Blaze follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Dr. Blaze.
I would now like to recognize my fellow Texan, Blake
Farenthold, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Could we get the slide up?
I think it was Mr. Potter that pointed out the FBI had some
recommendations on their Web site about encryption that was
recently taken down. I want to read the two that are
highlighted.
And, Ms. Hess, I want to get a couple questions for you on
that.
``Depending on the type of phone, the operating system may
have encryption available. This can be used to protect the
user's personal data in case of a loss or theft.''
And it also says, ``Pass code-protect your mobile device.
This is the first layer of physical security to protect the
contents of this device.''
These are now off of the FBI Web site. Why did the FBI take
down this guidance?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. Actually, we decided to provide a link
to that information. That same information actually appears
through the link to IC3.
Mr. Farenthold. And you agree that that is probably good
advice. You still advise people it is a good idea to encrypt
their data?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. We fully support encryption.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Now, Dr. Blaze, you talked about
the good guys versus the bad guys. Who is a good guy today may
not always be a good guy. I mean, that definition of good guy,
bad guy--I mean, it is overly simplistic.
Who are the good guys? Who are the bad guys? And who makes
that decision?
Mr. Blaze. That is certainly true. And I think, even if we
can draw a line between who we want to have access and who we
don't, which is, of course, an impossible task in practice,
we'd still be left with the problem that we wouldn't be able to
provide access.
Mr. Farenthold. And, Mr. Bankston, let's talk a little bit
about a golden key. That is one of the things that folks are
looking at.
Wouldn't that become the biggest hacker target in the world
if it were known there were a golden key and what we have today
that might be deemed secure as computing power increases might
become a lot easier to break?
Mr. Bankston. Yes, Congressman. That is absolutely the
case. I think that, as Professor Blaze made clear, attempting
to build such a system would add incredible levels of
complexity to our system such that it would inevitably, as the
cybersecurity coordinator at NIST said recently, lead to
unanticipated vulnerabilities.
And that doesn't even count the possibility of bad actors
obtaining the keys. Even if you were to split those keys apart,
as the NSA director has suggested, you have to put that key
together somewhere, and wherever you do do that is going to be
a critical target for anyone who wants to compromise our
security.
Mr. Farenthold. Yeah. I have got a very limited time. I
don't mean to cut you off. I am just trying to get some broad
general answers. We can get down to the weeds in another
opportunity.
Is there anybody on the panel who believes we can build a
technically secure back door with a golden key? Raise your hand
and I will recognize you if you think that can be done.
All right. Let the record reflect no one on the panel
thinks that that can be done.
All right. Let's talk a little bit about if we were to go
ahead and do it. The United States--let's assume they are a
good guy and we agree to put in a back door for them. All of a
sudden we want to sell this same product in another country. So
China wants a back door. North Korea wants a back door.
Basically, every country is going to want a back door. Does
anybody disagree with that statement?
I see no hands coming up for that one either.
So we then are good. So do we put all of these back doors
into every system, making it that much more difficult, or do we
then say, ``All right. Well, this phone is sold in the United
States. We are going to put a U.S. back door in''?
Well, that doesn't help our intelligence community abroad.
And if I wanted to avoid that, I would go to the Cayman
Islands, which I would assume would have better privacy laws--I
don't know--there would be some haven country--and buy my phone
there. Would it then be seized by Customs?
I mean, I don't see a practical way to implement this. I am
now appointing you to the NSA. You are the head of the NSA.
Anybody got a way we can do what we want to do? Raise your hand
if you have got any suggestions that you think we can do it.
Mr. Conley.
Mr. Conley. Yeah. I am no expert. I am probably the least
technologically savvy guy in this room, maybe. But there are a
lot of great minds in the United States. I'm trying to figure
out a way to balance the interests here. It is not an either-or
situation.
And Dr. Blaze said--you know, he's a computer scientist.
I'm sure he's brilliant. But, jeez, I hate to hear talk like,
``That cannot be done.'' I mean, think about if Jack Kennedy
said, ``We can't go to the moon. That cannot be done.'' He said
something else, ``We're going to get there in the next
decade.''
So I would say to the computer science community let's get
the best minds in the United States together on this. We can
balance the interests here.
Mr. Farenthold. And I appreciate that because I am a proud
American as well. But I think what we are saying today is--it
would be the equivalent of President Kennedy saying, ``We will
be able to get to the moon in 10 years and nobody else will
ever be able to get there ever.'' I think that is the
distinction I would like to draw there.
It is not like we are saying we can't develop a secure
system, but we are also saying that can we really develop a
secure system that will be secure for any length of time that
somebody smarter might not be able to hack 5 years down the
road or so.
Anyway, I see I am already out of time. I appreciate your
indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Votes have been called on the House floor. And what we are
going to do is go to Ranking Member Kelly for questions, and
then we will recess and reconvene 10 minutes after votes.
I would now like to recognize my good friend, Ms. Kelly
from Illinois.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend Ms. Kelly yield just for a
second? Because I may not be able to come back.
I just want to welcome Mr. Potter, who is an old friend and
colleague of mine. And I wish to welcome Mr. Conley, though I
wish he would learn how to spell his name.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bankston, a core component to what we are doing here
today is examining what we can do to protect the privacy of
consumer data and not serve as a barrier to law enforcement
communities' ability to do work that keeps us safe. I know I
have heard from a number of folks on both sides of the data
privacy issue.
And so my question is: Is there such a thing as creating a
back door that is only for the good guys?
Mr. Bankston. I am also not a technical expert. I am a
policy expert. But based on what every expert in the field has
said not only in the current debate, but also 20 years ago in a
many-multi-year debate over exactly this issue, the answer is a
clear no and, in fact, a unanimous no.
Ms. Kelly. Also, could the existence of a back door created
in the interest of public safety actually serve as a Trojan
horse that cybercriminals exploit to their advantage?
Mr. Bankston. Absolutely. Any back door is going to
necessarily weaken the security of a system in a way that
another actor, someone with worse interests than our own
Government trying to protect us, could exploit.
Ms. Kelly. Any other comments about that?
Ms. Hess. Yes, ma'am. First off, when we are discussing
solutions, what we found in the past is that, if solutions are
developed on the front end of a design, they're ultimately more
secure than something that is patched on to the back end of an
existing solution, of an existing network, or an existing
device.
That we also found with respect to what Mr. Bankston refers
to 20 years ago when a law was enacted that, essentially, most
thought would decrease security of systems, and that turned out
not to be the case. To the contrary. Companies actually
developed more secure ways of being able to still conduct the
surveillance that we were able to enact back 20 years ago.
Mr. Bankston. If I may respond to that, I assume Assistant
Director Hess is referring to CALEA, the Communications
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act, which actually explicitly
provided that the phone companies subject to its intercept
capabilities were under no obligation to prevent or assist in
the decryption of encryption that was done by their users or
even encryption that they offered where they did not hold the
keys. So protection for encryption and, in fact, end-to-end
encryption was protected explicitly in CALEA.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. The gentlelady yields back.
I would like to recognize the chairman of the committee,
Chairman Chaffetz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
And I again thank you all for being here.
There are some important questions that face us.
Ms. Hess, you have a very important role within the FBI,
and we appreciate the work that you are doing. But it was said
earlier--and I want to ask you and give you a chance to respond
to it.
But does encryption actually help prevent crime, in your
opinion?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir, it does.
Mr. Chaffetz. But the policies that the FBI is advocating,
specifically the Director, don't necessarily fall in line with
that, do they? I struggle with what the Director is asking for
because--are you going to have encryption? Not encryption?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. I think the distinction comes from the
idea that we are not supportive or in favor of encryption, and
that is not true. That is not accurate. We actually want
encryption. It secures our networks. It obviously assists us in
providing security and blocking the cyber threats.
However, all we're asking for is a way for us to be able
to, with a lawful order, be able to get information from the
company so that the provider would be able to provide in
readable form the potential evidence that we would need in an
investigation.
Mr. Chaffetz. So you want encryption, but a key. And
doesn't that key by its very definition create a vulnerability?
Ms. Hess. In today's world, sir, I think that there is no
such thing as absolute security in either the physical or the
digital world. What we are asking for is not to lower those
standards by developing some type of lawful intercept or lawful
access capability but, rather, to come up with a way that we
may be able to implement perhaps multiple keys or some other
way to be able to securely access the information--or,
actually, rather, be able to be provided with the information.
Mr. Chaffetz. And that is the concern, is that, if you
create a key--let's pretend it is a key to your house. You can
go down to Ace Hardware and make a copy of it. Right? Somebody
is going to be able to figure it out. You can get a locksmith
who can go and open up your front door.
And the same principle--unless there is some new technology
that we don't know about, that is the concern. And that is the
disconnect from what we hear from the FBI and the reality of--
do you create the hardest, strongest encryption possible, which
means not having a key?
And, again, I know we won't necessarily solve it all right
here in this debate. But I have got to ask you something else
before I run out of time.
One of the keen concerns that I have--and I have sponsored
a bill called the GPS Act--deals with geolocation. There is a
debate and discussion about metadata versus content, for
instance, in emails.
If you and I are trading emails, you have heard the
Department of Justice argue that the fact that I communicated
with you is just the metadata. It is not the content of what we
were talking about.
Does the Department of Justice believe that your
geolocation is content or do they just think that that is
metadata?
Ms. Hess. Well, sir, first off, for geolocation
information, we do obtain a search warrant for that
information.
Mr. Chaffetz. Always?
Ms. Hess. But I----
Mr. Chaffetz. Always?
Ms. Hess. I would have to ask that we maybe brief you about
that in more detail at a later time.
But at the same time, to address your issue about metadata
and geolocation information, clearly those certainly are useful
tools, usual techniques, for us to be able to paint the picture
of what happened in an investigation, but they are not wholly
inclusive of all the evidence we may need to be able to show
intent, for example, with the content of the communication.
Mr. Chaffetz. I understand the need. And I don't have a
problem if you have probable cause or get a warrant or even
articulable suspicion.
What I have a problem with is you tracking geolocation at
will. And I think Americans have a reasonable right to privacy.
So post-Jones, what I still struggle to understand from the
Department of Justice is: What is their guidance? What are
their rules of the road?
I mean, I would like to know if you all track my wife or
not. Do you do that? I know you can. My question is: Do you do
it?
And you are giving me a, ``Well, I am not''--I mean,
clarify that for us. It is not a yes or a no. That is the
concern. I am not getting a yes or no from you.
Ms. Hess. I would answer in response to that question that,
certainly, to obtain any type of information, we would go
through lawful process.
Mr. Chaffetz. Is lawful process your ability to track
geolocation without getting a warrant?
Ms. Hess. Currently we do get a warrant, is my
understanding.
Mr. Chaffetz. And I amasking: Do you always get a warrant
to track geolocation? The answer is no, isn't it?
Ms. Hess. There's exigent circumstances. That is correct.
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay. So describe those circumstances.
At what level? What is the threshold? What is the guidance?
Ms. Hess. So, first, I believe it would depend on the type
of data that we are talking about----
Mr. Chaffetz. Geolocation.
Ms. Hess. --and the type of geolocation data, whether
that's GPS data or whether that's some type of other
geolocation type of data.
I again would request that we could certainly brief you on
this in more detail.
Mr. Chaffetz. Yeah. I want you to brief the American
people. This is why I am going to continue asking these
questions.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time. And we have a vote on the
floor. But this is one of the deep questions I have for the
Department of Justice.
Believe me, you are not the first person that can't clearly
answer this, and I think people have the right to know what
that answer is.
Is the Government tracking their geolocation? And right now
I think the answer unfortunately is, yes, they are. And
certainly they are at times without a warrant and without
articulable suspicion.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Votes have been called on the House floor. We
will recess and reconvene 10 minutes after voting.
[Recess.]
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology will
reconvene.
I would like to now recognize my colleague from California
and fellow recovering computer scientist, Ted Lieu, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lieu. As a recovering computer and science major, it is
clear to me that creating a pathway for decryption only for
good guys is technologically stupid. You just can't do that.
But I am more interested now in knowing, if this were to
happen, what would the effect of this be on global companies
and global app developers.
And, Mr. Potter, in your testimony, you raise concerns that
device pathway will introduce technological vulnerabilities to
mobile application.
What effect would the pathway have on the global
application developers' market?
Mr. Potter. Thank you for that question, Congressman Lieu.
Today every app developer thinks that their marketplace is
global, their opportunity is global. The Google Play Store is
global. The Apple devices are global.
The challenge is in Europe we have a very different privacy
regime than we have in the United States. And Europe has
already made--European leaders have already spoken quite
bluntly that, if they strengthen their privacy laws, it will,
in fact, harm U.S. companies and create business opportunities
for European companies.
So European leaders in the privacy area are very concerned
about--and they've been pretty blunt about it--Facebook,
Amazon, Google, collecting data and things like that and what
do they do with the data. And they are extraordinarily
distressed with the U.S. Government vacuuming up data
throughout the world, including listening to phone calls of
some of their leaders.
The combination of that, of the political angst and the
business stress, creates a very easy opportunity for them to
simply say that any company that has a back door particularly
to the U.S. Government, which at least in the minds of European
leaders, does not have a great history of using those back
doors with discipline, creates a vulnerability that is unlawful
under European privacy law; and, therefore, you'd be banned
from the European market.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I am going to reserve the balance of my time to make a
statement. It is primarily directed at Mr. Conley. I respect
your public service. I take great offense at your testimony
today.
You mention that unaccountable corporate interests such as
Apple and Google are essentially protecting those who rape,
defraud, assault, and kill. I think that is offensive. It is a
fundamental misunderstanding of the problem.
Why do you think Apple and Google are doing this? It is
because the public is demanding it, people like me, privacy
advocates, a public that doesn't want an out-of-control
surveillance state. It is the public that is asking for this.
Apple and Google didn't do this because they thought they would
make less money. This is a private sector response to
government overreach.
Let me make another statement that somehow these technology
companies are not credible because they also collect private
data. Well, here is the difference. Apple and Google don't have
coercive power. District attorneys do. The FBI does. NSA does.
And, to me, it is very simple to draw out the privacy balance
when it comes to law enforcement and privacy. Just follow the
damn Constitution.
And because the NSA didn't do that and other law
enforcement agencies didn't do that, you are seeing a vast
public reaction to this. Because of NSA, your colleagues have
essentially violated the Fourth Amendment rights of every
American citizen for years by seizing all of our phone records,
by collecting our Internet traffic. That now is spilling over
to other aspects of law enforcement.
And if you want to get this fixed, I suggest you write to
NSA and the FBI should tell the NSA ``Stop violating our
rights'' and then maybe you would have the public much more on
the side of supporting some of what law enforcement is asking
for.
And then let me just conclude by saying I do agree with law
enforcement that we live in a dangerous world and that is why
our Founders put in the Constitution of the United States of
America--that is why they put in the Fourth Amendment, because
they understand that an Orwellian, overreaching Federal
Government is one of the most dangerous things that this world
can have.
I yield back.
Mr. Conley. Do I get to respond to that?
Mr. Hurd. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to recognize my colleague, Mr. Blum from Iowa,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Hurd.
I would like to welcome today the panelists. I appreciate
your insights on this topic.
And I also would like to acknowledge law enforcement. I
know it is not easy what you do, and I am so appreciative of
the amazing job that your departments do. And I love the Thin
Blue Line. So thank you so much for what you do.
Ms. Hess, my questions are probably addressed to you. I
just want to make sure I understand this.
Law enforcement wants to force the private sector to build
a back door, if you will, or backdoor key into cell phones,
into software, things such as that. Is that correct?
Ms. Hess. Sir, I would actually phrase that from the sense
that we are simply asking for information that we seek in
response to a lawful order in a readable format. How that
actually happens should be the decision of the provider.
Mr. Blum. So you are not asking for a backdoor key into the
encrypted software or cell phone?
Ms. Hess. If we don't have the key, but, yet, the provider
can get us that information by maintaining the key themselves,
then that would be obviously a legitimate way to respond to our
lawful order.
Mr. Blum. Okay. And what you are asking for only would be
used if a warrant is issued. Is that correct?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. Everything we are discussing today.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Blum. And what we are discussing today would arguably
make law enforcement's job quicker, easier to apprehend the bad
guys, as we said. Is that correct?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir.
Mr. Blum. I am a software developer myself, and I am also a
homebuilder. So I would just like to give you an analogy as I
understand this.
Isn't this analogous to the Government asking or requiring
homebuilders to put a video camera in every room of every new
home that they build with the guarantee or the promise that the
Government won't turn it on, ``Don't be concerned. The
Government will not turn this camera on unless we get a
warrant''? And that would make law enforcement's job easier,
correct, and quicker if there is a crime in the home? Isn't
this analogous to that? Because you are saying, ``Trust us. We
will only do this if we need to do it.''
Ms. Hess. Sir, I think the analogy may be better described
as if we should need to know what is going on in that home.
Then, as long as the company can respond quickly. Now, that may
mean that they wire the home, but it certainly doesn't mean
they necessarily have to have the cameras installed as long as
they can do that quickly.
On the other hand, if they can come up with a different way
to tell us what is going on inside that home and do it quickly
in a timely manner that is quickly available to us when needed,
then whatever way they come up with would be acceptable.
Mr. Blum. Because what troubles me is law enforcement tends
to agree with--and I will paraphrase here--but that there is a
reasonable standard of privacy, Fourth Amendment rights, when
one is in their own home. I think most people in law
enforcement would agree with that.
But when it comes to our cell phone conversations, our
emails, anything that is electronic and data, it seems like
this reasonable right to privacy isn't there. The people in my
district in Iowa feel the same way.
Would you address that, please.
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. I would like to.
I believe that is inaccurate. Certainly you do have a
reasonable expectation of privacy, which is why what we are
referring to today and discussing here today requires a
warrant. Whether that is realtime communications or the data
stored on that device, it still would require a warrant. And
that is the threshold under the Constitution.
Mr. Blum. Thank you.
And this next question is for anyone on the panel. Does law
enforcement have other ways, other ways, other than what you
are asking for, to access the necessary data needed in, let's
say, 99 percent of the criminal cases? Are there other ways of
doing this?
Because it seems like we are always given, as citizens, the
dichotomy of liberty and giving up liberty and freedom for
safety. And I believe in American exceptionalism. I believe we
can have both.
Aren't there other ways law enforcement can do this?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir. I would like to address that.
I also believe that we can balance liberty and security and
public safety. I would say that there are certainly--when law
enforcement is stymied by a particular obstacle in an
investigation, we will seek all other ways to get the
information we need.
But those other ways may delay us in getting that
information. They may not be timely solutions. They may not be
encompassing solutions to where we might be able to identify
other victims or other coconspirators or the vast nature of the
crime or the impact of the crime, and that is what concerns us,
to be able to get that information quickly.
Mr. Blum. And I am out of time. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
But, once again, I would like to thank law enforcement for
the amazing job that you do. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hurd. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions. I have got questions for everyone.
So we will start with you, Dr. Blaze. Can you tell us a
little bit about your background, quickly, your degrees, how
long have you been involved as a computer scientist in
cryptology.
Mr. Blaze. I am computer scientist. My specialty is in
computer security and cryptography and the applications of
cryptography to building large-scale systems.
As a particular focus of my research area, I have been
concerned with surveillance technologies and some of the issues
at the intersection of technology and public policy. In this
issue, 20 years ago I discovered some flaws in the previous
U.S. Government proposal, the Clipper Chip.
Mr. Hurd. And you are at a university that the department
is pretty well known worldwide when it comes to cryptology and
computer science. Is that correct?
Mr. Blaze. I would like to think so.
Mr. Hurd. And I know you are a modest man. So I don't mean
to ask an indelicate question.
But you are considered an expert when it comes to
cryptology and encryption?
Mr. Blaze. I suppose so.
Mr. Hurd. So in your expert understanding, is there any way
to do a split-key approach to encryption?
Mr. Blaze. There are things we can do, like splitting the
key between multiple locations, that can reduce some aspects of
some of the risks in a system like this.
Mr. Hurd. But it does create additional vulnerabilities----
Mr. Blaze. That is right.
Mr. Hurd. --that anyone who has technical capability would
be able to take advantage of?
Mr. Blaze. That is right. We can move the risks around from
one part of the system to another, but there are still
fundamental problems that we don't know how to solve.
Mr. Hurd. And this was ultimately part of the problem with
the Clipper Chip from the 1990s?
Mr. Blaze. That is right. There were a number of problems
with the Clipper Chip proposal, but that was one of them.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Potter, as a politician, I am always told don't answer
hypothetical questions, but I am going to pose a hypothetical
question to you.
If there were a back door or a front door put into
applications or programs of U.S. businesses, how do you think--
the impact that would have on businesses in China, Russia and
Iran?
Mr. Potter. I have to anticipate, sir, that those
governments would ask for their own back door.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Mr. Bankston, we are going to save you for last.
Mr. Conley, if you have a properly issued warrant to go
into someone's house and there is a safe in that house that is
locked, what happens?
Mr. Conley. The safe will be taken out and it would be
broken into.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. So in your testimony you mentioned that
Google--and I believe we can infer Apple--stated that its new
operating system would make its mobile devices inaccessible to
law enforcement officials even with a warrant signed by a
judge. Is that correct?
Mr. Conley. That is correct.
Mr. Hurd. So if you had a properly issued warrant, would
you not be able to get that device?
Mr. Conley. You could get the device. You couldn't get the
information off the device if it is running iOS 8.
Mr. Hurd. So iOS 8--the default setting is a five-digit
PIN. Correct?
Mr. Conley. Is it five? It is a pass code of some sort.
Mr. Hurd. Dr. Blaze, I am a little rusty when it comes to--
so that is 5 factorial over 5. Right? And it would take, what,
13,000 possible iterations of a potential five-digit PIN?
Actually, it is a four-digit PIN, I believe what it is, four-
digit PIN.
Mr. Blaze. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. So that is 4 factorial over 4, which is even less
than 13,000.
Mr. Blaze. 10 to the 4th. So about 10,000.
Mr. Hurd. For a brute-force method with today's technology,
is that difficult?
Mr. Blaze. That is well within the range of a brute-force
attack.
Mr. Hurd. And how long would that take, roughly?
Mr. Blaze. On modern computing hardware, essentially no
time at all.
Mr. Hurd. So would you agree that that is the equivalent of
taking a safe out of a home and using some safe-cracking
skills? This would be the digital equivalent?
Mr. Blaze. No. This would be much easier than that.
Mr. Hurd. Because you are good. You know? I think my
colleagues from Texas A&M would probably be able to do it, too.
Now, my next question is to you, also, Mr. Conley, on the
up-skirting example that you used, if you had surveillance on
someone doing up-skirting, the fact that they are putting a
camera to try to take pictures of someone, would that not be
enough to arrest them?
Mr. Conley. That would not be enough. In order to commit
the crime, you have to have taken the photo, and there would be
no way to prove it. There would be no way to prove that the
actual photo was taken, what it was taken of. So we could not
successfully prosecute that case without the photograph, in my
opinion.
Mr. Hurd. Excellent.
I would like to yield to my colleague from California, Mr.
Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I do have some more questions along the lines of how easy
it would be to defeat one of these pathways. So let's say we
pass law that says: Okay. The Apple iPhone now has to have this
pathway only for good guys.
What is to keep a terrorist--and this is for Dr. Blaze--for
example, from saying, ``Even though I like their multi-colored
Apple iPhones, I am going to switch to Samsung phones?'' Is
there anything stopping that from happening?
Mr. Blaze. No. Fundamentally, the ease of loading
application software and the wide variety of platforms that we
have make it very simple for somebody who is determined to use
unbreakable encryption to do so. It might not be as easy or as
inexpensive as we would like it to be, but there are no
fundamental barriers to it.
Mr. Lieu. And currently, right now, there is nothing
preventing two people anywhere in the world from downloading an
encryption program to encrypt end to end those two
communications that would make this pathway essentially
meaningless. Is that correct?
Mr. Blaze. That is right. Now, there may be vulnerabilities
on the computers that run that software, and, in fact, there
likely would be for the reasons that I discussed in my written
testimony. But the encrypted messages themselves in transit
would be effectively impossible in practice to decrypt.
Mr. Lieu. And is it your understanding that sometimes
terrorists now resort to something as simple as just writing
something on a piece of paper so they are off the grid?
Mr. Blaze. Well, I am not an expert on terrorists, but I
would imagine that paper-and-pencil technology is well within
their----
Mr. Lieu. And we don't say that companies who make paper
shredders are somehow protecting terrorists. Correct?
Mr. Blaze. I have never heard that said.
Mr. Lieu. So let's talk a little about computer code. It is
true, isn't it, that computer code is neutral, that is, the
code cannot tell if the person reading the code or accessing
the code is Asian or the leader of Hamas or the FBI director or
gay or a woman or a man? As long you have got the key to that
encryption, you get in the system. Correct?
Mr. Blaze. That is right.
Mr. Lieu. The NSA, would you agree, has one of the most
secure systems in the world?
Mr. Blaze. I think they have enormous expertise.
Mr. Lieu. Curious, isn't it, that we now know so many
secrets about the NSA not because of technology, but because we
have human beings?
And so another aspect of all of this is you would be asking
the American public to trust all the human beings in the
Federal Government who could be looking at private data.
And it turns out, right, that sometimes human beings do
things you don't want them to do, such as this one person who
now disclosed all these secrets of the NSA, even though that is
one of the most secure systems in the world?
Mr. Blaze. The operational aspects of maintaining any kind
of large-scale secure system are enormously daunting, as I
think the NSA discovered 2 years ago.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the ranking member, my good
friend Ms. Kelly from Illinois, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Hess and Mr. Conley, when you are not doing your job,
you are citizens of our society. So how do you reconcile the
need for this data with people's privacy interests in their
data? Because you are a person, too, and then you are in law
enforcement. So how do you reconcile this?
Ms. Hess. Yes, ma'am. I will start.
I certainly obviously value my privacy. I want to make sure
that my system is as secure as possible. And I think that goes
back to the points that certainly the FBI is trying to make,
which is that we support encryption. We want secure networks.
It is just this inability that, for example, if I was
committing criminal activity, that that information would be
completely inaccessible. So in the safe example, we would never
be able to access what is inside that safe, and that, I think,
is more to the point of the question because certainly we do
value privacy and certainly the safeguards of the Constitution.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Conley. As I mentioned in my remarks, too, I value my
privacy as much as the next person. Just to give you an
example, recently my computer at home was infiltrated by
somebody. And so anytime I click onto a link, I get bombarded
with all sorts of merchandising messages and so forth. Somewhat
innocuous, but it is clear that my computer was infiltrated. So
I went out and bought some security software and loaded it onto
my computer. So I am certainly very cognizant of the need to
protect my privacy. I do all my banking and so forth on this.
My position has always been just very simple, that we ought
to not be able to completely hide valuable evidence of a crime
that is being committed or has been committed to hold
individuals accountable for their actions. And that is what I
am advocating for, some sort of balancing of the interests here
so that everyone's right to privacy is acknowledged and
glorified, really, but at the same time law enforcement is not
completely kept in the dark about these sorts of things.
Ms. Kelly. I appreciate all of your testimony. And,
obviously, encryption of data, from what I am hearing, should
be conducted in a way that respects both law enforcement and
private consumers' interests.
So, again, I want to thank the chairman for holding this
very important hearing.
Mr. Conley. Mr. Chairman, you had asked the question about
the pass code and about brute force. And far be it from me, I
suppose, to challenge Dr. Blaze on brute force.
But my iPhone is owned by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and it has seven digits. My pass code is not
four, but seven. So I suppose the exponential issue there is
considerably larger, obviously, with seven digits. And I am
told that, after 10 attempts to break into my--using my pass
code, that is it. I am blocked out and there is some erasure
that goes on.
So at least up to this point in this hearing, I believed
that there is no brute-force technology out there available
that could allow law enforcement to break into somebody's
handheld device.
And I also ask this question: Can this issue be bifurcated
in some way so that big corporate computer networks and so
forth can remain encrypted without any sort of golden key, but
devices like this, mobile devices, which are now the tools of
terrorists and criminals, can be accessed on probable cause
after a magistrate issues a warrant?
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Conley.
And to answer that question, when I left the CIA, I spent
about 5 years helping build a cybersecurity company. We did
penetration testing, technical vulnerability assessments.
And I would always offer my clients--a lot of times we
worked with banks, and I would offer my clients the option of,
``You pay our fee or we get to keep what we take.'' Nobody took
us up on the last one because we never not got in.
So the tools, the technical capabilities, are out there.
That is something that--having a conversation about how do we
get the right tools and expertise to law enforcement may be a
conversation where that may be a positive thing that comes from
this conversation.
Mr. Conley, last question for you, sir, or sets of
questions. In the up-skirting example, are there up-skirters in
Boston that haven't been caught because they have used
encryption?
Mr. Conley. Well, this encryption technology is nearly
brand new. So I am not aware of any cases yet. You know, when
we caught an up-skirter in Massachusetts, we realized actually
there was no statute that made it a crime. So the Massachusetts
legislature quickly took up this issue and made it a crime,
meteoric.
Mr. Hurd. As it should be.
Mr. Conley. As it should be.
Mr. Hurd. As it should be.
And, also, to you, I appreciate your work and what you do.
You know, 9 years I was an undercover officer overseas
collecting intelligence on threats to the homeland. I collected
that intelligence to help law enforcement and help folks like
you and your colleagues put these bad guys away. You do this at
a threat to your own life. You do this at a threat to your
family. And I thank you for that.
But, also, you know, because of the role you play and the
importance you play, I actually hold you all up to a higher
standard as well, and I am always proud to stand side by side
with you all.
Ms. Hess, question for you. What is the FBI asking for?
Ms. Hess. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
I would say that certainly what we are asking for, first
and foremost, is exactly what we are doing here today and just
the opportunity for the American public to consider these
issues and to weigh the risks.
Because clearly we recognize that there is no absolute
security, again, in either the physical or the digital world.
Everything may present a vulnerability. There may already be
vulnerabilities in place.
But for law enforcement to not have the ability to accept
or to receive the information that we might need in order to
hold those accountable who conduct heinous crimes or who will
conduct terrorist attacks, that's the question that I think we
need to balance in the American public. And just by having that
conversation will help us, I think, to make better informed
decisions.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And, Ms. Hess, does the FBI have any information or data
that suggests that the inherent vulnerabilities that have been
discussed about dual encryption is that there is a way to do
it?
Ms. Hess. We certainly believe and share Mr. Conley's hope
that there is some type of innovative solutions out there, that
we might be able to see government and industry work together
to come up with--certainly they won't be bulletproof, as has
been said earlier, but certainly more secure ways of being able
to get law enforcement what it needs, yet at the same time
provide layers and layers and layers of security so that the
providers can provide the customer what they need as well.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Mr. Bankston, in your written testimony, you talked about
the President's Review Group.
Can you characterize quickly for me what the President's
Review Group was.
Mr. Bankston. The President's Review Group was a panel of
experts picked by the President, five of them, to review the
NSA's intelligence activities, including a former CIA director
and a former anti-terrorism czar of the White House. They
concluded that it should be the policy of the United States to
promote rather than undermine the use of strong encryption.
Mr. Hurd. And you highlighted Recommendation 29.
Mr. Bankston. Number 29.
Mr. Hurd. And I would like to read that. And I do
appreciate all of you all's written testimony. But you had a
lot of great information here.
Mr. Bankston. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. And Recommendation 29 that President Obama's
Review Group provided was that they recommend, regarding
encryption, the U.S. Government should fully support and not
undermine efforts to create encryption standards; number two,
not in any way subvert, undermine, weaken, or make vulnerable
generally available commercial software; and, number three,
increase the use of encryption and urge U.S. companies to do so
in order to better protect data in transit, at rest, in the
cloud and other storage. I think that is a pretty good
recommendation.
And I would like to close my remarks with some of the
quotes from Ms. Hess' written testimony: ``Following the rule
of law and upholding civil liberties and civil rights are not
burdens. They are what make all of us safer and stronger.'' I
couldn't agree more with that.
And, again, I started in the CIA in October of 2000. And on
September 12, I was the fourth employee in the unit that
prosecuted the war in Afghanistan and helped infiltrate
Americans into Afghanistan to bring Al Qaeda and the Taliban to
justice for their acts of terrorism on our shores.
And if somebody would have told me on September 13 that it
would be 14 years prior to an attack happening on our homeland
again, I would have said you are absolutely crazy. And the
reason nothing has happened these last 14 years is because our
men and women in the intelligence community, in law
enforcement, are acting as if it is September 12, 2001, every
single day. The velocity that that requires, the dedication,
the countless hours of sacrifice, is incredible, and I applaud
everyone for that.
But that is why I hold everyone in the law enforcement
intelligence community to a higher standard and that upholding
civil liberties and civil rights are not burdens. They are what
make all of us safer and stronger.
And this is a good conversation, but I would recommend or
comment that any other future proposals or comments that are
going to come before this body will be carefully scrutinized by
this committee, by many of our colleagues, because we can
protect our country and our civil liberties at the exact same
time, and that is what we must do.
So I want to thank all of you all for your time today and
this conversation. I think it is always helpful. This has
helped me better understand my opinions on this topic. And I
would like to thank our witnesses for taking the time to appear
before us today.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
