- DATA ACT IMPLEMENTATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DATA ACT IMPLEMENTATION

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-955 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Troy D. Stock, IT Subcommittee Staff Director
Katy Rother, Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 29, 2015....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. Gene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United
States, U.S. Government Acountability Office, Accompanied by
Christopher Mihm, Managing Director of Stategic Issues, U.S.
Government Acountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7
The Hon. David Mader, Controller, Office of Federal Financial
Management, Office of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Mr. David A. Lebryk, Fiscal Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department
of the Treasury
Oral Statement...............................................    37
Written Statement............................................    40
Mr. Robert A. Taylor, Deputy Assistant Inspector General for
Audit, U.S. Department of the Treasury
Oral Statement...............................................    45
Written Statement............................................    47

APPENDIX

2015-07-23 Powner-GAO to Hurd Meadows-Duckworth Post Hearing
Questions......................................................    64

DATA ACT IMPLEMENTATION

----------

Wednesday, July 29, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology Joint with
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 1:05 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology]
presiding.
Present for Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd and Kelly.
Present for Subcommittee on Government Operations:
Representatives Meadows, Walberg, and Carter.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology and
the Subcommittee on Government Operations will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
at any time.
And we expect a vote series during the middle of this
hearing, so we will try to get through as much testimony as we
can, and then go for votes and come back for questioning. And
as Ranking Members Kelly and Connolly arrive, we will have them
offer their opening remarks.
Good afternoon. Thanks for being here today. We have got a
pretty crowded house.
You know, this committee has investigated and explored
issues at the forefront of this Nation's security with the data
breach at OPM, the future of our commercial sector in drones,
and the ever-evolving capacity for our technological innovators
in as collegial and bipartisan a way as possible.
Today's topic is no different, because while we may
disagree on the size and scope of the Federal Government, we
can all agree on the importance of understanding how government
spends its taxpayer dollars.
Enacted in May 2014, the Digital Accountability And
Transparency Act, or DATA Act, is an important step in
leveraging technological capabilities and know-how to make
financial spending information accessible to the general
public. If implemented properly, the DATA Act will allow anyone
from public policy experts and journalists, to academics and
average citizens, even Members of Congress, such as myself, to
untangle the web of Federal agency receipts, appropriations,
obligations, allotments to create a clear picture of government
spending.
This is an ambitious goal, to be sure, and we are here
today to examine the progress that Treasury and the Office of
Management and Budget have made in implementing the DATA Act.
Whereas prior reform efforts have faltered, the work of the
Executive Steering Committee and the fact that OMB and Treasury
have met the statutory deadlines for issuing data standards and
the consolidated receipt reporting pilot program give me hope
that we are on the right track.
While it is certainly important to meet statutory
deadlines, agencies also have an obligation to make sure they
are implementing bills correctly, not just on time. The use of
standardized data has revolutionized entire industries and
drives multi-million-dollar decisions and transactions in the
private sector on a daily basis. Similarly, accurate data will
help drive efficient decision-making at all levels of the
government.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony today, and I am
looking forward to working with them to effectively implement
the DATA Act, and realize the benefits of true transparency in
Federal spending.
Now it is an honor to recognize my friend from the great
State of North Carolina, Mr. Meadows, the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Government Operations for his opening
statements.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this hearing, for your leadership on this effort. Thank
each of you for coming. Obviously, some of this is not your
first rodeo. For many of you, welcome back. And it is nice to
meet some of you who I am just meeting today for the first
time.
Obviously the Government Accountability Office and others
have consistently reported that data on the Federal spending is
often incomplete, out of date, and inaccurate. This lack of
accurate, reliable, consistent data makes it difficult, if not
impossible, to properly evaluate whether taxpayer dollars are
being wasted or wisely spent. And in this era of very tight
fiscal concern, when you are trying to make decisions on where
money is to be appropriated and where it should go, having good
record-keeping and good tools to make informed decisions is
critical.
In just 5 years, GAO had identified wasteful duplication,
overlap, fragmentation in 106 areas across the government, and
an additional 72 areas of potential cost savings. You know,
each year, Mr. Dodaro, we get your report, and it is
illuminating. The only troubling thing is is that it seems like
a lot of times, those things continue to stay on there. So
hopefully, today's hearing will help us better implement a law
that was initiated right here in this committee, one that I
think will provide great tools for OMB and others as we look
forward to that.
You know, to give you an example, the EPA has 37 different
laboratories managed by 15 different EPA officials, spread
across 30 cities and 170 buildings without any coordination.
Now, if that is not a recipe for disaster, I can not imagine
what it would be, because just the duplicative nature of that,
you know, is one thing being done here, I can just imagine what
we have got.
So it is with this duplication and the type of efficiencies
that we want to make sure that we have, that the GAO could not
even tell the taxpayers where dollars were being wasted at the
EPA, because they did not maintain sufficient documentation on
the operating data.
Well, it is not just there. As many of you know, the Social
Security Administration is required to offset benefits for
certain individuals who receive similar benefits under another
program, like Workers' Compensation. In 2012, GAO found that
the Social Security Administration was not effectively
administering the Workers' Compensation offset due to a lack of
information about which recipients were receiving what
benefits. And in an 8-year period, it was estimated that some
$43 million in disability insurance overpayments were made.
Those are just a few examples that we have.
The DATA Act requires that Federal agencies need to
maintain and report Federal spending data in a format that will
allow for government watchdogs to weed out the waste and the
fraud. And if implemented correctly, we will finally know how
much our government is spending and where the money is being
spent.
I think today's hearing, we are looking forward to you
illuminating those particular issues as we see, even with that
law that has been in effect a little over a year now, is not
really taking hold to give us the tools to make informed
decisions. So we look forward to you sharing what we can do
better to help you implement it, and ultimately help the
American people.
With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman Meadows.
And now it is my pleasure to do something I get to do
almost every week, and that is, recognize the distinguished
gentlewoman from the great State of Illinois, my friend, Robin
Kelly, the ranking member of the Subcommittee on Information
Technology, for her opening statement.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you for holding this hearing to examine the progress of the
implementation of the DATA Act. I would also like to thank each
of our witnesses for coming to address us today.
Effective implementation of the DATA Act is crucial in
order to improve the transparency of Federal spending. The Act
requires that agencies report spending data in a consistent
way, which, in turn, will help them operate more efficiently.
The transparency that the DATA Act is designed to provide will
help hold agencies accountable for their spending decisions.
Comptroller General Gene Dodaro testified before this
committee last year that the DATA Act was one of the single
biggest things Congress could do to address wasteful spending.
OMB and Treasury have taken major steps forward in carrying out
the requirements of this Act. I applaud the way the
administration has embraced the Act and worked so diligently
over the last year to set the executive branch on the right
path.
In the last hearing concerning this topic, David Mader, the
Controller for the Office of Management and Budget, stated,
``We have charted a very aggressive path towards implementation
building off past experiences and successes to transform the
way the government does business.'' Mr. Mader is here with us
again today, along with Mr. Lebryk from the Treasury
Department. I look forward to hearing from them how well OMB
and Treasury are progressing. OMB and Treasury got off to a
great start by meeting the first big deadline, which required
them to establish government-wide data standards by May 9,
2015.
I want to highlight the efforts the administration has
taken to get feedback from stakeholders and provide
opportunities for public comments over the past year.
Stakeholder input is crucial to ensuring the success of the
DATA Act. This Act is an initiative that encourages innovation.
Including stakeholders in the discussion will help foster that
innovation, both inside and outside the government.
I also want to commend the way the GAO and the Office of
Inspector General for Treasury has engaged early in the
process. I know both GAO and the OIG already have work underway
to access implementation efforts.
The work of Congress did not end with the passage of the
DATA Act. It is our duty to stay engaged and see that the
execution of the Act happens seamlessly. We must keep our
finger on the pulse of the agencies to assure them that they
have our support and guidance as well as the resources they
need to ensure the law is carried out as it was intended.
Again, I welcome the witnesses and I thank the chairman for
holding this bipartisan hearing, and I look forward to hearing
from you.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly.
Now it is an honor to welcome the Honorable Gene Dodaro,
Comptroller General of the United States at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office. He is no stranger to this committee. It
is great to have you here. And he is going to be accompanied by
Christopher Mihm, the managing director of strategic issues at
the GAO, whose expertise may be needed during this hearing.
The next person I would like to introduce is the Honorable
David Mader, the Controller of the Office of Federal Financial
Management at OMB.
And Mr. David Lebryk, the Fiscal Assistant Secretary at the
U.S. Department of Treasury. Thank you for being here today,
and it was great meeting you earlier this morning.
And Mr. Robert Taylor is our fourth panelist, the Deputy
Assistant Inspector General for Audit at the U.S. Department of
Treasury. Thank you for being here today.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. We will also swear in Mr. Mihm.
Please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated. And let the record reflect
that the witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written record and your
written statement will be made part of the record. And I would
like to recognize Mr. Dodaro for his opening remarks for 5
minutes. Welcome, sir.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF HON. GENE L. DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much. Good afternoon, Chairman
Hurd and Meadows, Ranking Member Kelly. It is very nice to see
all of you today. I want to thank you for holding this hearing
and for asking for GAO to participate.
The DATA Act, if effectively implemented, can really
enhance the transparency and accountability of government, and
lead to more efficient and effective government operations.
Treasury and OMB have gotten off to a good start. I think
they have taken some significant steps. They have issued 27 of
an eventual 57 data elements that plan to be implemented by the
end of this summer. So that is very important.
Now, we have given them a lot of technical suggestions that
could lead to some revisions. The intent of our effort to
engage early is to make sure that we get a good solid
foundation in the beginning to make sure that the standards are
clear, they can be consistently applied, and will produce the
desired result over time. So we plan to continue to provide
them ongoing feedback to achieve those objectives, but much
more needs to be done in order to effectively implement the
Act.
Today, I'd like to focus my opening remarks on three
recommendations that we have made in our written testimony. One
is we think OMB and Treasury need to accelerate the efforts to
merge the DATA Act standards requirements with the requirement
in the Government Performance Results Act to ensure that the
government has a complete inventory of Federal programs. The
Federal Government still does not have this. We need an
inventory of Federal programs so that Congress can collectively
look at the aggregate investment the Federal Government's
making in Federal programs and activities. And also, if we are
going to efficiently and effectively be able to reduce
fragmentation, overlap, and duplication in the Federal
Government. It is critical that this inventory be developed so
that Federal spending can be linked to Federal programs and
activities.
Secondly, we encourage Treasury and OMB to establish a
permanent governance structure for the life cycle of the
standards to ensure that they're enforced, that their
integrity's maintained over time, and that they use leading
practices in data governance that have been used by standard-
setting bodies throughout the world. And we have made that
recommendation.
I think it is very important. Treasury and OMB have a good,
initial governance structure, but they have yet to establish
how it is going to be permanently done over time. Now, I think
it is very important to do it now, because the implementation
of the DATA Act will span the next two administrations, and I
am concerned that there will be lost momentum and lack of
direction to the agencies without that permanent governance
structure being in place now that can transcend the transition
to the new administration.
Thirdly, Treasury and OMB have outreached to stakeholders,
but we think there is more that could be done in this area that
would effectively replicate a lot of good practices that were
established during the Recovery Act. There needs to be a two-
way dialogue between Treasury, OMB and the agencies and various
stakeholders, particularly at the State and local level, non-
for-profit level, the contracting community, and we believe
that Treasury and OMB need to provide feedback to them based
upon their suggestions. That hasn't happened to date. We think
that that dialogue is important. The initial standards were
more focused on Federal Government budget data and
requirements, so that there is not yet a lot of standards that
are going to affect the recipient community. Those will be
coming out, or have been coming out now, so it is very
important to get this dialogue up and running effectively over
time.
Lastly, I would say, there needs to be continued attention
by this committee and the administration to ensure that these
standards are effectively implemented. We can come up, and OMB
and Treasury and the government come up with the best standards
in the world, but unless they're implemented effectively, you
are not going to have accurate data.
Chairman Meadows mentioned our work in the past about the
inaccurate, incomplete data on USASpending.gov. It
significantly has--we found it to be incomplete and inaccurate.
And unless attention is made to effectively implementing the
standards, I am afraid that we could have the same very poor
result after a lot of good intentions and good efforts to get
the DATA Act implemented.
So a long way to go. GAO will be there every step of the
way. And I thank you for the opportunity. I will be happy to
answer questions at the appropriate time.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you very much, sir.
Mr. Mader, you have 5 minutes for your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID MADER

Mr. Mader. Thank you, Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly,
and Chairman Meadows for the opportunity to be here today to
talk about the progress that OMB and Treasury have been making
since our last appearance in December with the implementation
of the DATA Act. As you stated, Mr. Chairman, the Act presents
the unique opportunity to improve the way the government works
by providing all Americans with the ability to see how Federal
dollars are spent. By delivering access to reliable financial
information through USASpending, the DATA Act will provide both
individuals and organizations in and outside of government to
understand how the Nation's tax dollars are being spent, and
provide opportunities to create innovative solutions for
improving the efficiency and effectiveness and oversight of how
the government does its business.
Equally important, increasing transparency will enhance
inter-government and intra-governmental communication, allowing
for more informed, effective, and efficient decision-making.
Access to standardized data will improve the efforts of
Federal, State, local, and tribal governments as well as all
other stakeholders.
We believe the DATA Act's statutory requirements are driven
by three clear goals: First, continuing to improve how the
Federal Government accounts for and displays total spending;
second, institutionalize a culture of data-driven decision-
making; and third, reexamine how we can lessen the burden on
Federal contract and grant recipients and their reporting
burden.
Since last December, we have had an opportunity to make
significant progress. Since our December meeting here, there
are significant actions that have been accomplished: first, we
continue to work to improve USASpending's government interface;
two, we established government-wide USASpending data
definitions and data exchange standards for all Federal
spending; third, we developed an agency playbook to assist the
agencies in the DATA Act implementation; fourth, we issued
guidance to agencies to systemically improve data quality; and
fifth, we launched a pilot to simplify Federal award reporting.
Moving forward from this day, we have significant work
ahead of us: One, we must complete the remaining work for
additional data standards, including additional data
definitions; second, we need to work with agencies,
specifically, for them to develop implementation plans; third,
we need to continue to collaborate with Federal and non-Federal
stakeholders to develop the display of DATA Act information;
and lastly, we need to continue to enhance the Section 5 pilot.
As we close out fiscal year 2015 and move into fiscal year
2016, the success of our ongoing efforts will be contingent on
the appropriation of sufficient resources for Federal agencies.
Thus far, progress made in the implementation of the DATA Act
has been accomplished using existing resources. In fiscal year
2016, the President's budget included $84 million for DATA Act
implementation, which would put us on a strong path towards May
of 2017.
As you recall, the Congressional Budget Office estimated
that the DATA Act would cost somewhere around $300 million for
the period 2014 through 2018. Without dedicated resources,
agencies will have a substantial difficulty in reaching both
the statutory requirements and the overall intent of the DATA
Act. With Congress's continued support, appropriate funding,
and continued robust collaboration, we will be on a path for
successful DATA Act implementation.
We look forward to the opportunity to continue to work with
GAO, with the IG community, and this committee to ensure that
we meet the objectives of the DATA Act.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you for your remarks, sir.
Mr. Lebryk, 5 minutes is yours.

STATEMENT OF DAVID A. LEBRYK

Mr. Lebryk. Thank you. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly
and Chairman Meadows, thank you very much for having us here
today to talk about----
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Lebryk, can you----
Mr. Lebryk. Yep. There you go.
Thank you for having us here today to talk about the
implementation of the DATA Act. In my over 25 years of
experience in the Federal Government, there are few initiatives
I've seen in the financial management area that can make as
much of a difference as this Act can across government.
When Mr. Mader and I have gone out and spoken to the
Federal community, I think what we have been struck by is how
receptive the Federal community has been to getting better
access to data. And the underlying premise of our
implementation has been better data, better decisions, better
government. And I think our ability to actually improve the
access to data, to unlock the data that exists in disparate and
siloed systems across government can make a major difference in
terms of making government operate better, both internally as
well as externally, with respect to citizens understanding how
government is spending their money, as well as seeing ways that
we can improve program performance and enhancements. So I think
that it is really an ample opportunity here, a really good
opportunity for us to make a significant difference long term
for how government operates.
When I testified last on this, we talked about the
implementation approach we had. And I think, you know, when you
have a new piece of legislation and it is as comprehensive and
as transformational as this, one of the first things you have
to do is articulate what your business approach is and what the
business case is of why you want to do this.
So Dave and I have spent a lot of time within the Federal
community talking about the importance of the Act and
explaining our approach. And significantly, we have talked
about a data-centric approach, which is more about the ability
to access the data rather than the systems approach. In the
past, government oftentimes builds large-scale systems in
attempts to access data or change systems to access data. Our
approach has been more data-centric. It is about finding the
data that currently exists within existing systems, mapping to
that data, and then being able to present it and make it
accessible to both government and externally.
So this has been something that is a little bit new. And as
we have gone out and spoken about that, we have had to sort
of--once we get people to kind of understand a little bit
better, the next question is, what do you want us to do? So
part of the implementation has been for us to put together a
playbook. And, you know, one of the probably smarter things I
think we have done was to develop a PMO, a Program Management
Office, a small group of people who are very much getting up
every morning and going to sleep every night thinking about how
can we advance the implementation of the Act? And one of the
things that they have done, and the office was established
within Treasury, was working closely with OMB, was put together
this 8-step plan, and saying to the agencies, if you are going
to implement the Act, what kinds of things do you need to do?
And we're at the very beginning stages of that.
In May, when we announced the standards, we also announced
the playbook. And one of the first things that people needed to
do is put together a small team to understand where the data
resides within their existing systems.
And that process, which is underway today, is going well.
We have held over 20--we have met with all 24 of the CFO Act
agencies, we have met with the IG community, the GAO, and
spoken about the implementation and how you need to proceed as
an organization to actually get access and start mapping the
data.
So that is gone very well. We're at the very beginning
stages of that, and I think the results of that will give us
some indication of how difficult this will be across government
over the coming months, what kind of resources are going to be
necessary, how easy it is going to be to actually map the data
and actually extract it from the different systems.
One other philosophical point of view we had in
implementation was that we would try pilots, that we would try
an agile approach to development, which is more about sprints
and failing fast if you are going to fail, and understanding,
you know, what's working and what's not working. So we have had
a number of pilots that we have been testing as it relates to
the implementation. Those have been very effective at having us
learn lessons and moving forward. And we'll be doing more of
that.
I should also mention that I know we have been getting a
lot of very good constructive feedback. And the GAO and our IG,
I think it is been very good that they have been involved in
this in the beginning to give us quick feedback and allowing us
to make corrective course corrections as necessary with respect
to how we're doing the implementation.
We have done a lot of outreach to the community. We have
done something new with respect to getting input, using
something called the Github, which is allowing people in real-
time to actually look at proposals that we have out there and
getting us back their comments and their feedback. This is, I
think, a useful tool in the sense that it does allow a
community of experts to really--to be a community and talk
about how you actually implement data and use the data, and we
have been--we have found that a very effective way to move the
project forward. But certainly, there are challenges, and I
don't want to suggest this is easy, because it is not. And
moving the Federal Government in a direction, it is going to
take resources, as Dave mentioned, but we're very much
committed to doing what we can to move this effort forward.
I look forward to taking questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Lebryk follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Taylor.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT A. TAYLOR

Mr. Taylor. Yes. Chairman Hurd, Chairman Meadows, Ranking
Member Kelly, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you this afternoon for the
hearing on DATA Act implementation. I am here to discuss our
office's recent oversight report on Treasury's effort under
this Act.
The DATA Act places initial responsibility for
implementation squarely on Treasury and OMB, requiring that
they issue guidance on government-wide financial data standards
for Federal spending, ensure financial and payment information
data is accurately posted and displayed on USASpending by May
2017, and then ensuring the data standards established are
applied to the data made available on this Web site by May
2018.
As the DATA Act moved towards passage, Treasury Inspector
General Eric Thorson, recognized that our office would hold an
important oversight role. He asked that we engage Treasury
early in this process. In response, we started what will be a
series of audits over the next several years focused on
Treasury's DATA Act efforts.
We issued our first report this past May. That report
covered actions taken by Treasury as of October 31, 2014. We
found that Treasury and OMB made progress in setting up an
implementation approach. For example, Treasury and OMB
established an executive steering committee with Mr. Mader and
Mr. Lebryk. This committee is supported by an interagency
advisory committee comprised of representatives from various
government-wide communities to provide leadership in obtaining
stakeholder buy-in.
And as Mr. Lebryk mentioned, Treasury and OMB also
developed a data-centric vision for implementation. This
approach focuses on managing existing data to avoid massive
system changes across government. To execute the data-centric
approach, Treasury and OMB created a structured divide into
four general areas: Lead, implement, support, and consult, with
specific workstreams under each.
While Treasury's progress is notable, we did identify
concerns with project management that we believe could hinder
implementation. Due to the complexities involved, Treasury is
using a combination of agile and traditional project management
practices. Very briefly, agile is characterized by quick,
small-scale pallets to test innovative concepts and strategies
to get to an end result. Traditional project management, on the
other hand, is a more structured methodology that is
characterized by a detailed step-by-step approach done in
chronological order to achieve an end product that is clearly
defined upfront.
Conceptually, the combination of these two approaches makes
sense. However, we know that Treasury's project planning
documents did not describe the different practices being used
for each identified work stream, it did not clearly show how
the tasks in the various workstreams tied together to produce
desired results. Additionally, the planning documents did not
fully reflect or recognize artifacts, tools, and metrics for
either an agile or traditional project management methodology.
There were also inconsistencies between the status of
activities reflected in certain tracking documents, and some
documents that we expected to see were either not prepared or
not maintained. Furthermore, at the time, Treasury did not have
a formal process to track stakeholder feedback. We also know
that Treasury had some trouble filling the position of program
manager, which may have contributed to some of the concerns we
found. However, Treasury did fill this critical role in
November 2014.
We are pleased to report that in his response to our audit,
Mr. Lebryk agreed with our recommendations for strengthening
project management. I also want to emphasize that the above
concerns were as of a point in time, October 31 of last year,
and a lot has taken place since that time.
In closing, I'd like to say that our office views the DATA
Act as a critical step in providing government managers, the
Congress, citizens, and the inspectors general, and GAO, for
that matter, with a better tool to evaluate how government is
using the resources entrusted to it. We believe that a key
component is the strong oversight provision incorporated in the
Act; specifically, that the Congress and inspectors general and
GAO conduct a series of rigorous reviews to assess the quality
of data submitted under the Act. These reviews will hopefully
give users comfort and reliability of the spending information
presented, something that is currently lacking with USASpending
data.
This concludes my statement. I will be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Taylor.
Now I'd like to recognize Chairman Meadows for 5 minutes
for questioning.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank each of you for
your testimony. I am going to start out very briefly, and maybe
emphasize the reason why, Mr. Mader, Mr. Lebryk, why it is so
critical that we get this information.
If you go back to the Wastebook of 2014, it highlights a
few things in there. And so I looked at what I found egregious,
and then I went and looked to try to find the information on
the site for how we would make a decision on whether we should
give that grant or not. And so this--I won't mention the
institution, but the institution name is there, and it
basically is two pages of just where they're from and the name
of the institution, and then the project description is
Research in Strong Interaction Theory. Now, I mean, that could
mean a lot of things to a lot of people, and so--but that was
the extent of the information that we had from the Federal
Government.
Well, come to find out, that was a $331,000 project that
allowed parents, or individuals, to stab voodoo dolls with pins
so that they could figure out if you--when you are hungry, if
you are angrier. Now, most parents who have toddlers know that
when they're hungry, they get cranky, and so to spend $331,000
to stick pins in a voodoo doll may be important to someone, but
when we have so many unbelievable needs out there, to make an
informed decision, we need more data. And so I want to give
that example. I've got more, but we won't go into those.
So, Mr. Dodaro, let me come to you. I understand there are
some pilot programs that we're trying to implement. What would
you believe that a good pilot program would look like?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, the characteristics of a good pilot
program would be clear objectives of what you would want to
test, a defined time frame, clear criteria on how you are going
to evaluate the pilot to know whether it was successful or not,
and having good data along the way in order to be able to
monitor the effective implementation of the pilot and evaluate
the results of the pilot.
Mr. Meadows. So basically, a matrix of where you are trying
to get to, some standards on what those expectations are, and
then the quality of the input to see if it measures up to that
so you can make an informed decision?
Mr. Dodaro. Right. Right. And so you can compare it to the
existing system to make sure it is going to improve the
situation.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So as we look to do this, and the
pilot programs, Mr. Mader, I know you've been working, I guess,
with HHS, and what that pilot program, as it is described to
me, and it may be wrong, it seems that it misses the target
that Mr. Dodaro has in that, you know, it is a blog and, you
know, we're putting up a few things and we're getting a little
bit more information here and there, but it really is not
clearly defined. So when it comes from a pilot standpoint, how
can, one, do you see any deficiencies, and I guess the other
is, is how can we go to improve that?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I agree with Mr.
Dodaro's description of what the critical elements are for a
good pilot.
And I think with regard, specifically, to the Section 5
pilot, which is basically--if we go back to the underlying
statute, it basically talked about a pilot and it talks about a
report at the end of the period. And when we looked at the
statute and we looked at what we know the outcome needed to
be--and that really is to reduce the burden on individuals that
interact with the government with regard to contracts, or with
financial assistance and loans. And I think if we had taken a
traditional approach of doing a study, what we would have wound
up at the end of 2 years is a 3-inch binder with a series of
recommendations. And I don't think that that would be
satisfying to us, nor would it be satisfying to the committee,
or anybody, for that matter.
So in thinking about how to construct a pilot with the
intent that everybody wants, we said let's sort of think, and I
will use something that Dave mentioned, is let's take a more
iterative approach. Let's start working with the recipients,
the stakeholders, and asking them, if you are applying for a
grant, what is the burden? How difficult is it? What are things
that we could improve? If you are applying--if you are going to
bid on a Federal contract, how could we make that process
easier? So the first part of the strategy is actually to ask
the recipients, the stakeholders, what would you fix? What's
broken? And that is the step that we have embarked on now.
As we gather that input from the stakeholders, then we're
going to start looking at the business processes, the business
practices, whether it is in financial assistance or in
contracting, saying, can we change this? Can we change the
practice? Can we do it now instead of 2 years from now?
So I do believe that the way we are constructing this pilot
adheres to best practices, because we're just getting started.
We only began a couple months ago. But I also think that this
iterative approach is actually going to get us real results
faster.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I hope you are right. The only problem
that I have is, is if Mr. Dodaro's definition of what success
is and you go in to the stakeholders who receive the grants and
say, How do we make this better? Really it doesn't meet the
requirements of what a pilot program is supposed to be, you
know, with regards to the statute, you know, because it is got
some pretty--you know, A, B and C there in terms of what it
needs to do, and it sounds like you haven't really addressed
those. Have you addressed those in your pilot?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Chairman. We are going to--we're going to--
--
Mr. Meadows. Have you already addressed them?
Mr. Mader. No. We're in the process of addressing, but we
will address what's required in the statute, but I think we're
going to do it in a way that actually will generate real
results sooner rather than later.
Mr. Meadows. I will yield back since I am--you were very
gracious with your time, Mr. Chairman. I will have a follow-up
series of questions.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Kelly, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Dodaro, the Recovery Accountability and Transparency
Board in consultation with inspector generals established the
Recovery Operation Center, ROC, in 2009. The ROC has been
successful in using enforcement and analytics in software tools
to identify patterns and identify areas at risk for fraud. For
example, the inspector general for the Department of Homeland
Security used ROC to investigate companies that receive
contracts for debris removal from Hurricane Sandy. The ROC
identified contractors who had tax liens and filed for
bankruptcy, as well as organizations that committed fraud
previously on similar contracts.
Do you agree that ROC has been an effective tool in
identifying fraud?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. You said that pretty emphatically.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I will tell you, we were involved in the
Recovery Act implementation as well. Our job was to look at the
use of the money by State and local governments, but I went
over and I saw demonstrations of the ROC's capabilities. I
think the Recovery Board and the IGs did an excellent job. I
think there was great concern about the amount of potential
fraud that could occur pushing out $800 billion in a short
period of time. And I think that their effective implementation
of these sets of tools in the Recovery Operation Center led to
a relatively minimal amount of identifiable fraud in that
program, a lot less than people anticipated.
Ms. Kelly. Thanks.
Mr. Taylor, has the ROC also been a valuable service to the
inspector general community?
Mr. Taylor. To some extent. I am going to defer to the GAO
on that. I can speak for myself. I have not used it, but they
have been doing a body of work looking at the requirements
under the DATA Act. There is a requirement that Treasury
consider setting up a data analytic center. When GAO informed
us that they were going to do a study of that, we deferred our
work.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. So under the DATA Act, Treasury can
transfer the assets of the ROC to establish a data analysis
center, or to simply expand an existing service.
So Mr. Dodaro, your written testimony states that the
Treasury Department does not plan on transferring any of the
ROC's assets. Is that correct?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct. I mean, they are engaged in
transferring information and knowledge from the ROC operations.
They have hired one person, who had an integral role in the
ROC's area, but for various reasons that we cite in our
testimony, that they told us about the age of the hardware, the
proprietary nature of some of the contracts, and et cetera, no,
they do not plan at this time, what they have told us, to
transfer those assets, intact, over to their operations.
Ms. Kelly. And, Mr. Lebryk, is that accurate?
Mr. Lebryk. Yes, it is.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. And, Mr. Dodaro, your testimony identifies
four categories of assets that could be transferred from the
ROC to Treasury. One of those is personnel.
Mr. Lebryk, has Treasury hired any employees from the ROC?
Mr. Lebryk. Yes. We have hired several employees from the
ROC, as well as have leveraged significantly kind of what they
have learned in the process of operating the ROC.
Ms. Kelly. Another category of assets Treasury could obtain
from the ROC is data sets. And your written testimony includes
a chart that shows the data sources available to Treasury Do
Not Pay Program compared to the data sources available to the
ROC.
Mr. Lebryk, do you agree with GAO's assessment that there
are data sets available to the ROC that are not available to
Treasury Do Not Pay Program?
Mr. Lebryk. That would be correct in the sense that the ROC
had very specific authorities that were not transferred in the
Act. The Act actually allows Treasury to take assets, but to
not transfer the authorities of the ROC.
Ms. Kelly. And has Treasury taken any steps to use its
authority under the DATA Act to obtain access to those data
sets that the ROC has but Treasury does not have?
Mr. Lebryk. So it may be useful to sort of talk about how
we have approached the issue of improper payments and fraud.
Treasury is very much committed to reducing improper payments
across government, and we operate something called the Do Not
Pay Center. The Do Not Pay Center is more comprehensive than
what the ROC is doing, because what Do Not Pay is doing is over
500 million government payments have already been run through
the Do Not Pay Center; that is, making sure that you are doing
real-time matching against existing government payments,
something the ROC was not able to do.
The second piece, which is--that is important is in Do Not
Pay, we're looking at pre-award, that is, when someone's making
a determination about whether they should give an award to
someone, they have the ability to come in to Do Not Pay and do
an assessment about whether they should give that person an
award. They then have the ability prior to actually issuing
award to run it against the Do Not Pay databases. And finally,
there is real--thirdly, there is real-time ability that once
payments are being made, to match them against the Do Not Pay
database. And then finally, fourth, is the ability after a
payment has been made, to do analysis to figure out whether the
payment is appropriate.
So we have used the Do Not Pay Center as well as our
existing capabilities and payments to use that information to
do analytics and to stop improper payments, which is much more
expansive than what the ROC can do today.
Our IG recently gave us an award for the ability to
actually help identify and prosecute over 130 cases of fraud
that was based on our payment files. So what we're doing right
now is we're going by, which is something the ROC did not have
the capability of doing, is analyzing all the government
payments that are being made. So if a beneficiary has received
a payment for the last 10 years to a bank account, and all of a
sudden, it appears as though it is not going to a prepaid debit
card, that may be an indication that there is fraud.
In one of the cases that was prosecuted, there were over 10
government payments being made to a single address, and we did
geo-space coding and sort of said where is that house that
those payments are going to? And it turned out it was a
warehouse. And you, therefore, can sort of say, well, that is
not--those payments shouldn't have been being made that way and
they're problematic.
So we have been working with the IG community to--in CIGIE
to sit down and talk about how can they get better access to Do
Not Pay, how can we work with them more closely to provide
those services that currently are being provided by the ROC in
addition to further services that we can offer to them to
reduce improper payments.
Ms. Kelly. Well, congrats on the award, and my time is up.
Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Walberg from Michigan is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just last week, I
believe, the Oversight and Government Reform Committee approved
the Taxpayer Right to Know Act, which, as you know, establishes
a definition for a government program. It seems it is about
time that we do that since we have plenty of programs.
It requires OMB to publish an inventory of all programs as
well as its activities online, and so Mr. Dodaro, can you
describe the effect of not having an established definition of
``Federal program'' on both transparency and the ability to
conduct oversight?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I'd be happy to. I mean, it is very
problematic not having this definition. We were charged in law
by the Congress 5 years ago to produce an annual report on
overlap, duplication, fragmentation in the Federal Government.
It took us great pains and time and effort to come up with an
inventory.
For example, we identified, after a lot of work and a lot
of digging, 82 programs that provided assistance for teacher
quality. Not even the Department of Education had a
comprehensive list of all these programs. There are 160
programs in the housing area that we eventually unearthed, but
even then, we couldn't tell how much spending was associated
with these programs.
So this is a very--it is an impediment from several means,
Congressman. Number one, you and other policy Members of
Congress, in making decisions, can not tell what the aggregate
Federal investment is in a related set of programs. This is
problematic if you are trying to decide priorities and make
decisions, also knowing whether you are getting a return on the
investment.
The other problem we found was there wasn't a lot of data
on evaluating the success and the outcomes of Federal programs,
so you did not have a lot of good inventory of the programs,
you did not have a good listing of the spending associated with
the programs, and what you were getting in outcomes for the
programs. This is not a way to run a government. You need to
have that information.
Mr. Walberg. So implementing the DATA Act would be very
difficult for OMB as well without this definition of a program.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, that is exactly right. That is one of my
recommendations in our testimony today is they accelerate the
DATA Act with the--the Government Performance and Results
Modernization Act passed in 2010 required OMB to come up with
an inventory of Federal programs. They have not yet done that.
They have allotted a lot of flexibility to the agencies, and
the agencies implemented it in different ways, and so you can
not compare across departments and agencies.
So they agreed with our recommendation then and said they
were going to defer implementation until the DATA Act was in
place, which I thought was a reasonable position, but we need
to get it done, and it is not yet done.
Mr. Walberg. I guess then I'd slide over here, Mr. Mader,
and ask you why has OMB then not created a Federal program and
inventory to date?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Congressman, my understanding was that at
the time that OMB attempted to create the inventory, they took
an approach that basically went out to, and I will say, let's
say the 24 major departments across government, and asked them
to identify within their particular organization what
programs--you know, what rose to the program level.
And then when they brought all of that data back and looked
at the 24, what they couldn't do--and I think this goes to an
earlier comment about duplication and overlap is you couldn't
actually see across the 24 where there were common expenditures
against the particular activity.
For example, there are programs that exist and are executed
in different departments. They weren't able to link them
because everybody defined what was important to them as a
program, so----
Mr. Walberg. When it was action and activity; is that what
you are saying?
Mr. Mader. Well, it was--they identified a program, but
they did not identify a program so that it was consistent with
another program in a different department.
Mr. Walberg. Okay.
Mr. Mader. So there was inconsistency, so you couldn't
crosswalk that.
What we're doing now is we have, right now, 3,800-plus
program activities, and in the DATA Act, what we're doing is
actually refining them and ensuring that everybody understands
the definition of those program activities. If you think about
program activities and you think about a pyramid, to us, the
program sits on top of that. Where you would have multiple
program activities, that would aggregate up to a broader
definition of program. And as we----
Mr. Walberg. But you are defining those programs now?
Mr. Mader. We have not started yet, Congressman, because
our goal is, first, to perfect, and we're starting to perfect
the program activities, get that right across the government,
and then start looking at, so when we look at a breadth of
these 3,000-plus program activities, how do you aggregate that
up to fewer? Because there will be fewer than 3,000 if you
bring the definition up.
Mr. Walberg. Well, my time is expired, but if I could ask
just an expected date of getting to that point where you have
that list of programs, is there any timeline you have on it
now, based upon what you are doing already with the activities?
Mr. Mader. We don't have a timeline yet, but what we have
said is that we're going to start looking at, you know, can we
start that activity some time in the new fiscal year so that
werun it concurrent? But as I've told Senator Lankford
recently, the same people that are implementing the DATA Act
will have to do this, and it is a matter of prioritization, and
also the fact that program activity is foundational to the
program. So while there--while we may be able to launch the
effort, our sense is that won't be finished until after May of
2017.
Mr. Walberg. Whoa. Mr. Chairman, I guess I would say, with
the Taxpayer Right to Know proposal, with the DATA Act in place
now, I would encourage you to bump that up, an aggressive work
to get those programs defined. That is the only way we gain
control, as I understand it, gain control on what the size,
scope, cost, and responsibility of government is. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I've been in Congress for 7 months, I think that is it, and
my staff makes fun of me because I say the word ``outrageous''
a lot, because as I learn more about how our government
operates, it is pretty outrageous, and something as simple as
understanding how the Federal Government spends money, I would
think we'd be able to answer that question, and we can not.
And I recognize the four of you all are involved in trying
to get us to a point where we can answer that question, and my
understanding, and Mr. Lebryk, I think the philosophy that you
all are using to try to solve this problem is a good one, and
we recognize that whether it is fed 57 pieces of data that we
want track, and that every agency may have one of those 57
pieces in a different database that doesn't talk to each other.
Now, for me, it doesn't take 2 years to map that, right?
And so my first question is, what is the deadline for the
agencies to just identify those 57 pieces of information,
whether they have it or not or how they're going to get? When
is the next--when is there a deadline for them to identify
that?
Mr. Lebryk. So what we have done in the--with the guidance
that we set out on May 8th was we laid out the eight steps we
want agencies to go through, and as I mentioned, they're in the
process of doing that right now.
From that process, they put small teams together, and I
think this is one of the values of the approach we're taking.
It doesn't take lots of people to do this. You just need a
small number of knowledgeable people to sit down and sort of
look at the systems.
From that effort, we'll have a much better sense of the
level--degree of difficulty to actually get to that end state.
What we have done, and also part of that May 8th announcement
was that by the end of this summer, agencies--early September,
agencies are asked to come back what their agency
implementation plan will be.
So after they have done their sort of assessment, they're
going to comeback and they're going to say, this is what the
degree of difficulty is, these are the resources that are
necessary in order to do it.
Mr. Hurd. So what resources do they need in order to look
through their databases to find out if there is--you know,
where that 57 pieces of information is? And Mr. Mader, you said
at the beginning--and I wasn't around when the DATA Act was
passed. I think it is a good thing, and we're moving in the
right direction, but $3 million to get 24 Federal agencies to
map 56 pieces of information to a single database does not
require 2 years and $300 million.
This is something that I've spent time doing in the private
sector, and what are we using the $300 million for?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Chairman, that was a CBO mark. The
administration asked for $94 million in '16 and the----
Mr. Hurd. So what did we use the $94 million for? Or $84
million?
Mr. Mader. And the House appropriations have only allocated
25 million for four agencies. And I think when you think about,
let's talk----
Mr. Hurd. there is programmers on staff, right, already in
some of these agencies, they're collecting the information.
Mr. Mader. The information, Mr. Chairman, is being
collected. There is a financial system that collects and
reports information. There are acquisition systems----
Mr. Hurd. Yeah.
Mr. Mader. --that collect and report----
Mr. Hurd. And somebody is maintaining these systems.
Mr. Mader. --and will be----
Mr. Hurd. Somebody is maintaining these systems already.
Somebody is already putting data in these systems. Why do we
need more people and more resources to come in, because
basically, this is going to be--you are going to identify some
database tables and which attributes was in those tables, and
you know, run an SQL query and generate that to some place that
sends it to USASpending.gov, right?
The solution is quite simple. The real problem, in my
opinion, is the data that is already been entered, because now
we're going to have to go back through in 24 agencies and 56
different pieces of information, folks have put in a lot of
different data and probably done it the wrong way, so going
back and cleaning up the data is going to be a challenge.
And Mr. Dodaro, I am interested in hearing your thoughts on
how we solve that problem.
Mr. Dodaro. I think that the agencies need to do the
identification as you say. I don't think it should require a
lot of resource to identify whether they have the 57 data
elements or not. The question is, what--what's the gap between
what they currently provide and what they need to do in order
to come into compliance with the standards and ensure the
quality of the data.
There is a lot of money being spent now by the Federal
Government to produce inaccurate, incomplete data, and I think
that the money, we also ought to look as to whether some of the
money that is currently being spent for the systems, our
estimate is there is about, in this current fiscal year, about
$900 million spent for financial management systems upgrades
across the Federal Government. Some of that money potentially
could be reprioritized to come into compliance with these
standards.
Mr. Hurd. Amen, brother. Help us identify these things
because--and know this, and I recognize the endeavor that you
all are taking, right, and also make sure the agencies that you
are working with, because you all are going to create the
framework, you've already hit the timelines that you are
supposed to hit, you know, good on you all, but the agencies,
better make sure that they're giving you the information that
you all need in order to move forward, because this will be
something that we continue to look at as we go forward in
executing our oversight role. Because this really is outrageous
that we don't know how much money is being spent, and we're
spending money on, you know, poking voodoo dolls when we're
angry to see if you poke it more in the knots, and this is the
kind of--this is the kind of stuff that needs to stop. This is
the kind of stuff that I think the folks that we represent
expect us to fix, and we're going to need you-all's help to do
that, but also know we're watching, we're going to continue to
watch, and if there is folks that are having--if there is--if
there is agencies that you all are having difficulty with,
please let me know.
Any further questions? Ranking member? I would like to
thank our witnesses for taking the time to appear before us
today. If there is no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee is to stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:00 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
