- GAO'S HIGH-RISK REPORT: 25 YEARS OF PROBLEMATIC PRACTICES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GAO'S HIGH-RISK REPORT: 25 YEARS OF
PROBLEMATIC PRACTICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-537 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015

___________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Katy Rother, Counsel
Christopher D'Angelo, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Vance, Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 11, 2015................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. Gene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General, US. Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     2
Written Statement............................................     5
The Hon. John Koskinen, Commissioner, Internal Revenue Service
Oral Statement...............................................    61
Written Statement............................................    63
The Hon. Alan F. Estevez, Principal Deputy Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, U.S.
Department of Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    71
Written Statement............................................    73
Mr. John J. MacWilliams, Senior Advisor to the Secretary, U.S.
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    81
Written Statement............................................    83
Shantanu Agrawal, M.D. Deputy Administrator and Director, Center
for Program Integrity, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services
Oral Statement...............................................    89
Written Statement............................................    91
Mr. Robert M. Lightfoot, Jr., Associate Administrator, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................   106
Written Statement............................................   108

APPENDIX

QFR's to Hon. Gene L. Dodaro from Chairman Jason Chaffetz........   140
Additional QFR's to Dr. Agrawal from Chairman Jason Chaffetz and
Rep. Duckworth.................................................   144

GAO'S HIGH-RISK REPORT: 25 YEARS OF PROBLEMATIC PRACTICES

----------

Wednesday, February 11, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:25 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Duncan, Jordan,
Walberg, Amash, Gowdy, Massie, Meadows, DeSantis, Mulvaney,
Cooper, Blum, Hice, Carter, Hurd, Palmer, Cummings, Maloney,
Norton, Connolly, Lieu, Watson Coleman, Plaskett, and Lujan
Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
We have an important hearing today. We appreciate the many
people that are here to participate in that. We also appreciate
the patience with votes on the floor that got called a little
bit later. That always serves as the primary thing that we do
in the afternoon around here. So we appreciate your patience.
But, nevertheless, we do have a very important hearing
highlighting the ``General Accountability Office's High-Risk
Report: 25 Years of Problematic Practices.'' This year marks
the 25th anniversary of the GAO's high-risk list.
I have a full Statement, but in the essence of time, I am
going to insert those comments into the record and would invite
other Members to do the same.
But I would now like to recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Cummings, if he has any opening Statements.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I Am going to do the same. I want to thank all our
witnesses. And I will submit my Statement for the record.
And I want to always as usual thank you, Mr. Dodaro, and
all of the GAO employees, who do a great job and help us so
much.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I will hold the record open for 5
legislative days for any Member who would like to submit a
written Statement.
And we would now like to recognize our first witness. I am
pleased to welcome the Honorable Gene Dodaro, Comptroller of
the U.S. Government Accountability Office. He is accompanied by
a panel of experts from the GAO.
And, on behalf of both of us and this whole body, we thank
the thousands of men and women who serve in the GAO who really
work hard to create a work product and present it here today.
So welcome to all.
Pursuant to committee rules, the witness will be sworn in
before he testifies.
We will also swear in the panel behind him should their
input be needed during their questioning.
So if you could all rise, please.
Thank you. If you will rise and please raise your right
hands. Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you
are about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth?
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Dodaro, you have testified before our committee several
times. We will give you great latitude here, but we would
appreciate your summarizing your comments, and then your entire
written Statement will obviously be made part of the record.
You are now recognized.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF HON. GENE L. DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon to you, Ranking Member Cummings, all the members of
the committee. I'm very pleased to be here today to discuss
GAO's latest high-risk update. We do this with the beginning of
each new Congress to identify areas we believe are at highest
risk of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement in the Federal
Government or in need of broad-based transformation.
Our report today discusses solid, steady progress in most
of the 30 high-risk areas that we've had on the list since our
last update in 2013. Of the--all the areas we rate according to
five criteria to get off the high-risk list. You have to have
leadership commitment; top level attention; you have to have
the capacity, the resources and the people with the right
skills to be able to fix the problem; you have to have a good
corrective action plan that addresses root cause; a good
monitoring effort with interim milestones and metrics that
gauge progress; and you have to demonstrate that you're
actually fixing the problem. You don't have to be 100 percent
fixed, but we have to be convinced that we're on the right path
to rectifying the problem and reducing the risk and eliminating
waste and improving government services.
Of the 30 areas, 18 have at least partially met all five
criteria, and 11 of those 18 have at least fully met one or
more of the criteria and partially met the others. In two
areas, we're recognizing progress so that we're narrowing the
scope of the high-risk area. First is on FDA's oversight of
medical devices. We are pleased with their efforts to get the
recall process under better control and discipline, and also to
have a good process to review the applications for new devices
in a more risk-based approach. We're still concerned about
their need to oversee the global marketplace for medical
products and drugs. 80 percent of the ingredients of active
drugs come from other countries, about 40 percent of finished
drugs, about half of medical devices, so they need to do more
there and also to address drug shortage issues.
Second area is contract management. We believe the
Department of Defense has focused more attention at top
leadership on contracting tools and techniques and reducing the
risk associated with undefinitized contracts where they start
contract work without having a clear agreement with the
contractor or they're using time and materials, which is a
risky contract approach, rather than having deliverables. They
still have to improve their areas in their acquisition work
force, service acquisitions, and improve their use of
contracting in the operational environments to support military
operations in theater.
We are adding two new areas to the high-risk list this
year: First is VA's provision of healthcare service for
veterans. We're very concerned about this area. There are five
fundamental problems that we've identified: ambiguous policies,
inconsistent processes, inadequate oversight and monitoring of
the activities, IT challenges, inadequate training of staff,
and unclear resource needs and allocations. Congress has passed
legislation recently to give them additional $15 billion to
help address this problem. That legislation has to be
implemented properly. We have over 100 recommendations that
we've made to VA that have yet to have been fully implemented,
so this is an area that needs congressional oversight and
continued attention.
Second are IT acquisitions and operations across the
Federal Government. Too often the Federal Government, and we
enumerate this in our report, there's a litany of efforts that
have failed after spending hundreds of millions of dollars or
in cases of billions of dollars and many years. They're
terminated. There's a longer list of problems where there are
cost overruns, schedule slippages, or they fail to deliver the
promised functionality and make improvements in the programs
that they're supposed to in delivery of services. Here again,
the Congress has passed legislation late last year.
This committee was instrumental in passing the legislation
of the Federal Information Technology Reform Act to give CIO's
additional authority, put in place better practices to have
more disciplined approaches to IT management. Here again, just
in the last 5 years alone, we've made 737 recommendations. Only
23 percent have been fully implemented. So we believe this is a
critical area.
We're also expanding two areas. In the administration of
tax area, we have been focused on a tax gap, which at last
count was $385 billion. We're expanding that to include
identity theft. And the IRS was able last year to stop about
$24 billion in fraudulent returns potentially, but they missed,
by their own estimates, about $5.8 billion. We've got some
fixes to this we can talk about in the Q&A.
We're also expanding cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure protection to include privacy issues. Initially
we designated computer security across the entire Federal
Government, the first time we ever did that, in 1997. We added
critical infrastructure protection, because most of the
computer assets were in the private sector hands in 2003. Now
there's a lot more incidents involving personally identifiable
information. The number of incidents have doubled over the last
5 years. A privacy law was passed in 1994. It's sorely in need
of updating. And we have a number of other recommendations to
protect this sensitive information. The American people deserve
for their information to be protected properly while we're
addressing the cybersecurity issues.
I thank you for the opportunity to be here today and look
forward to answering your questions.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate that.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Chairman.
Just one quick question for you, and thank you for joining
us this afternoon. Since the enactment of the Veteran's Access,
Choice and Accountability Act, I have a number of veterans in
my district who, because of their location where they live,
they've not been able to utilize the VA Medical Centers, and so
they have opted to use non-VA doctors and so forth. And one of
the issues they're facing are significant delays from the VA in
paying those medical providers.
Is there anything that you--that the GAO plans to do in the
future to evaluate this issue and to report on it in the
future?
Mr. Dodaro. Actually, we've already addressed that issue,
and the issue to report, talking about the problems they were
having in paying providers in a timely manner. We're also
concerned about the fact that the VA doesn't always have
information enough to make sure that they're making the right
decisions in terms of whether they should be providing the care
or going on non-healthcare provider, both for access purposes
and for making sure that it's a cost-effective approach.
Debbie Draper's our expert in this area. I'll have her talk
about the recommendations we've made, but we've already
addressed this issue and we plan to followup, sir.
Mr. Hice. OK.
Ms. Draper. Yes. We actually conducted work about a year or
so ago, and we made a number of recommendations around the
infrastructure surrounding the non-VA care. And a lot of the
issues were not paying claims promptly, and so we do have
concerns about non-VA care and, you know, we have concerns that
it may not be the panacea that people envision it could be,
because there is not really the infrastructure in place, or it
wasn't in place, you know, when we took a look at the work. So,
you know, you're talking about putting people--the VA system is
a very difficult system to navigate, so now you're also asking
them to navigate another system that's outside of the VA. So
there's just a lot of issues around non-VA care. And the other
issue is that wait times for non-VA care is not really tracked,
so no one really knows how long people are waiting to get care
in the community. So there's just a lot of issues, and it is
something we'll be looking at. And the Choice Act does have
several mandates for GAO to look at the non-VA care.
Mr. Hice. Well, thank you. Obviously the concern is if
these payments are slow in being received, at some point I'm
fearful that our veterans will receive diminished health care
across the board, and that is the concern. I thank you.
And I yield my time.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I'm concerned too, Congressman. We'll stay
on top of it.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman yields back. We'll now
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings from Maryland, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, one of my major concerns have been drug
shortage. Whether the Members of Congress know it, but 99
percent of all hospitals in this country have drug shortages.
And there are people, Mr. Dodaro, as you know, who are,
unbeknownst to them, getting second-, third-rate drugs. And
even in my own district, with one of the No. 1 hospitals in the
world, Johns Hopkins, they have told us that they have those
problems.
Can you comment briefly on that, where we are on that and
what can we do about that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. This is a very important issue,
Congressman. One of the things that we've already suggested to
the Congress and they've acted on, before drug manufacturers
didn't have to notify FDA if they were going to have potential
shortages, and now they have to provide adequate notice ahead
of time. So that was one step in the right direction.
Marcia Crosse, our expert in that area, will talk about
other work we've done and recommendations we've made to address
this issue. It's one of the reasons FDA's on the high-risk
list.
Ms. Crosse. Yes. Congressman, we agree that it's a big
concern, and drug shortages is one of the areas that's keeping
FDA on the high-risk list. As the Comptroller General
mentioned, Congress did take action to require advance
notification to FDA if a manufacturer was going to cease
producing a drug. Congress, just over a year ago, also enacted
the Drug Quality and Security Act that we believe can help
particularly with this issue of substandard drugs, because it's
enacted requirements for tracking of drugs through the system
that can help reduce the possibility of the gray market drugs
that I know you had been concerned about, and also counterfeit
drugs getting into the system, because there'll be a system of
tracking. It's still not implemented. It will take a number of
years for that to go into effect, but that Act, we think, also
has potential to address that.
We are continuing to track drug shortages and we have
ongoing work looking at it. We know the number of shortages is
coming down, but there are still some that are persisting for
long periods of time for multiple years for certain drugs.
Mr. Cummings. I am glad, because our committee a few
minutes ago, the greatest part of our plan to look at generic
drugs. Again, every single Member of Congress has this problem,
and they don't--probably many of them don't even know it, that
generic drugs are going up sometimes as much as 800 times in a
matter of a day, which is ridiculous. And it's about greed. A
lot of it is about greed.
But let me go into another thing--issue, the whole issue of
cyber. You know, I just want to read from your report, Mr.
Dodaro, and you--you all say this, ``The increasing
sophistication of hackers and others with malicious intent and
the extent to which both Federal agencies and private companies
collect sensitive information about individuals have increased
the risk of personally identifiable information being exposed
and compromised.''
That's an accurate Statement. Is that right?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Your report goes on to say, ``The number of
reported security incidents involving PII at Federal agencies
has increased significantly in recent years and a number of
high profile breaches of PII have occurred at commercial
entities. For these reasons, we added protecting the privacy of
PII to the high-risk area.''
So your report highlights attacks against both public and
private sector entities. And one thing these attacks seem to
have in common is the hackers want to access--want access to
personal information of as many Americans as possible. That's a
major problem. Is that right?
Mr. Dodaro. That's exactly right, and that's why we're
adding it to the list. And, Congressman, there's projections by
informed parties that the amount of information that's
collected, stored and disseminated is going to double and
triple every 2 or 3 years, so this problem is on a trajectory
to get a lot worse before it gets under control.
Mr. Cummings. So the sources of these hackers could be
anywhere in the world. Is that right?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And they could be State-sponsored, they could
be international criminals, they could be domestic hackers, or
any of the above. Is that right?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And so I see you have your fellow----
Mr. Dodaro. My cyber expert----
Mr. Cummings. OK.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. Right hand here.
Mr. Cummings. And what can we do about that? If you can
identify yourself, please, sir.
Mr. Wilshusen. Sure. My name is Greg Wilshusen. And I think
there's a number of actions that both the Congress can do as
well as Federal agencies who collect this type of information.
First, with the Federal agencies, agencies need to implement
effective information security programs that adequately protect
the confidentiality and integrity of their information to
include not only personally identifiable information, but other
sensitive information. We have found over the years that
agencies have not done a very good job of this. For example, in
Fiscal Year 2014, 17 out of the 24 agencies that are covered by
the Chief Financial Officers Act reported either a material
weakness or significant deficiency in their information
security controls for financial reporting purposes. IG's at 22
of the 24 agencies identified cybersecurity or information
security as a major management challenge for their agency.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Thank you very much, Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hurd, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, sir, for being here today. I enjoyed reading
your report for the outrageousness of some of the things that
are listed in there. And one of the questions that I have,
about 80 percent of the administration's IT spending goes to
maintain legacy systems. Many of those systems most Americans
would think would be incredibly out of date. What's a more
appropriate, you know, investment-to-maintenance ratio?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, we've said--and I'll--this is Dave
Powner, our expert in the IT area. What we've said is that this
should be under operational re-evaluation every year. There are
ways to drive down technology costs, and a lot of areas the
costs are decreasing if you're making the proper investments
and reinvestments. We find a lot of duplication where the
systems are being duplicated because of a lack of oversight and
a portfolio assessment. The Congress has underscored the need
to be able to do this in the agencies, but unfortunately, the
trends are going in the wrong direction, or there's additional
spending in the O&M area, operations and maintenance area,
rather than coming down as it should be in that area. And Dave
can talk about more specific recommendations that we've made.
Mr. Powner. Yes. Congressman Hurd, to highlight the trends,
we are spending--$80 billion spent right now. We're only
spending about $15 billion on new development. The remainder is
going toward operation and maintenance. That's why in our high-
risk report, there's many areas where we have inefficiencies.
Data center consolidation, there's about $7 to $10 billion on
the table if we consolidate data centers appropriately. There's
also----
Mr. Hurd. On that question, the report highlights shy of
10,000 data centers. What should be--where should that number
be?
Mr. Powner. Well, I think the plan is to close about 4,000
of those 10,000, roughly. That's the game plan for all the
major Federal agencies right now. And the game plan is to save
at least seven and a half billion dollars through 2017. So
that's right around the corner.
You know, in addition to data centers, we have a lot of
duplication that this committee has focused on over the past
couple of years. There's probably another, you know, $5 billion
in savings looking at duplicative systems too. So you can
easily get to over $10 billion in savings. Move that
inefficient spending out of the O&M spend and into the
development where we're modernizing the government more
appropriately.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. And my question, along the same lines,
CIOs play an important role in oversight and governance of
these projects. Are Federal agencies, CIO's effective, and what
tools do they need to become more effective?
Mr. Powner. I think with the Federal CIO, it's a mixed bag.
We see some CIOs that are quite successful and others that
aren't, and that's why I think the legislation that this
committee was instrumental in passing, FITARA, which
strengthened the CIO authorities, is going to be really
instrumental going forward so that we can manage this $80
billion more appropriately.
Mr. Dodaro. The CIOs need to be more involved and they need
to be held accountable for these efforts and it needs to be
more uniform across the government, and if this legislation's
successfully implemented, we should achieve those goals.
Mr. Hurd. On the area of accountability, Mr. Dodaro, how
long have you been with GAO?
Mr. Dodaro. This June, it'll be 42 years.
Mr. Hurd. Have you seen anybody in the Federal Government
fired for cost or time overruns?
Mr. Dodaro. I'm trying to think. I'm sure there have been
people have been in big trouble as a result of it. I could tell
you that. I know about that. I can't think of any specific
personnel actions offhand, but there have been people who have
been under a lot of scrutiny and have--and have, you know,
suddenly retired in that process. So, yes, there have been
people that have been moved out.
Mr. Hurd. Good copy. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Connolly. Would my colleague yield just for a second?
Mr. Hurd. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my colleague. You brought up two very
important points on CIOs and on legacy systems and--and data
center consolidation. The FITARA bill, also known as Issa-
Connolly, our preferred name, does address all three things and
mandates status and a consolidation, also requires--there are
250 people with the title CIO spread out over 24 Federal
agencies. Imagine that. So our bill says there ought to be one
primary CIO for every agency who's accountable and has
authority.
So that's what Mr. Dodaro's talking about, about hopefully
with the implementation of that bill, we're going to see some
real progress. And it's something I hope we will monitor. I
know Mr. Meadows and I intend to do that in the subcommittee.
Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. I
now recognize the gentlewoman from the District of Columbia,
Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
My colleague asked about cost overruns. If people get fired
for cost overruns, half the Defense Department would be gone,
because that's where you have most of the cost overruns in our
country. I'm very interested in this high-risk list, because
I've been obediently listening to this list for a long time,
and I never knew much about how you get on it and how you get
off it, so I'd like to drill down a little bit about it,
particularly considering that GAO must look at what must be
hundreds, thousands of agencies in order to draw its list.
And I must say, whenever there's good news, it seems to me
this committee ought to be the first to note it, but I did note
that highlighted, I think almost in your first page, it says
solid, steady progress has been made in the vast majority of
high-risk areas. I don't believe I've seen that kind of
language before in your reports.
You say that more than one-third of the areas previously
designated as high-risk have been removed. So I'd like to know,
you know, how do you get on it and how do you get removed?
Mr. Dodaro. Sure. First of all, we have published criteria
that we vetted with the executive branch years ago about how
you get on and how you come off.
How you get on is we look at the significance of the risk,
both in quantitative terms, in other words, there has to be at
least a billion dollars in risk; there has to be issues, it's
either a public safety issue, like oversight of medical
products and food safety, we have on the list; has to be
important to national security, economic security for the
country; it has risk of program failures, programs actually not
achieving their objectives because they're on the high-risk
list. And there--so there's a long list of factors that we
consider. And we also look as to whether or not the agencies
have corrective action plans in place. If they do have a plan
and it looks like it's going to be a good plan and they may be
successful, we may hold off on putting them on the list, and
give them an opportunity to fix it.
Now, you come off by five criteria: Top leadership
commitment. There has to be a commitment by the top leaders in
the agencies sustained; they have to have the capacity, the
people and the--and the number of people and the right skills
and the right numbers and resources to be able to fix the
problem; they have to have a good plan, a corrective action
plan that addresses the root causes of the problems; you have
to have a monitoring effort to--with interim milestones and
metrics; and you have to actually then demonstrate that you are
fixing the problem. If you meet those five criteria, you come
off the list. If you do that in part of the high-risk area, we
narrow the high-risk area to those areas that you haven't, like
we mentioned this year we did in two areas. So that's--that's
how you do that. Now, the----
Ms. Norton. Now, I noticed the second, I think the second
criteria you mentioned the word ``resources.'' Wouldn't it
would be fair to say that a significant challenge for getting
off the list would be the scarcity of funding these days----
Mr. Dodaro. Well----
Ms. Norton [continuing]. Since it's one of your criteria.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Well, by ``resources,'' we mean the skills
necessary, the right people.
Ms. Norton. So it doesn't mean funding at all. Let me ask--
--
Mr. Dodaro. No. Well, it can mean----
Ms. Norton [continuing]. Is funding a significant challenge
for agents implementing your recommendations and getting off
the list?
Mr. Dodaro. It could be, but it could be that they're not
using the funding that they have very well. It's not
necessarily mean they need more funding.
Ms. Norton. Accepted. Could I ask you what Congress can do,
you know, assuming that Congress is not going to do much about
resources? I'll take an area of specific interest to me, real
eState. That is the area, the Federal Government's handling of
its real eState portfolio has been under constant criticism
from the GAO. Could you tell me how, considering the billions
of dollars involved in leasing and construction, how real
eState portfolio is doing?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. First I would say, on the high-risk list,
we have asterisk areas where the Congress needs to take action
in order to help address the area. So there's a substantial
number of the 32 areas that we've already designated for
Congress. Postal Service reform's one, cybersecurity's another,
and the need to finance the Nation's transportation
infrastructure system's another one. So we've designated major
areas where Congress needs to be part of the solution to the
problem.
In the real property area, what Congress can do, one of the
areas that we--that's on the list is the overreliance on
leasing. And we've tried to convince the agencies, particularly
GSA, to put forward a case to the Congress that says, look, we
would be--it would be cheaper to own this particular property
rather than lease these properties, but they've been reluctant
to do so. So we think the Congress ought to mandate that they
do that in that area. There are also, you know, underutilized
properties, that the Congress could give additional authority
in pilot areas to try to provide these things. There's a lot of
barriers that we've identified that the Congress could help
alleviate for the agencies to do this, but they need a good
strategic plan. They have not yet presented the Congress with a
good strategic plan on how to address this area. We've
recommended it, they're working on the plan right now for the
first time, and so we're hopeful to see it this year, and
hopefully it will provide a good roadmap for them and for the
Congress.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Very useful.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I thank the gentlewoman. Now
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Mica, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mica. Texas. The State----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry. How about the State of Florida?
Mr. Mica. Texas, Texas.
Chairman Chaffetz. Florida. Florida.
Mr. Mica. Where it's warm.
Mr.----
Unidentified Speaker. Don't mess with Texas.
Mr. Mica. Mr.----
It's a great State, but I'd rather be from Florida right
now. Mr. Dodaro, have you ever seen the movie ``Groundhog
Day?''
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Over and over.
Mr. Mica. Yes. Well, I'm sitting here, and I swear a lot of
the recommendations are the same recommendations you've brought
us before. I segue from Ms. Norton's and your comments. In
fact, I just read--the chairman, myself, Mr. Denham, we have
been interested in excess property, and you can't get people to
move on dealing with excess property. I think we've found
14,000 at GSA. And we did the first hearing at the Old Post
Office, and I put an X through and I put 13,999. We've done
about six more in vacant properties, some of them moving, but,
you know, I'm only going to be here so long. Even this guy's
young. He can't--we can't do a hearing on every property.
What concerns me, and you just said it in your report, is
OMB, in conjunction with landholding agencies, could improve
its capacity and action by implementing, this is dealing with
excess--or underutilized properties, to develop a strategic
plan. They have not done that. OMB has not done that.
Mr. Dodaro. That's correct.
Mr. Mica. One of the things too, and I've discussed this,
Mr. Chairman, briefly with Mr. Denham, in the bill that--there
were two bills offered, Mr. Chaffetz offered one, I worked with
Mr. Denham, and he authored another, but we need a requirement
that they have a plan and then there be some annual action on
the plan and the recommendation, some triggering mechanism.
Wouldn't you agree?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Mica. And none of them will make a decision. The stuff
just sits there. It sits there, it sits there. So I come back
again and we're having a Groundhog Day on excess property.
Finally, on the administration, this is on--the
administration released the results of a freeze on footprint
policy, which they indicated a freeze reduced the government's
office and warehouse space. They gave you that report, you
analyzed that report, and they claim they reduced the Federal
warehouse space by 1.--I'm sorry--10.2 million square feet, but
then you said they didn't.
Mr. Dodaro. That's correct.
Mr. Mica. Can you elaborate?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, Phil Herr is our leader on that report.
Mr. Herr. Hi, Mr. Mica. Yes. One of the things we like to
do is go behind some of those kind of estimates, take them
apart, try to see where some of the flaws are, and in looking
at the freeze and footprint data, we saw some things that were
miscounted, also things that were vacant, but then they were
counted separately in GSA's data base.
One of the things that really underscores and is something
that we have testified before your subcommittees previously is
the real problem with the data on the property.
Mr. Mica. That is right. We found in fact, one, they didn't
know what property they had.
Mr. Herr. Right.
Mr. Mica. They didn't know the condition of the property
that they had.
Mr. Herr. Correct.
Mr. Mica. They didn't know the status of it for being
eligible for either future utilization or current or keep an
inventory. I mean, right down the line they did not know.
They--in fact, they gave us lists that we checked and you
checked that showed that--that what they were giving us was
totally incorrect. Is that not correct?
Mr. Herr. That is correct.
Mr. Mica. OK. Well, this is something else we have got to
get is some requirement for these agencies, and if OMB won't do
it, we can do it statutorily. I know Mr. Chaffetz is committed
to get a bill through the House and the Senate that will get a
handle on this, but we have to have triggers. We have to have
milestones. We have to have some measure of them achieving a
goal or performance. Am I wrong?
Mr. Dodaro. I agree, and any major management reform that
has been successful over time has a statutory underpinning, and
that will transcend in administrations and Congress----
Mr. Mica. Coming soon. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman now yields back.
Now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Dodaro, for being here. This is--maybe it says what a wonk I
am, but I actually really look forward to this hearing every
year, and I congratulate you for the intellectual underpinning
of identifying these risk categories. I think it is an
incredible, helpful public policy document, and I hope a useful
management tool. It also guides us, and especially this
committee. So much of what you are talking about is all about
our agenda. So hopefully we will also take it to heart and
respond accordingly.
Mr. Dodaro, you actually endorsed our bill, FITARA, also
known preferably as Issa-Connolly. How important is it to you
that that get implemented?
Mr. Dodaro. It is very important. I mean, that is a
critical--that is one of the reasons, actually, that we put IT
acquisitions and operations on the list, is in order to elevate
attention to make sure that FITARA, Issa-Connolly, bill is
implemented effectively.
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry. What was that last part?
Mr. Dodaro. But if it doesn't have attention, and I am also
concerned, because, you know, we are coming to the last 2 years
of this administration, it has got to be sustained in the next
administration, having a statutory underpinning is critically
important, and it gives us and the Congress means to hold
people accountable over time. So it is absolutely critical to
rectifying this problem that we have identified.
Mr. Connolly. And there are real potential savings if we
can make this work. Is that not correct?
Mr. Dodaro. Oh, yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. In the
billions.
Mr. Connolly. In the billions, Mr. Chairman.
So I know we are going to work on a bipartisan basis to
actually have oversight hearings on implementation to go and
exhort and encourage, and I think that is really good.
Mr. Dodaro, with respect to this whole subject, you are
familiar with the 25-Point Implementation Plan to Reform
Federal Technology Management that was issued December 9, 2010
by Vivek Kundra.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Yes. I am familiar with it, and I am
joined by Dave Powner, who is our IT expert.
Mr. Connolly. And I assume that you both--well, let me not
assume. Was that a helpful document in terms of laying out
goals and objectives?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Connor. Yes, it was extremely helpful. It set the
foundation----
Mr. Connolly. Sets the foundation.
Mr. Connor [continuing]. For a lot of the key initiatives
going forward.
Mr. Connolly. And, for example, when it talks about we
ought to approve funding of major IT programs only when it
meets three basic criteria, right: Have a dedicated program
manager and a fully staffed integrated program team; use a
modular approach with useable functionality delivered every 6
months, I think they mean by that break up huge multi-year
complex systems integration contracts so that they are easier
to manage; and, third, use specialized IT acquisition
professionals. Are those--do you think those are three helpful
criteria when we are looking at issuing a major procurement?
Mr. Connor. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. And did we follow that advice from the White
House itself when the Website for the healthcare rollout was
occurring?
Mr. Connor. No. We did not.
Mr. Connolly. We did not. So, hopefully, our bill, but also
even the guidance that Vivek Kundra issued from the White House
going 4 years ago-plus might have spared us some of the grief
and embarrassment that, in fact, occurred.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, they have--we have issued nine factors
that are critical to successful efforts that have been put in
place. There is Vivek's guidance. There is GAO guidance. There
is best practice. The basic problem that I have seen over the
years is there is a lack of discipline to follow good
practices.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. We get off the rails and nobody is held
accountable during that period of time. Modular development,
incremental development, CIOs, was one of the basic tenants in
the 1996 legislation that I helped Congress work on passing. It
just hasn't been implemented. So I commend this committee for
your recent legislation. I look forward to working with you to
make sure it is successfully implemented, but it will require
congressional oversight, and I look forward to that.
Mr. Connolly. And I will point out, as the chairman knows
and the ranking member knows, when we put together this bill,
it was a bipartisan bill, and we--a lot of what we did was
codify recommendations that came out of the White House itself.
It was not a hostile bill, and so hopefully it will be seen
that way, as a useful management tool, and we look forward to
working with you as we follow and monitor, and, as I said,
exhort the implementation, because there are enormous savings
to be had and some very significant efficiencies. So----
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, and better services to the public.
Mr. Connolly. Yep. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Gentleman yields back.
Now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I don't--I
will take just a moment. I just want to say, Mr. Dodaro, I
think you do a very good job, and I appreciate the work the GAO
does. You have been very helpful to me on this committee. I
have been here 26 years. When I tell these newer members this,
they look at me like I am from outer space. May main committee
has always been the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee, and I have heard Dr. Dillingham testify more
probably than any other witness, and he seems like a good man.
Mr. Dodaro. He is.
Mr. Duncan. But I just want to say that I think the GAO
does a great job, and I appreciate what you all do, and that is
all I wanted. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Duncan.
Chairman Chaffetz. Gentleman yields back.
We will now recognize the gentlewoman----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I know that there are other
witnesses who want to know Mr. Dodaro's magic is that he got
that kind of----
Chairman Chaffetz. We will now recognize the gentlewoman
from the Virgin Islands, Ms. Plaskett, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
sir.
Mr. Dodaro. Good afternoon.
Ms. Plaskett. I really wanted to thank you for all of the
work that your agency does and to talk to you about one of the
primary things that you all do is uncovering waste and fraud
and abuse and identification of the risk of integrity of the
Federal programs. We know, however, that there is also best
practices that your agency tries to identify, not only for the
private--for the public sector, but for the private as well,
and we understand now that the cyber attacks are not just on
the Federal agencies, but also on private. We know--we have
heard about Home Depot and the compromise of about 56 million
companies and the credit card and debit card information, as
well as Anthem, the Nation's second largest health insurance
company with more than 80 million records that may have been
compromised. I see that your--one of your colleagues are coming
over to assist you.
Mr. Dodaro. This is our cyber expert, Greg Wilshusen.
Ms. Plaskett. Great.
Mr. Dodaro. We sense a cyber question.
Ms. Plaskett. You sense very well. One of the things I
wanted to talk with you about is this notion of segregating
duties. If you could briefly explain for us what that concept
is and how that works.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Now, that has been one of the major
problems that we have identified over the years. Greg can
explain the importance of it.
Mr. Wilshusen. It is vitally important to assure that
systems and information are adequately protected from
unauthorized modification alteration. And it basically relates
that the activities of one individual or group are countered by
the activities or overseen, if you will, by the activities of
another group. So one group does not have full control of a
transaction or of a process in which it can then perform
unauthorized activities without detection. Within the cyber
realm, that often relates to having, for example, software
developers being able to operate in the production environment
where real live actual data is being processed because they
could potentially make undetected changes to the software
process and that data, and you don't want that to happen. So
software developers, in this case, should be confined to a
development and PRO-ART environment.
Ms. Plaskett. OK. So my understanding, and, you know, I am
not--my children will tell you I have no--I am a Luddite. I
have to technological knowledge, but kind of like a submarine
where when there is a leak in one area you can close off that
section and then another area where the leak occurs doesn't
infect the other areas with the segregation of duties. Is that
occurring now in the Federal agencies with the IT?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes. In several agencies there are instances
where they have weaknesses, and I think it is about 14 agencies
that have weaknesses and segregation of duty controls, and the
example you highlighted actually also speaks to defense in
depth, and that is another security defense principle that
agencies should put layer upon layer of security controls so in
the event that one layer may be circumvented or penetrated,
that other controls help to protect the data and systems at
hand.
Ms. Plaskett. So now one of the reasons that I mentioned
Home Depot and Anthem, we know that this has occurred in other
private sector areas, is what is the relationship that you all
have with trying to assist those private sector individuals in
best practices, because at the end of the day, all of these
systems connect with one another.
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes. Actually, it is the Department of
Homeland Security that has an overriding role within the
Federal Government for helping in assisting with critical
infrastructure industries in protecting their information and
their systems. In addition, for certain retail companies like
this, it may also be the Federal Trade Commission that would
also provide assistance and guidance to those entities.
Mr. Dodaro. We have been encouraging and exhorting for
years more dialog and information sharing between the public
sector and the private sector. Both have been reticent for
different reasons to share information, but that is really the
only way that this problem is eventually going to be solved.
Congress has made some overtures in this area and legislation.
We believe more legislation could be helpful in this regard.
Ms. Plaskett. Well, I am hopeful that this body will
continue to assist you in making sure that that happens, and I
yield the balance of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentlewoman.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and ranking member,
and, Mr. Dodaro, good to see you again, and all your cohorts. I
agree with Mr. Connolly's remarks that this may not be the most
sexy hearing of the year, but----
Chairman Chaffetz. Objection.
Mr. Lynch. Well, I think it may reflect best the core
mission of this committee, however. I do notice in your list of
areas of concern, you have got a list of--that 2015 high-risk
list, that the VA Health is on that list for the first time,
and I know it is one of the two new areas, and this designation
comes in light of the longstanding and systemic weaknesses in
accessibility and quality of care. We saw the problems that we
had down at the Phoenix VA, a terrible situation there. And we
also have, quite frankly, a huge increase in the number of
veterans that are now, for the first time in their lives,
relying on the VA for their healthcare. We went from 6.8
million veterans in 2002 to 9.4 million enrollees in 2015. So
it has put a huge amount of pressure on the system, including
1.4 veterans form Operation Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom
in Afghanistan, and mindful that most of those folks did
multiple tours.
And I was in Kandahar Province not long ago, and I asked
how many folks were on their first tour, their second tour. I
got all the way up to seven tours of duty before I ran out of
Marines. Most of them had been there three or four tours of
duty. So that repeated cycle of deployments does a lot of
damage, I think, to the, you know, the psychiatry of serving
among our young men and women, and I think that we are going to
see reverberations in the healthcare system as a result of
those multiple deployments, but I am looking forward.
That is--I am actually the ranking Democrat on the National
Security Subcommittee that is going to address those, and I
look forward to your good work continuing in that area,
especially with some of the new implementations that we have
had allowing veterans to be treated at non-VA facilities if we
do have a backup in appointment time, and that has been a
constant problem for us not just in the Northeast but all
across America, and I know Florida is all backed up because of
the number of retirees down there. They have had a very long
backlog there. Some of the areas in Texas as well. Virginia, my
friend, Mr. Connolly, a huge number of veterans in his district
as well, and also we have got another provision that allows
them to go to non-VA facilities where their travel to a VA
facility is more than 40 miles. So it all builds up to a
greater reliance on our ability to conduct oversight on the VA
healthcare system. I look forward to working with you. You have
got a great staff. You have got a good cohort of people behind
you that have worked tirelessly over the years. I am looking
forward--we have got no shortage of issues to work on, and I
just appreciate the work that you do every single day. Thank
you.
Now I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I would ask my friend to yield.
Mr. Lynch. Oh, yes. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. For a question. Mr. Lynch, how many times
have you been to Afghanistan or Iraq?
Mr. Lynch. I would say Iraq about 14 times, and I would say
Afghanistan about 12 times, oftentimes with folks from--that
Mr. Dodaro works with, a special inspector of--Special
Inspector Generals of Iraq Construction or Afghanistan
Reconstruction as well.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I just want to say, for me, you have
been a model of oversight commitment to the work in both
countries at personal risk and peril to yourself, and I honor
you for that. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Well, thank you.
Mr. Dodaro. I would just say in terms of the picture that
you paint, not only have we had more veterans coming back with
multiple tours, but they are going to be living longer thanks
to modern medicine, but this problem will occur over decades,
and we need to get a handle on it right now. There will be more
veterans even coming back. So this is really a very significant
long-term issue, and that is one of the reasons that we put it
on the high-risk list.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. I
now recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Maloney, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank you for your work, and I
apologize to my colleagues. I am late to the committee because
I was at a meeting on a cyber security, which is really one of
the biggest challenges we face as a Nation, and I believe it is
an area that we will in a bipartisan way work together to
address. So I want to mention the assessments that you have
found for dealing well cyber attacks. And your report found
that many agencies had ``Inconsistently implemented policies
and procedures for responding to a data breach involving PII.''
Can you explain for the committee those areas in which GAO
found that agencies were inconsistent in their implementation
of policies for responding to data breaches, and what do we do
about it?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Greg Wilshusen will address that. He is
our expert in the area.
Ms. Maloney. OK. Great.
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes. We conducted a review at several
Federal agencies over their procedures and policies for
responding to security incidents involving personally
identifiable information, and one of the things we identified
is that agencies did not consistently identify the risk to the
affected individuals and the harm that could occur or the
impact that it could occur to those individuals.
In addition, they were inconsistent at what point do they
provide additional services to those individuals. For example,
whether or not to provide credit monitoring services or other
types of services in order to help those that have been--whose
information has been compromised.
Mrs. Maloney. OK. And to the point, what can Congress do to
assist you, GAO, in advocating that Federal agencies are being
consistent in carrying out policies that respond to these
breaches?
Mr. Dodaro. We believe that the Privacy Act which was
originally passed in 1974 needs to be updated, and Congress
should take that upon their responsibilities. The agencies are
collecting more information than was contemplated in the
Privacy Act because the Privacy Act deals with records of
information but not through social media and other means. More
information is being collected that wasn't contemplated when
the Act was passed. The definitions in the Act are very broad,
which leads to inconsistent applications that can be done.
There is not enough notice that is made to the public.
Typically in those days, it was through the Federal Register,
but there are more available tools now to notify the public and
make things available. So the Congress needs to update the
Privacy Act, and we would be happy to work with this committee
or other committees to do so.
Mrs. Maloney. OK. And, finally, you State, and I quote
GAO's report. ``Agencies may not be consistently taking action
to limit the risk to individuals from PII-related data
breaches.'' So in GAO's assessment, what are specific actions
agencies can take right now to improve their ability to respond
to data breaches on top of rewriting the Privacy Act?
Mr. Wilshusen. Sure. Yes, one of the actions that they can
take is making sure that they have appropriate policies and
procedures in place before incidents occur so they know how to
act once an incident will occur. And, indeed, our work has
shown that the number of incidents involving PII at Federal
agencies is climbing, and every agency is affected by that, and
that could include having a dedicated team available that has
the roles and responsibilities previously identified and
trained in those roles and responsibilities in order to act
appropriately and timely when incidents occur.
Mrs. Maloney. And, finally, how can Congress be most useful
in ensuring that this is fulfilled, that agencies consistently
take all the necessary actions needed?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, one is, as the comptroller general
mentioned, is to update the Federal laws protecting personal--
the privacy of personally identifiable information. Another is
holding oversight hearings and holding agencies to account for
their incidents that occur and assuring that they appropriately
implement proper protections of the personally identifiable
information that may be compromised.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you so very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. If no other member has a
question for this first panel, we would like to again thank the
GAO, specifically Mr. Dodaro, and the great work that so many
of you and your staff do. I would ask that the clerk change the
table, and I would actually like to mention something as we do
in this in the essence of time. So again, Mr. Dodaro, thank
you. You are excused, and go ahead and make the change. I want
to talk about the artwork that you see in here, and I would
like to make a bit of a Statement, and, again, there will be a
little commotion here as we change out the names, and please,
if you are on the second panel, please come take a seat.
When I became the chairman, we made some alterations to the
artwork here, and part of what I was trying to do was I felt it
would be best to highlight the people that we serve rather than
the past committee chairmen. I feel strongly that we should be
inspired by those who--by the American people, and that is who
we serve. They have done great things over generations of time,
and those are the types of people that we should be inspired
by.
So I would like to introduce these pieces of art as, again,
we get this next panel ready, and I will tell you that they are
all real photography and real photos. I would like to start
here with this one. It is of the Ben Franklin Bridge and the
Philadelphia skyline. It was taken by a photographer by the
name of Charlie Lansche. It is the Ben Franklin Bridge. It
spans the Delaware River connecting Philadelphia with Camden,
New Jersey.
Contrasting the urban setting, we have this new photo that
was taken, actually, in my congressional district in Utah. It
does look like a painting, but it is actual photograph that was
taken in January. It was taken along the Provo River with the
Mount Timpanogos there in the distance, and we live in a very
beautiful setting, and I think the contrast between the urban
setting and a more rural setting is part of what I wanted to
highlight.
Going here on this side, this is a photo that was taken--it
was first published in March 1966. Warren Leffler was a
photographer for U.S. News and World Report, and the image is
of postal workers loading mail bags into trucks for delivery,
and a good number of people for decades, generations, have been
doing good work in the postal service, and one of our couriers
of responsibility.
This next photo back over here is of Utah copper miners. We
have had people who have been in the mining industry across
this Nation, whether it is coal or copper or whatnot. This was
first published back in 1942. They are using a rock-drill
machine at the Bingham Mine in the Bingham Canyon in Utah.
This next photo was taken in Afghanistan. The American flag
capturing the morning's first rays of sunlight as it is hoisted
from one of the peaks of the Kowtal-e Paymor Mountain on the
outskirts of Kabul, Afghanistan, in honor of Veterans Day. It
was shot on November 11, 2010. Not a professional photographer,
but that is one of the most beautiful patriotic shots I have
ever seen, and really appreciate the service that Paul Bingham
offered this country and the photo that he took that day
honoring Veterans Day above the hills there in the mountains
outside Kabul. We have had thousands and thousands of Americans
serve overseas and in Afghanistan, and we honor them and should
be thinking of them regularly.
This next photo at the back of the room is actually civil
rights protesters on one of three marches from Selma to
Montgomery, Alabama. This photo was first published in 1965,
they tell me, and is a good reminder that people have gone
through a lot of hardship, but also made a lot of progress. And
I love the patriotic nature of the carrying of the flags in
that photo and appreciate the Library of Congress for providing
that to us as well.
The next one is of the Golden Spike. The Golden Spike
actually happened in Utah. It was taken on May 10, 1869. By
joining the Central Pacific and Union Pacific lines at
Promontory Point in Utah on May 10, 1860. The Golden Spike was
the ceremonial last spike driven in by Lelant Stanford to join
these rails to form the first Transcontinental Railroad across
the United States bridging the east and the west together.
The next photo is really the only portrait that I would
consider here, but interestingly enough, this was first
published in 2006. It was from the Library of Congress. The
Lincoln Memorial is obviously one of the best sites we have in
this country and certainly in the United States, but when he
was Congressman Lincoln, he served on the Post Office and Post
Roads Committee, and the Expenditures and the Department of War
Committee, two committees that preceded the modern day
Oversight and Government Reform Committee. So interesting to me
that Abraham Lincoln, when he served in the House of
Representatives, served on what is now known as the Oversight
and Government Reform Committee, an inspiration to a lot of
people.
Moving over here, we have got two more. This photo was
taken--it comes from the Library of Congress. We are not sure
who the photographer was. It was published sometime between
1914 and 1918. It is of women making and crimping fiber powder
containers for 3-inch Stokes guns during World War I. It was
taken at the W.C. Ritchie & Company facility in Chicago,
Illinois. And, again, a great deal of sacrifice that was going
on in this country, and I actually like--I love the patriotic
nature that one as well.
And, finally, I want you to look closely at this photo if
you have a chance. This is a steel worker on the framework of
the Empire State Building high above the city with the Chrysler
Building prominently displayed in the back.
Mr. Lynch. Ironworker.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ironworker. Ironworker. My apologies.
The photographer was Lewis Hine, and it was first published in
1930, and comes to us from the National Archives. Not exactly
OSHA compliant back then. That gentleman is sitting on the
precipice of death, working hard to build this country without
a safety harness, without the types of things that our workers
have now, but a good deal of people have made these kind of
dedications and sacrifices, and I am glad that they captured a
photo of it.
These are the types of people I think should be inspired in
this committee rather than just the committee chairmen of past,
and so we made those changes. I hope the committee appreciates
that, and I am honored to have these photos in here, and I
thank the members for my indulgence.
We would now like to recognize our second panel of
witnesses.
Oh, pardon me. I would like to yield to our ranking member,
Mr. Cummings, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, when you told me that you were
going to select some photographs, I was--I didn't know what you
were going to do, but I must tell you and all of those who had
anything to do with selecting these photographs, that they are
absolutely beautiful.
You know, I used to say that my father who only had a
second grade education, but who educated all seven of his kids,
I used to say that I was inspired by his aspirations, and when
we look at these pictures, the ones of hard-working Americans
in the pursuit of happiness and building our country, I believe
that their stories, I mean, just looking at them, should
inspire all of us to be the very best that we can and to lift
up their lives and people--the people like them, their lives,
and then, you know, you look at the other ones that show our
environment. I think it should be a reminder that we do have a
sacred duty to pass on to our children an environment which is
just as good as or better than the one that we inherited.
You know, it is said that we do not inherit our environment
from our ancestors, but we borrow it from our children, and I
would say the same thing about our democracy, and so--and last
but not least, Mr. Chairman, you, you know, you really did a
hell of a job when you put the Selma one right there because it
just reminds me every time I look at it, 4 years before that in
Baltimore, it reminded me of us marching, little kids, we were
marching trying to integrate a pool called Riverside Pool, and
it was all-white pool. We were beaten, but yet still we marched
in the pursuit of happiness, and so I am--I still like to say
that I am hoping that this will be--these photos will be an
aspiration--will be an inspiration because of the aspirations
of these folks who made America what it is.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate those comments.
And now back to the business before us. I thank the five
gentleman who have joined us, and I would like to recognize
this panel of witnesses. I am pleased to recognize the
Honorable John Koskinen, who is the Commissioner of the
Internal Revenue Service; the Honorable Alan F. Estevez,
Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics at the United States Department of
Defense; Mr. John MacWilliams, Senior Advisor at the United
States Department of Energy; and then Shantanu Agrawal. Did I
pronounce that properly? I know you have testified previously.
Mr. Agrawal. You nailed it.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes. He is the Deputy Administrator and
Director of the Center of Program Integrity at the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services; and Mr. Robert M. Lightfoot
Jr., Associate Administrator at the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
We thank you for your patience. It has been a while to get
to this panel, but we do appreciate you here.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witness be sworn before
they testify. So if you could rise please and raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. You may be seated.
Mr. Koskinen, we will start with you. Your full Statement
will be introduced into the record, but we would ask that you
please limit your testimony to 5 minutes, and we will go from
there, Mr. Koskinen.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN KOSKINEN

Mr. Koskinen. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz,
Ranking Member Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the Government
Accountability Office's high-risk list as it pertains to IRS
operations. I am delighted to note that one of our programs,
Business Systems Modernization, was removed from the list in
2013 after being on the list since 1995. Its removal came about
because of the advances the IRS has made over many years in
addressing weaknesses in information technology and financial
management capabilities. Turning now to tax enforcement, the
GAO has identified this as a high-risk area because of the size
of the tax gap and the difficulty over time in narrowing that
gap. The most recent IRS study of the tax gap released in 2012
found that the tax gap was $385 billion for tax year 2006. The
IRS is preparing a new study of the tax gap that covers tax
year 2010, and will be based on audits done between 2008 and
2010. We expect this report to be released in the first quarter
of 2016.
One of the key findings from our ongoing research on the
tax gap has been that the compliance rate is very high for
income that is subject to information reporting. Income subject
to third party reporting is underreported only about 8 percent
of the time. That number jumps to 56 percent for income that is
not subject to any third party reporting or withholding.
Another thing we've learned from our research is that the
biggest portion of the tax gap involves the underreporting of
business income by individual taxpayers which totaled $122
billion in 2006. The evidence is clear that the lack of
reliable and comprehensive reporting and withholding on this
type of income is the main reason for such a high level of
underreporting. A good example of our recent efforts to improve
compliance in this area involves the legislative requirement
for electronic payment processors, credit card companies, to
send us information from business credit card receipts on a new
form 1099-K. The first 1099-Ks were filed in 2012 for
transactions in 2011, and I am pleased to report we are
beginning to see positive impacts on compliance from this new
program provided by the Congress.
Programs such as 1099-K reporting are useful not only
because they help the IRS to collect the correct amount of tax,
but also because they encourage voluntary compliance, and the
importance of voluntary compliance cannot be overStated. A 1-
percent increase in the level of voluntary compliance brings in
about $30 billion annually in tax receipts.
Even with these and other efforts, I would note that it is
not possible to eliminate the tax gap completely. Getting to
100 percent tax compliance would require a huge increase in
audits and significantly greater third party reporting and
withholding than we have now. Realistically, that wouldn't work
because the burden on taxpayers and the strain on IRS resources
would be far too great. Our budget situation represents a very
serious challenge to our ability to keep making progress on
this front. In order to absorb required reductions this year,
the IRS has taken a number of difficult steps, including the
loss through attrition of about 1,800 key enforcement
personnel. That translates into fewer audits and collection
cases, and we estimate the government will lose at least $2
billion in revenue that otherwise would have been collected.
Additionally, the reductions in our funding have forced us to
make cuts in taxpayer service. This is also troublesome because
if we can't provide the services taxpayers need to fulfill
their tax obligations, voluntary compliance will suffer.
This concludes my Statements, and I would be happy to take
your questions.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Koskinen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Estevez.

STATEMENT OF HON. ALAN F. ESTEVEZ

Mr. Estevez. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, members of the committee. Appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you to discuss a couple of the areas of high
risk identified by GAO, specifically supply chain management
and weapons acquisition.
The Department of Defense has made measurable progress in
addressing these areas as well as in the areas of contract
management, as Mr. Dodaro mentioned, and infrastructure. The
Department is dedicated toward improving our supply chain and
acquisition processes to ensure effective support for our
warfighters and value to the American taxpayer.
Supply chain management and weapon system acquisition are
complex areas that, by their nature, entail some level of risk.
We develop and field the best weapon systems in the world, and
our logistics capability is unparalleled, as demonstrated in
the last 13 years of war. However, due to the scale and
complexity of these functions inside the Department of Defense,
even at six Sigma levels of tolerance, there will be some
deficiencies. Therefore, we must continually strive to improve.
Today the DOD supply chain is simultaneously sustaining
forces in Afghanistan, supporting the war on ISIL, and
completing the mission to control Ebola. At the height of
operations in Afghanistan, we provided 1.1 million gallons of
fuel and 435,000 meals a day, delivered medical supplies,
construction materials, and spare parts to sustain our combat
power at record levels of readiness. DOD manages over 5 million
items valued at over $90 billion. Our actions to improve
inventory performance while maintaining overarching focus of
reducing risks to our warfighters have produced substantial
results that have been acknowledged by GAO. For example, since
2010, DOD has been implementing our comprehensive inventory
management improvement plan. Since 2012, we've reduced
government-managed inventory by $14.4 billion, the first
reduction in government inventory since the 1990's. DOD is
implementing a new forecasting methodology, which is producing
improved material availability, decreased back orders, and
reduced procurements. With that said, there is more work to be
done on improving our supply chain performance and we remain
focused on doing so.
Second area of high risk that I want to address is weapon
system acquisition. It is important to recognize that the
weapon system acquisition process has provided the United
States with dominant military capabilities. The rise of foreign
capability, coupled with our ongoing combat operations, global
commitments and our reduced budgets is jeopardizing our
technological superiority. Our weapon system acquisition
process must deliver needed combat capability to our
warfighters as effectively as possible. Our program for
continuous process improvement in this area that we call better
buying power, or BBP, is focused on that goal.
GAO's and our own main concern in the acquisition area is
cost and schedule of growth. Under BBP, the Department sets and
enforces affordability caps on all major weapon systems. We are
tracking performance against established caps to ensure
compliance. Affordability caps tied to requirements. BBP drives
active engagement between the acquisition and requirements
leadership, that would be the operator who uses the weapon
system, during weapon system development to ensure that
requirements associated with the program address the warfighter
needs in a cost effective, affordable way.
We revised our principal acquisition policy, DOD
Instruction 5002, which formally institutionalizes BBP and the
improvements resulting from the Weapon System Acquisition
Reform Act, including emphasis on systems engineering, cost
analysis, and testing. In addition to the actions already
mentioned, we are formally measuring our own performance. The
first two annual reports on the performance of the defense
acquisition issue--acquisition system have provided data that
the Department is using to increase the performance of the
acquisition process, and GAO is also using those reports.
In summary, DOD will continue to work with the GAO to
address the underlying root causes that have resulted in our
high-risk designation. We are and continue to be focused on
removing ourselves from this list by correcting our
deficiencies for the benefit of our warfighters and the
taxpayer.
Thank you for the opportunity, and I look forward to your
questions.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Estevez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. MacWilliams.

STATEMENT OF JOHN MACWILLIAMS

Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, and Ranking
Member Cummings, members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
Department of Energy's efforts at improving our management of
our capital asset projects. This is a topic of great importance
to Secretary Moniz and our Deputy Secretary Sherwood-Randall.
DOE manages some of the largest most complex and
technically challenging projects in either the public or the
private sector due to its diverse mission. The portfolio of
large projects undertaken by DOE is unique not only from other
projects in the public and private sectors but also each DOE
project is unique from other DOE projects. These projects are
truly one of a kind with uncommon challenges, such as handling
radioactive conditions or producing extremely bright X-rays for
nano science. In light of these challenges, DOE has
historically struggled with project and contract management,
and we have been on the GAO's high-risk list since the list's
inception in 1990.
We have made some important progress, however, that has
been recognized by GAO and others. In 2009, we were removed--
the GAO removed the Office of Science from the high-risk list,
and in 2013, GAO again narrowed its DOE focus to projects over
$750 million in the Department's Office of Environmental
Management and the National Nuclear Security Administration.
The Department remains very focused on getting off this list
entirely. To meet this challenge, the secretary is instituting
changes to improve departmental performance on major projects,
and one of the first actions he took when he became Secretary
was to create an Under Secretary for management and performance
to focus specifically on improving project management and
providing direct supervision of many of DOE's most challenging
projects.
In August 2013, the Secretary also established a working
group which he asked me to lead to conduct an in-depth analysis
of project management. This working group was comprised of
DOE's senior-most project management experts, and we took a
very comprehensive look at the challenges that DOE faces, and
the group provided opinions as to why projects either fail or
succeed in the DOE environment. The working group's findings
were issued in a report which was released in December, and
that report you can find on our Website at the Department of
Energy.
The report led to several recent--implementation of several
efforts to improve project management. First, we strengthened
the Energy Systems Acquisition Advisory Board. We will now
review all projects with an estimated cost of $100 million and
up. Used to be we only looked at 750 million and up, and the
board, which is chaired by the Deputy Secretary and comprised
of the senior-most departmental officials, will now meet at
least quarterly and will focus on projects that are deemed to
be at risk of not meeting their performance baselines.
Second, we have established a new committee, the Project
Management Risk Committee. This is comprised of the senior
project managers who are the same folks that wrote the report
that I just referenced, and that is providing risk assessment
and advice to the Department's senior leadership, reviewing and
analyzing projects before all critical decisions and baseline
change proposals, and providing peer reviews and in-house
consulting to projects across the Department.
Finally, the Secretary has taken a series of actions aimed
at improving lines of responsibility and improving our peer
review process. The Department is improving accountability by
ensuring that for each project, the appropriate Under Secretary
must now designate a clear owner who has budgetary and
programmatic responsibility. There must also be a clear line of
responsibility that extends from the Under Secretary to the
project owner to the Federal project director. In addition,
where it doesn't exist already, each Under Secretary is now
establishing a project assessment office.
The reforms and processes that we are instituting at DOE
with respect to project management are critical steps to meet
our solemn responsibility to be responsible stewards of
taxpayer dollars. We are encouraged by the work that has been
done over the last year which has been focused on effecting
permanent, structural and cultural change in the way that the
Department manages its projects.
Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. MacWilliams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Members should be advised that there is
a vote on the floor. We have three votes. The intention is to
have the next two gentlemen give their opening Statements, but
we will not get to questions until after votes. So we
anticipate that that will happen no sooner than 5:15. Each of
you two gentlemen have up to 5 minutes, but please be swift,
and your full Statements will be entered into the record.
Doctor.

STATEMENT OF SHANTANU AGRAWAL, M.D.

Dr. Agrawal. Thank you. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee, thank you for the
invitation to discuss the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services' operation of these programs.
We share this committee's commitment to protecting
beneficiaries' and taxpayers' dollars and to preserving these
program for generations to come. CMS appreciates the work of
the GAO. Medicare is a large and complex program serving 54
million beneficiaries and working with over 1.5 million
providers. We pay over one $billion claims per year from these
providers. While the GAO continues to classify Medicare as a
high-risk program, there is good news to report. The last 2
years saw the slowest growth in real per capita national
healthcare expenditures on record. The 2014 Medicare trustee's
report projects that the trust fund which finances Medicare's
hospital insurance coverage will remain solvent until 2030, 4
years beyond what was projected just last year. They are also
promising improvements in the quality of care furnished the
beneficiaries. CMS initiatives have contributed to an estimated
50,000 fewer patient deaths in hospitals, and 1.3 million fewer
hospital-acquired conditions, saving $12 billion over 3 years.
Medical review strategies have resulted in over $5 billion of
savings in just last fiscal year.
CMS is working to transform Medicare into a high-value
payer with payment policies based on quality not just volume,
and we remain focused on preventing waste, abuse, and fraud
before it occurs. These issues are not merely about cost. They
threaten beneficiary health through unnecessary services,
substandard care, dangerous prescribing, and a host of other
problems. Since 2011, CMS has been using its fraud prevention
system to apply advanced analytics on all Medicare fee-for-
service claims. The system also incorporates beneficiary
complaints made through 1-800-MEDICARE, and works with numerous
other inputs to generate and prioritize leads for further
review and investigation. CMS then swiftly takes administrative
action to stop problematic behaviors through the suspension of
payments, medical review of claims, and removal from the
program. As we recently reported to Congress, our advanced
analytic system has already generated a 5 to 1 return on
investment.
Another component of our efforts is to strengthen provider
enrollment by verifying the legitimacy of new or existing
Medicare providers through a risk-based approach. We are
screening those that pose the highest risk to the program using
routine data checks over licensure and criminal records,
scheduled and unscheduled site visits, and fingerprinting. As a
result, we have removed over 450,000 Medicare enrollments since
2010, and importantly denied thousands of enrollment
applications, which means that these providers never gained the
ability or lose the ability to build a Medicare program. These
unprecedented examples of success have been positively
acknowledged by GAO.
Additionally, we are engaging with the private sector in
new ways to better share information and transform insights
into action. The Healthcare Fraud Prevention Partnership is
currently made up of 38 private, Federal, and State members,
and continues to gain membership. The partnership has completed
studies that led partners to take substantive actions, and is
developing additional studies based on these results. The
President's FY-16 budget includes a proposal to allow both
public and private partners to support this partnership by
providing funds. Beyond the partnership, CMS has made important
progress in integrating proven private sector tools in our
operations, including advanced predictive analytics, prior
authorization, and the use of automated prepayment claims
edits. These initiatives net million--hundreds of millions of
dollars in savings every year.
Finally, CMS is focused on moving the Medicare program away
from the misaligned incentives of fee-for-service
reimbursement, like paying the number of tests performed
instead of paying for quality and outcomes. CMS is testing
different payment models where providers are held accountable
for the quality and cost of their care, and providers have a
financial incentive to coordinate care for their patients. For
the first time, HHS has also set explicit goals for this work.
CMS has a goal of tying 30 percent of traditional fee-for-
service Medicare payments to quality through alternative
payment models by the end of 2016, and tying 50 percent by the
end of 2018. As a physician myself, I ultimately care most
about the health of patients, which I am reminded of daily as I
work with CMS colleagues to improve the delivery of healthcare
services. Our healthcare system should offer the highest
quality and most appropriate care possible to ensure the
wellbeing of individuals and populations.
I look forward to answering this committee's questions, and
I thank for the time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Dr. Agrawal follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Lightfoot, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT LIGHTFOOT

Mr. Lightfoot. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, other members of the committee. Appreciate the
opportunity to appear today to discuss NASA's efforts to
improve acquisition management. NASA develops missions and
capabilities to expand the frontiers of knowledge, capability
and opportunities in space and here on Earth. By the very
nature of our mission, NASA's activities are inherently high
risk. At the same time, we recognize the critical importance of
managing our projects as effective stewards of taxpayers'
dollars. This means managing our projects to deliver them on
cost, on schedule, and identifying risks as quickly as possible
so we can implement appropriate corrective action.
We've made significant improvements both in managing our
projects and preparing our managers. These improvements are
already yielding results, particularly with our small and
medium class missions. We have seen a significant reduction in
the number of projects that exceed their baselines, and, in
fact, several projects have recently launched within their
baselines, including Juno, Landsat 8, the Mars Atmosphere and
Volatile Evolution, and just 2 weeks ago, the Soil Moisture
Active Passive Mission, or SMAP.
Our larger, more complex projects typically involve
technical--typically involve the development of significant
number of new technologies, which present greater technical
risk, but even the James Webb Space Telescope, the next great
observatory in space, which was originally confirmed on an old
cost policy that we used and had exceeded its original
baseline, has benefited from our improved process. The James
Webb Space Telescope has remained on track to meet the new cost
and schedule baseline we established in accordance with the new
policy 3 years ago.
NASA cost policies have evolved over time toward a
probabilistic joint cost and schedule confidence level
analysis. This joint confidence level analysis enables NASA to
estimate the probability of completing a project within a
certain life cycle cost and schedule based on the individual
project's unique technical and programmatic characteristics. A
key benefit to the joint confidence level policy is the added
rigor it brings to the analysis process, driving an integrated
analysis of the cost schedule and technical risk.
NASA has also taken steps to enhance the agency's earned
value management capabilities. Earned value management guidance
is provided to the NASA community through the recently released
project management handbook, as well as through the EBM
handbook. NASA routinely reviews earned value management data
at formal regular recurring meetings at the projects at the
center, at the mission, and at the agency level, as well as in
ad hoc meetings should issues arrive. NASA relies on the
knowledge we gain with each new project in order to improve our
project management practices, and introduces new tools to
assess whether our projects are on track to meet their cost and
schedule commitments.
I would like to thank the GAO for their hard work and their
valuable insights. We appreciate the open dialog we've had with
them over the last few years, as we've both improved--as we've
worked to improve and refine our project management
capabilities. As a result, I think what--and while I think
there's still a lot of work to be done, I am confident that we
are on the right track to improving project management at NASA.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[Prepared Statement of Robert Lightfoot follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlemen. With the vote on
the floor, the committee will stand in recess. When votes
conclude, we will continue, and we thank you again all for your
patience.
[Recess.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Committee will come to order. I thank
you all for your patience with votes on the floor. We obviously
got delayed.
I'd actually like to start by recognizing the gentleman
from North Carolina, who's the chairman of one of our
subcommittees on government--the Subcommittee on Government
Operations. The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Meadows, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank each of you
for being incredibly flexible today.
Really, I guess the underlying concern that I have is as we
have--are celebrating the 25th anniversary, is we've got to
figure out a way to get off of the high-risk list. It's not a
very high benchmark. You know, really if you look at the
components of that, it is just making a real concerted effort.
And so I'm looking forward to each one of you putting together
a plan to make sure that we can do that.
Doctor, let me come to you. I sent you a text, and I want
to compliment you--I actually sent you an email. I want to
compliment you on the fact that on a weekend, you responded via
email, which was shockingly surprisingly--surprising, and I
want to just say thank you.
Do you have the automatic re-enrollment numbers that I've
been requesting from CMS? Have they given those to you?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes. Mr. Meadows, thanks for the question and
I'm happy to be accessible whenever you need. So the answer is
I think we're still working on it. You know, that is part of
the agency obviously that I don't have direct oversight over.
My understanding is that you've had numerous conversations with
the CEO of the marketplace, Kevin Counihan, and that they are
working on assembling those numbers. I think obviously, as you
know, our focus is certainly on getting the numbers out to you
and the public, but making sure that they are accurate when we
do.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So what you are saying is that you
have not seen the numbers for the automatic re-enrollment.
You've never seen any totals?
Dr. Agrawal. I have not, correct.
Mr. Meadows. OK. It's my understanding that we have those
numbers, and we've been trying for 60 days to get it. Any
reason why it would take that long to verify numbers?
Dr. Agrawal. I think it's just confirming that the numbers
are numbers we can stand behind, making sure that they're good
numbers that ought to be released. Again, I believe staff at
CMS are in touch with your staff, and obviously, you've been in
touch with----
Mr. Meadows. Well, they--we've been in touch. They have not
really been in touch----
Dr. Agrawal. Gotcha.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. From a followup. It's amazing to
me that we can have the response time for those that get
recorded messages or wait times for Spanish-speaking operators,
and we know that down to the second, or actually tenth of a
second, and yet we can't get automatic re-enrollment numbers
from CMS. When can we expect those?
Dr. Agrawal. I don't have a particular timeline.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Well, let me go on further, because
I've got limited time. Let's look at Medicare. You're going
from 14,000 lines of code to 68,000 codes in terms of Medicare
reimbursement. Is that correct?
Dr. Agrawal. Are you talking about ICD-10?
Mr. Meadows. Yes. ICD-9, 10. ICD-10.
Dr. Agrawal. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. So we're going to different codes.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. And so doctors and hospitals putting in the
wrong code will come out as an improper payment or fraud. Is
that correct?
Dr. Agrawal. Not necessarily. So it really----
Mr. Meadows. Or improper payment?
Dr. Agrawal. It may. You know, obviously the importance
of----
Mr. Meadows. Why would we go from 14,000 codes to 68,000
codes? How could that make it more efficient?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, first let me say the agency is adopting
these codes that are actually established outside of agency
processes and with the input of the provider community. In
fact, it was really the provider community searching for
specificity and the ability to really define exactly what they
were seeing in the----
Mr. Meadows. So they were getting the payments they wanted?
Dr. Agrawal. So they could get appropriately reimbursed.
Mr. Meadows. Let me ask you. I mean, I went through and
looked at your codes. We've got codes now that one in
particular says if you unexpectedly are missing your big toe.
Unexpectedly missing a big toe gets a code. There are six
different codes for squirrels, I mean, so if a squirrel bites
you, if it's the first time or second time, if it scratches
you. Do you not see that we've got unbelievable lines of code,
that more codes will not make it more efficient? There's one
code in here for spending too much time in a freezer. I mean,
it's incredibly ridiculous. And let me tell you, the physicians
that I talk to and the hospitals I talk to are spending
millions of dollars in compliance trying to figure out your
codes, and yet we're going to increase those by four-fold? Why
would you do that?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, again, I'd be just careful. And let me
just say, I believe there's a code for an Orca attack as well.
Mr. Meadows. There--there is.
Dr. Agrawal. There are numerous different kinds of codes. I
don't imagine in my own practice to be using that one or many
of the others. However----
Mr. Meadows. Well, let me ask you----
Dr. Agrawal [continuing]. I would like to say----
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. Is a mouse a rodent?
Dr. Agrawal. Pardon me?
Mr. Meadows. Is a mouse a rodent?
Dr. Agrawal. I assume it is.
Mr. Meadows. Well, but you've got a different code for a
rodent than a mouse, and, I mean--what I'm saying is it's so
complicated, you make it so complicated, that nobody can
comply.
Dr. Agrawal. I think to be clear, though, the agency is a
recipient of ICD-10, just as other agencies are. We did not
intend----
Mr. Meadows. But you're in control of that, are you not, on
implementing that, your Program Integrity?
Dr. Agrawal. No. There are actually numerous parts of the
agency. I mean, we are actually required to implement ICD-10. I
realize that Congress has delayed implementation of that
requirement, but at some point we are required to implement
ICD-10, and that's meant to--you know, the code design itself
is not something that CMS is engaged in. It is really designed
to improve both epidemiologic understanding of administrative
data to make sure administrative data really reflects what's
going on in the real world clinically, and that providers have
had extensive input into these code sets.
I don't necessarily disagree with your point, but I think
we are as much a recipient of ICD-10 as other agencies that are
implementing it across the world.
Mr. Meadows. Well, my time's expired. I'll yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman. Recognize the
ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Yes. Dr. Agrawal, I want to thank you for
appearing before our committee today. CMS has undertaken a
number of initiatives to reduce fraud and improper payments in
the Medicare program. I just--I'm just concerned about how they
work and how effective they are and what you see for the
future. I'd like to ask you about these today. The ACA requires
increased scrutiny of providers and suppliers who have
historically posed a higher risk of fraud or abuse. This
heightened screening process applies to providers and suppliers
that are attempting to either newly enroll in the Medicare
program or re-validate their participation.
Can you describe the different risk-based screening level
designations and the various requirements that providers and
suppliers in each category are subject to?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So provider categories by provider type
essentially are subdivided among three risk categories:
Limited, medium and high. And as you go up the chain of risk,
more screening strategies and approaches are implemented to
screen those types of providers, again, whether they're newly
enrolling or revalidating. At the highest level of risk, say, a
newly enrolling DME company or home health agency, there are
automated background checks that would be performed that really
are performed for all provider types to ensure adequate
licensure, lack of a criminal--relevant criminal background or
felony record that would keep a provider out of the program.
But in addition, high risk--the highest risk providers face
site visits, they face fingerprint-based background checks. So
a multitude of different screening approaches for the highest
risk providers, and that also includes providers who are
attempting to re-enroll after having a Program Integrity action
taken against them in the past.
The result of all of this work, and to--you know, to date,
we have revalidated over a million of the million and a half
providers and suppliers enrolled in Medicare, and the totality
of all this work on both newly enrolling and revalidation is
that we have removed the billing privileges of over 450,000
enrollments in Medicare to date. And I can tell you that these
new enrollment requirements are also allowing us to deny more
applications at the front end, so providers actually never make
it into the program because they do not qualify.
Mr. Cummings. Well, that's what I was about to ask you. So
as opposed to chasing money, you do some preventive things. Is
that right?
Dr. Agrawal. I think a lot of our provider enrollment work
really solidly lands in the preventive category, because it
really is designed to keep folks out of the program that
don't--that don't belong. So if we conduct a site visit and
determine that you are a non-operational provider, then you
never make it into the program, or if we check your criminal
background record or check your licensure and determine that
you're not appropriately licensed or you have a relevant felony
conviction that would keep you out of the program, then indeed
we deny your enrollment application.
Mr. Cummings. OK. Let me ask you about the agency's
demonstration program on power mobility devices. How does the
agency's prior authorization demonstration for power mobility
devices complement CMS's Program Integrity efforts?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. Thank you for the question. So one of
the central challenges in the improper payment rate is that
there is a disconnect between the medical record documentation
that underlies a medical service or, you know, indicates what
happened over the course of that medical interaction, and then
the claim that comes in to CMS, essentially the bill for that
interaction. What prior authorization does is allows us to
ensure that medical necessity requirements and documentation
requirements are being met on the front end before the service
is even offered to the beneficiary. The demonstration, and
generally the way we've approached prior authorization is,
again, to take a very risk-based approach. The demonstration
was implemented around power mobility devices first. We are
actually--we put out a proposed rule that would look to expand
that to other high-cost DME supplies, and then there are
elements in the President's budget that look to expand it to
things like hyperbaric oxygen and scheduled ambulance
transportations. But all of it is the same principle which the
private sector uses every day of evaluating the service before
it's even provided, determining that it's OK, and then the
beneficiary gets the service and the provider gets paid.
Mr. Cummings. Now, is the beneficiary adversely affected?
Dr. Agrawal. I think that's a really important aspect of
this. So by checking on the front end before the service is
even provided that the documentation's appropriate and that
medical appropriateness and necessity are there, it prevents
the beneficiary from unnecessarily or potentially being on the
hook for a denied claim. So the service was never provided,
right? That way neither the provider is on the hook for a
service that they provided but then are not getting paid for,
and the beneficiary is not on the hook for having received a
service that the provider's not going to then get paid for.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. I
now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Estevez, just today, The Hill newspaper says in an
article, before signing on to increased Pentagon spending to
its highest level ever, Congress should insist on a serious
effort to identify and address wasteful spending by the
Pentagon. Among major Federal agencies, the Pentagon is the
only one never to submit, let alone pass, a full audit.
Another article said, Pentagon leaders have requested the
step-up production of the F-35, the beleaguered jet fighter
that has proven to be a massive drain on resources with no end
in sight, $7.5 billion sunk into the F-35 in Fiscal Year 2014
alone, with massive cost overruns and egregious acquisition
failures.
Over the years, I've read so many articles about waste at
the Pentagon, and I sometimes wonder if there are any fiscal
conservatives at the Pentagon.
What do you say--how much--do you have any estimate as to
how much we've spent on the F-35 so far, and are you--are you
concerned about this article that's in The Hill today that
talks about the wasteful spending by the Pentagon?
Mr. Estevez. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
First, we're always concerned about any wasteful spending at
the Pentagon. And we have a number of processes in place to
address spending in general, including looking at our overhead
and functions and looking at our acquisition processes.
Let me address the F-35. I don't have the number total
spent to date. F-35 costs per plane have gone down below our
estimation since it was re-baselined in 2010. It's actually
producing a pretty good airplane. And I think----
Mr. Duncan. You have----
Mr. Estevez [continuing]. The F-35 is stuck on old news.
Mr. Duncan. You're the principal deputy for acquisition.
And do you have any rough guess as to how much we've spent on
the F-35 thus far, a wild rough guess?
Mr. Estevez. I'm going to have to get you that for the
record.
Mr. Duncan. You don't know.
Mr. Estevez. It goes back to 2004, Congressman.
Mr. Duncan. Right. All right.
Dr. Agrawal, I met last week with hospitals from east
Tennessee, and they told me that many hospitals in Tennessee
are either going to have to close or are about to go under or
probably end up being sold to some big out-of-State
corporations because of the unfairness in their Medicare wage
index. And they said that the system that CMS has now rewards
very expensive, inefficient hospitals and penalizes hospitals
that have held their costs down or that have continually
lowered their costs. Have you looked into this? I mean, it's--
the difference between what hospitals are being paid, say, in
San Francisco or--in comparison to Tennessee or Mississippi or
places like that, it's just almost unbelievable. These
hospitals are being paid twice as much for some of--mostly the
same type of work. What can you tell me about that? Are you--is
CMS looking into this or concerned about these huge
discrepancies at all?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes. I appreciate the question. We do have
processes for hospitals and other providers to engage us in
terms of wage discrepancies like that. I can tell you that we
have a very proactive approach to, say, the misvalued codes
that we know exist and reevaluating those codes, ensuring that
our coding approach and reimbursement approach is really paying
for valuable services that, you know, taxpayers expect that we
all want the program to provide.
So there is a--I think the core message is there is a
process for doing that, and we're happy to engage with
hospitals and other providers on these kinds of questions.
Mr. Duncan. Well, I'll tell you this: I don't have much
time left, but years ago a hospital administrator in a small
town in Tennessee, he told me, he said--he said if you don't
have hospitals, you don't get doctors, and if you don't get
doctors, you don't get people. And there are many rural
hospitals that are really struggling in this country today
because of these discrepancies between what they're getting in
comparison to some of the very wasteful, very inefficient big
city hospitals. And I think that's something that you really
need to take a look at, because it's very unfair. And I could
give you all kinds of statistics about that that I won't bother
you with today, but it's getting to be a very serious problem
in my State.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman. We're recognizing
members based on seniority when we gaveled in, so the gentleman
that's up next is actually from South Carolina, Mr. Mulvaney.
The gentleman's recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Koskinen, when I sat down--this is my first hearing,
and when I sat down to do the research on the GAO report, which
is the subject of today's hearing, I sort of got sidetracked.
And I want to talk to you about some other things, because one
of the things I found in doing the research was a report that I
think just came out today, in fact, it's being reported today,
that your agency is reporting that the tax refund fraud will be
$21 billion this year. That's up about 300 percent from just a
couple years ago. And that number stunned me.
Just out of curiosity, I think it's more than we spent on
the entire Department of Agriculture. You could run the
Treasury, the judiciary, the SEC, the SBA, and your IRS with
that money and still have a couple billion dollars left over.
Mr. Estevez, just out of curiosity, for your interest, I could
buy you 140 F-35s on just on what we're going to lose this year
in tax refund fraud. You could run my State, South Carolina,
for 3 years on that money. And that's not all the fraud
occurring in the IRS, it's just the tax refund fraud.
Anyway, that research led to the research that I wanted to
ask you about, which is your testimony last week before the
Senate where Mr. Grassley, Senator Grassley asked you some
questions about the impact within the Internal Revenue Code and
within your department of what the President has done on
executive amnesty. And I think you went back and forth with
Senator Grassley, and he asked you about people who are
benefiting from the amnesty claiming the Earned Income Tax
Credit in arrears for up to 3 years. Are you familiar--you
remember that testimony with Senator Grassley?
Mr. Koskinen. I do.
Mr. Mulvaney. And I don't know if we established what that
would cost. Have you had a chance to figure out what the total
cost of that program would be?
Mr. Koskinen. I have not, but before I get there, I don't
know where the $31 billion in refund fraud came from.
Mr. Mulvaney. $21 billion.
Mr. Koskinen. $21 billion came from. As GAO testified, we
stopped last year about $16 billion worth of refund fraud and
only $5 billion is our estimate. What went through, which is
still a big number and we're worried about, but it isn't $21 or
$31 billion that's going out the door.
Now, with regard to the question you asked earlier----
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes.
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. To be eligible for the Earned
Income Tax Credit, you have to work. It's in the Earned Income
Tax Credit.
Mr. Mulvaney. Correct.
Mr. Koskinen. To be able to apply for it, you have to have
a Social Security number.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK.
Mr. Koskinen. So if you are--there are--we have about
700,000 ITINs out there by illegal immigrants who are paying
taxes----
Mr. Mulvaney. Correct.
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. But they're not eligible to
apply, because they don't have a Social Security number.
Mr. Mulvaney. But several million of them well get Social
Security numbers under the new program, right?
Mr. Koskinen. And under the new program, if you get a
Social Security number and you work, you'll be eligible to
apply for the Earned Income Tax Credit. You will get an amount
depending on your situation. If you're an individual working
and applying for the individual tax, the maximum you can get
will depend--it's been in the range of about $500 or $600.
Mr. Mulvaney. Right. Let's slow down a little bit, Mr.
Koskinen, because there was some apparent lack of clarity in
the interpretation of what you said in the Senate. I want to
clear this up.
Is the Earned Income Tax Credit only going to be available
to illegal immigrants who filed taxes previously or is it going
to be available to all of them who receive Social Security
numbers under the new program?
Mr. Koskinen. It turns out there was a lack of clarity
about that. If you get a Social Security number, you can then
file for this year if you're working; and if you earned income
in the 3 years before that and filed, you'll be eligible; if
you did not file, you'll have to file a return and you'll have
to file to demonstrate with the same information you would--
anybody else would that you actually earned income and
therefore were eligible.
Mr. Mulvaney. So if you----
Mr. Koskinen. There's some assumption that you would get
the Earned Income Tax Credit automatically whether you were
working or not.
Mr. Mulvaney. So it will be available to everyone who was
working, even if they didn't file the previous 3 years?
Mr. Koskinen. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. And you have no idea how much this is going
to cost?
Mr. Koskinen. I don't now how many people are going to be--
get Social Security numbers, how many will be single----
Mr. Mulvaney. Sure. But we do this all the time. Did the
White House not ask you to estimate that?
Mr. Koskinen. I haven't talked to the White House about
this at all.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did anyone at the White House ever consult
with your office before they issued the executive orders that
gave rise to the executive amnesty?
Mr. Koskinen. They didn't consult with me and, to my
knowledge, they didn't consult with anyone else. I'm not aware
of any consultation.
Mr. Mulvaney. Are you aware that if we were to do what the
President did by legislation that he did by executive order,
that we would have to go and get an estimate of exactly what
you and I are talking about here today?
Mr. Koskinen. From the Joint Committee on Taxation?
Mr. Mulvaney. Or CBO, yes.
Mr. Koskinen. Or CBO. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mulvaney. So if we did the same thing the President
did, by law, we would have to know the answer to that question,
but the President doesn't have to know the answer to that
question before he did what he did.
Mr. Koskinen. The President may know the answer to that we.
He wouldn't come to us necessarily to get the answer; he would
go to OMB.
Mr. Mulvaney. But by the same token, he didn't ask you for
any input. Did he ask you, for example, about any increase in
the risk of fraud?
Mr. Koskinen. No. We had no conversations with the White
House that I'm aware of. I certainly personally have not
talked--I've never talked to the White House about any of this.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right. Thank you, Mr. Koskinen. I
appreciate that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman. Now recognize the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan----
Mr. Jordan. I thank the----
Chairman Chaffetz [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chairman. And I wanted to talk
about the IRS targeting of conservative groups and, frankly,
the pattern of deception and delay that we've seen from this
administration. And I would just remind you, you don't take my
word for it. Just yesterday in The Hill, front page, Feds won't
release IRS targeting documents. So don't take my word, take
Bob Cusak, editor of The Hill, respected mainstream journalist,
talking about the deception and delay from this administration.
I think it's important we remember the whole saga here.
February 2012, Lois Lerner told this committee staff that there
was no targeting going on. Turned out to be a lie, of course.
March 23d, 2012, Doug Shulman, then-Commissioner, told the Ways
and Means Committee he could give assurances that there's no
targeting going on; also, a false Statement. May 2013, that day
when Lois Lerner went in front of a bar association here in
D.C. with a planted question, again, unprecedented, to get in
front of the story; went before the inspector general released
a report and talked about the targeting by the IRS of
conservative groups. And I quote from--remember, she talked to
Treasury and the White House about this. From Mr. Cusak's
article yesterday, and I quote, Then-chief of staff Mark
Patterson at Treasury informed the White House about the plan
to disclose the targeting, 'so that the White House wouldn't be
surprised by the news.'
So think about this: planted question before the inspector
general's report comes out, she discloses that, and the White
House and the Treasury already knew it was going on. And then,
of course, we have Ms. Lerner talking about Cincinnati was the
problem and not Washington. That was false. And the White House
says it's a phony scandal, no corruption, not even a smidgeon,
which brings me to Mr. Koskinen, the current Commissioner.
February 14th of last year, we subpoenaed you for all of
Lois Lerner's emails. Put up slide No. 1. Just a few weeks
later, March 26 in this committee room, the chairman of the
committee, Mr. Chaffetz, asked you a question: Are you going to
provide all of Lois Lerner's emails? And your response was,
yes, we will do that.
Do you remember that conversation, Mr. Koskinen?
Mr. Koskinen. I remember that conversation. You've reminded
me of it a couple of times.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And I'm going to keep doing that, because
the American people are frustrated and mad about what the IRS
did to them regarding their First Amendment free speech rights.
June 13, you sent a letter to Senate Finance saying, we
lost Lois Lerner's emails and destroyed--the hard drive's been
destroyed and the tapes are destroyed. You remember that letter
you sent to Senate Finance, Mr. Koskinen?
Mr. Koskinen. I do remember.
Mr. Jordan. 10 days after that letter was sent, you came
back to this committee room and we asked you some questions.
Put up the second slide. I asked you specifically, what date
did you learn you couldn't get all her emails? Remember that
conversation, Mr. Koskinen?
Mr. Koskinen. I remember that conversation.
Mr. Jordan. And your response was, I learned in April.
So my question to you is, today will you admit that you
misled this committee, the U.S. Congress, and more importantly,
the American people just like Ms. Lerner was doing, just like
Mr. Shulman was doing? Will you admit that you misled the
Congress and the American people?
Mr. Koskinen. No. Absolutely not.
Mr. Jordan. You don't think you misled them?
Mr. Koskinen. No.
Mr. Jordan. So you told Mr. Chaffetz, yes, we'll give us
all--give you all her emails. A few days later, you learned in
April--that was March. In April, you learned you can't, and you
wait 2 months to tell us, and you don't think that's misleading
the American people?
Mr. Koskinen. I do not. And we waited 6 weeks to tell you,
and we waited those times to find as many of the emails as we
could. And as we reported----
Mr. Jordan. Have you sent----
Mr. Koskinen. Let me complete.
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask you this.
Mr. Koskinen. I----
Mr. Jordan. Have you sent the chairman a letter saying what
you told him on March 26, yes, we will get you all of Lois
Lerner's emails, have you sent Chairman Chaffetz a letter
saying, you know what, what you told you on March 26 isn't
true?
Mr. Koskinen. As I noted in the hearing, we've had several
hearings, I--and I still tell you, we said we would give you
all the Lois Lerner emails. We gave all the Lois Lerner emails
we had. As I told you once before, we couldn't make up Lois
Lerner emails. We didn't have them to produce them. We gave you
all the emails that we had and we continue----
Mr. Jordan. What you said, you said I'll give them----
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. To give you those.
Mr. Jordan [continuing]. All to you, and then you--then you
write a letter to the Senate Finance saying you lost them, you
destroyed them. Have you done anything to correct the record?
Mr. Koskinen. Actually, we didn't lose them and destroy
them. They were lost in that period of time in 2012. And then
when we testified, testified in June, I testified that we
waited the 6 weeks while we tried to provide you as much emails
as we could, and there were 24,000.
Mr. Jordan. Let's put up--put up--put up slide 4. Put up
slide 4.
This is the letter you sent, and you said, you can confirm
that no backup tapes existed. So you confirmed that you
couldn't get us all her emails, and you've done nothing to
correct the record when you told Mr. Chaffetz you were going to
give all them to us. And you waited 2 months before you ever
told us that you lost them.
Mr. Koskinen. I waited 6 weeks so we could provide you all
the emails we could find. We've provided you 24,000 emails from
the time of her hard drive crash, and we said and the backup
tapes did not exist because they had been re-recorded over.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Chairman, I----
Mr. Koskinen. So we at that time gave you all the emails we
had.
Mr. Jordan. I got one more question, Mr. Chairman, just in
the last 10 seconds, if I could.
Have you withdrawn the letter--understanding that now TIGTA
has told us that her emails are recoverable on the backup
tapes, have you withdrawn the letter that you sent to Senate
Finance where you confirmed that those tapes weren't there?
And I bring this up, Mr. Chairman, because this committee
has some experience with letters being withdrawn. In 2011, the
Justice Department, after making inaccurate Statements
regarding Fast and Furious, sent a letter to then-Chairman Issa
and they said this: Facts have come to light during the course
of this investigation that indicate the letter, the February 4
letter, contains inaccuracies. Because of this, the department
now formally withdraws the February 4 letter.
So what I want to know, Mr. Koskinen, is when are you going
to be square with the American people and withdraw false and
misleading Statements you've sent this committee, and more
importantly, the letter you sent to Senate Finance? Are you
going to withdraw that letter?
Mr. Koskinen. Absolutely not. We can have that argument for
a long time. TIGTA, by the way, has spent 6 months and untold
amounts of money trying to extract those emails from those
backup tapes. So the idea that we could somehow----
Mr. Jordan. You said you could confirm they didn't even
exist.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman----
Mr. Koskinen. I said the backup tapes--if you go through my
records, you will find I've said the backup tapes----
Mr. Jordan. Will you withdraw the letter that had
falsehoods in it? That's what I'm asking.
Mr. Koskinen. There is no reason. There are no falsehoods
and there's no reason to withdraw that letter. I stand by that
letter.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Koskinen, Monday and Tuesday of this week, I did two
live town halls back in my district and one tele town hall, and
at two of those events, the issue that was brought up, the same
story that came out in The Washington Post with the headlines,
IRS Rehired Hundreds of Ex-Employees With Troubled Records,
came up. And it basically came up from my constituents saying,
you know, why can we not get away with the same things that
were recorded there?
In the article, it indicated that between 2010 January and
September 2013, the IRS rehired 7,000 employees. A great jobs
program, and we're always delighted when people are employed,
but the question comes from my people as to why over 800 of
those 7,000 rehired IRS employees were rehired with prior
substantial employment issues, including 11 individuals who
engaged in unauthorized access to taxpayer information. And
that really discourages and frustrates my citizens that these
people, 11 of them who engaged in unauthorized access to
taxpayer information, which is a crime, as we understand it,
were rehired. Why?
Mr. Koskinen. Those are--the bulk of those employees are
temporaries or seasonals who are hired for 4 to 6, 8 months a
year depending on the time. They should not be rehired.
Mr. Walberg. Even though they committed a crime, you're
saying they should not--why were they rehired?
Mr. Koskinen. They shouldn't. Because the process at that
point in time in 2009 or 2011 into 2012 followed, as the IG
said, the OPM rules and regulations, which, in fact, would have
allowed those people to be applied.
We consolidated in 2012 all of those hiring issues into our
personal security division, and I have made sure that if you
have violated the alls under a section called 1203(b), if you
have worked for the IRS and violated Section 1203(b), you will
not be rehired.
Mr. Walberg. Well, according to TIGTA, they said, it still
remains a concern, because in 2012 and 2013, IRS hired
individuals with prior significant IRS substantiated conduct
and performance issues.
What are you doing--I mean, this was subsequent to that.
Mr. Koskinen. Yes. And what the IG recommended, the IG,
again, in that report said that was all pursuant and we
followed--pursuant to when we followed the OPM rules. What the
IG said is we should make sure that we make sure before we hire
someone, we've actually reviewed all of this. And as I said, we
now do that. We took the IG's recommendation. And I have talked
with our personnel people since the IG started raising this
issue, which I think is an important issue, in December, and to
make sure that--and this consolidation with our personal
security people, if you have violated 1203(b), which is willful
violations of taxes or access to taxpayer information, you
won't be hired.
Mr. Walberg. Let me proceed further, then. And I hope this
is a general trend. The audit identified 141 individuals that
were rehired that had a prior tax issue, with five of them
having been found by IRS management to have willfully not filed
their taxes.
How many of these employees are still working?
Mr. Koskinen. They're all seasonal employees, so I don't
know. A lot of them don't come back the next year, so I don't
know how many of those there were. I would note that the 141--
we take the requirement of IRS employees to be tax compliant
very seriously. Our compliance rate is over 99 percent. We hold
people accountable. Even if their mistakes are inadvertent,
even if they make modest mistakes, we count that as not-
compliant. The--what we are concerned about is the five
employees you mentioned that have willfully--have been found to
willfully not pay their taxes and violate the tax laws, and
those people are subject to termination.
Mr. Walberg. Could you get us information for this
committee of people we're referring to here that are still
employed?
Mr. Koskinen. I can find the information. The 141, if you
had a minor attempt--minor mistake, those you would get cited
for, but those aren't basis for termination. The five you
mentioned that had a willful violation finding, I will find out
the information and get it back to you.
Mr. Walberg. I appreciate that. What about--what about
those, not the tax issue, but had substantial prior employment
issues, attendance issues, misrepresentation of what they were
doing if they were on the job?
Mr. Koskinen. There's again--again, as I say, the
consolidation now, we have a personal security department that
reviews every offer before it is made to make sure that we've
gone over all of that. Some--again, some personal activities
are you didn't show up to work, you know, for 2 days, others
are you had a significant problem. And we distinguish between
those. And the OPM rules are very clear about that, that if
you've--just because you've had a performance issue in your
file doesn't mean you can never work again for the IRS. It
depends on the nature and the duration of the affair. But it is
important for people to be confident even though 80 percent--as
the TIGTA report said, 80 percent of these people are
temporaries and seasonals who don't necessarily work even for
half the year, it is important for us to make sure----
Mr. Walberg. Very important.
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. That we have the appropriate
people working, and so I take the TIGTA report--I'm a big
supporter of IGs, because they continue to review these issues.
And we take it seriously. We have implemented their
recommendations. We are--we have a personal security group now
that ensures before an offer goes out, if you have violated
1203(b), which is the two most serious issues, you don't get
hired. And if there are other conduct issues, not only are we
going to follow the OPM rules, we're going to review those for
appropriateness for work at the IRS. And I think it's important
for people to be comfortable that we do take it seriously and
that people working for the IRS ought to be tax compliant. If
we're collecting your taxes, we ought to be paying ours.
Mr. Walberg. Well, I appreciate that. And I would like the
information on those that are still employed that came under
these 824.
Mr. Koskinen. Well, the 824 covers a large range----
Mr. Walberg. A lot of lot.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's time has expired. We now
recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I want to give Mr. Koskinen a break here for a minute and
talk with Mr. Lightfoot, if that's OK.
Mr. Koskinen. I don't want you to think that's not
appreciated.
Mr. Palmer. Well, that doesn't mean I won't come back to
you.
Mr. Lightfoot, NASA's done a good job in making progress on
getting off the high-risk list, but there are still some
issues. I'm obviously from Alabama. NASA's a major presence in
our State, but there have been some issues with re-baselining
costs and schedule on--in light of management and technical
issues, can you address that, on some of your projects?
Mr. Lightfoot. Yes, sir. We have--the process we go through
where we review these projects on a routine basis. We have
some--while we've had some that have done really well, we
continue to make good progress on those, eight out of the last
nine that have a launched that came in under the baseline. Once
we issue--once we go through confirmation, what we call
confirmation of a project, which moves it from formulation to
development, that's when we make a commitment for a certain
cost and schedule that we're going to try to live to.
The process we have where we review those all monthly.
Occasionally we have one that pops up and is--it gives us an
issue. We've had two of those. The space ground sustainment
system that we have, and then the ICESat-2 project, which are
two--two issues we have going where we were required to then go
back and baseline. When you re-baseline, you go through a
process of analysis of alternatives, is there another way you
can get that particular mission accomplished, can you de-scope
the existing mission so that you can still stay within that
cap. So that's the process we go through. Each one of those has
lessons. Those lessons--one of the things that we've been
really working on is the--factoring those back in and
continuing to improve our process as we go forward for the rest
of those projects.
Mr. Palmer. At a prior time in my life, I worked for a
couple of major engineering companies, and one of the things
that drives a client crazy, particularly one paying the bill,
is change orders. You've got some projects that I don't know if
it's a result of design changes or poor design to begin with
that are running some substantial overruns on change orders.
Could you address that?
Mr. Lightfoot. Yes, sir. I think the one you're talking
about in particular is the ground systems project that we had.
This was the first time that we've actually applied the same
project management methodology that we had for the spacecraft
that we've been flying to a ground system. And one of the
things--that's an upgrade to our ground networks that actually
communicate with all the satellites we have on orbit. That
system is basically becoming obsolete. So what we did is we
went out and we tried--we knew we had a pretty large job in
front of us, and we tried those program project techniques that
we've been--that we've been doing for spacecraft, one of a kind
things, to a ground system.
We've learned a few lessons in that process. The No. 1 one
is that--or the first one is that we have to be very clear on
our requirements, much to what--much to what you're talking
about, and understand what the--and make sure we understand
that the contractor that's doing that work understands those
requirements as well. So we've gone back and forth with this in
terms of trying to define better the--what the expectations we
have for the contractor and then managing that contractor.
In this particular case, we've--we've changed out the
entire contract management team and the team that we have in
terms of our--our managing it. And since we've done that,
we've--it's--we have managed to stay--from an earned value
perspective, we stayed at the levels that we expected.
Mr. Palmer. So this is--would you say this is the result of
a design that--that a--of a project that the schedule dictated
the design, or is this something where you're entering a new
area and--and you're--and you're designing as you go?
Mr. Lightfoot. No. I think this is a case where we
underestimated the type of work we needed to do to deal with
the obsolescence issues that we had in front of us in terms of
designing the software system that we were putting in place
with the new equipment.
Mr. Palmer. All right. I believe that's all I have. I'll
yield the balance of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman yields. I now recognize
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Chairman.
And Mr. Koskinen, since you had a break, I thought it only
appropriate to come back to you and ask you a couple questions
that were on my mind in particular.
Based on the previous testimony, you've made it clear that
the ability of the IRS to make progress in the areas that have
been outlined by the GAO have been largely hindered due to
reductions in funding. And I--this is kind of a personal
question to me because of my involvement with non-profit
organizations. And the IRS has spent millions of dollars to
basically rewrite the governing rules for 501(c)(4)'s or what--
what have you, different non-profit organizations, specifically
potentially removing tax-exempt status if those organizations
are involved in political activity.
My question is multiple. It's rather amazing personally
that there would be an issue of trying to hinder speech of
Americans. My specific question really comes down to, how much
money--can you tell me how much money the IRS has spent on
writing and the attempt to rewrite that specific section of the
501(c)(4) ruling? I know it was withdrawn, but my understanding
is that there is an attempt now to rewrite that. I'm curious
how much money has been spent to that end.
Mr. Koskinen. I don't know. The only money that's being
spent is the lawyers that have been working on the drafting of
that, and that's not--they haven't been spending full-time, so
it is not a large amount, but I could try to get an estimate of
how many people worked on it. Some of it--the work on the first
version was done before I got there, but if you'd like, we can
try to figure out on a rough estimate as the man-hours, but the
only time spent was, as I say, a relatively small number of
lawyers who were working on it.
But I would note that the goal here is not to hinder. As
said when I started and kind of inherited all of this, the goal
is, in fact, to try to make clear what the rules are in a way
that is fair to everybody, all of the organizations, it's clear
and easy to administer. Right now, the rule that's been there a
long time is you judge both the determination as to whether
you're eligible to be a 501(c)(4) and then whether you're
performing under the statute by facts and circumstances. So
that means anybody running an organization is running the risk,
looking over their shoulder saying, is somebody going to have a
different view of the facts and circumstances. So my sense is
we ought not to be hindering political speech, we ought not to
be changing the way people act, but what we ought to have is a
much--and the IG, in his recommendation, said the Treasury
Department and the IRS should clear up what the standard is for
what amount, how much, and what the definition is of the
political activity you can engage in. And my sense is that it
ought to be possible to have a rule that would be clearer,
easier for people in those organizations running them to
understand, and fair to everyone, and that would not be
hindering political speech. So it's not my intention, anyway,
in looking at that to do that.
My sense and concern is that the present system has, over
the last several years, by the IG's analysis, turned out to be
unworkable, and I think it would be in everybody's interest if,
again, it could be clearer what the rules are without hindering
people, and they would be able to run organizations confident
that somebody isn't going to come in and second-guess them on
the facts and circumstances that they've been operating under.
Mr. Hice. Well, I would agree we certainly need
clarification in that, but I would also strongly urge a very
clear understanding of the freedoms of Americans, that just
because someone is a part of a non-profit organization, they
have not waived their First Amendment rights. And that is a
tremendous threat that the IRS has, in my opinion, no business
interfering with, and that is a deep concern.
Mr. Koskinen. I agree with you. And, in fact, my sense is
that the rules if they're fair and clear to everyone will, in
fact, create less of a constraint on people's right to free
speech than the present rules, which are muddy and hard to
interpret.
Mr. Hice. OK. One other question, and I will yield my time.
Again, going back to the issue that the main problem has been
lack of funding. The issues from the GAO have come up with the
IRS for some 25 years or close to it. It's been a long time
that we've had issues, and yet a few years ago, in 2010, the
IRS had more funding than they've ever had, and these problems,
these issues have still not been addressed.
Mr. Koskinen. Well, that's not quite true, because we did
have more money in 2010 by a long shot. And as I noted in my
testimony, in 2013, as a result of some of that spending on
information technology, the information technology business
system modernization problem for the IRS was taken off the
high-risk list after having been there for 14 years. So it has
been true and proven that in--certainly in the IT area, that if
we have the funding, we can make significant progress.
Mr. Hice. And that's great for the IT area, but there's
many other areas that need to addressed, and 25 years is far
too long. It's time to put some teeth to it, sir. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. DeSantis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Commissioner Koskinen, it was a year ago
where the senior IRS leadership learned that Lois Lerner's hard
drive had crashed, there was an issue about getting her emails
off backup tapes. You wrote a letter to Senate Finance in June
2014 saying that there were problems with Lerner's emails and
that the backup tapes have been--had been destroyed. And then
on June 20, you testified before the Ways and Means Committee
that the IRS went to ``great lengths'' and made ``extraordinary
efforts'' to recover Lerner's emails.
So let me ask you this: After the IRS became aware that
Lerner's hard drives had crashed, what specific steps did the
IRS take to locate any backup tapes or disaster recovery tapes?
Mr. Koskinen. The disaster recovery tapes that the IRS are
recorded over when they're used until they're no longer
useable, so there is no technique or capacity in the IRS to
actually retrieve emails off of those tapes. What we did do was
go to everybody in the what so-called custodial list at that
point of about 80 different people that Ms. Lerner would have
been communicating with, because we were looking for all
emails. We'd already produced all the emails that were relevant
to the determination process. We were then trying to respond to
``all.'' So we looked at all of those 82 and took every email
that was to or from Lois Lerner, compared them against emails
already produced----
Mr. DeSantis. But that would not have been backup tapes.
That was from their hard drives or their account.
Mr. Koskinen. That was their hard drives we produced----
Mr. DeSantis. So the hard--so the backup tapes, you had
made the judgment that they simply were not going to be
recoverable, or did you actually have somebody investigate
whether you could have backup tapes or you could find some
backup tapes?
Mr. Koskinen. Our expert said we had no way, that they were
not recoverable. It's taken the IG 6 months, the last 2 or 3
months working, he tells us, around the clock, and he still
hasn't gotten them produced and we still don't know how many
there are. But my position all along has been with the IG,
because we helped him find what the backup tapes were that had
been recorded over from that time, is if we could find more
emails, that would be terrific. And I actually mean that
seriously, because it would lend even more light than the
24,000 we already produced into what were in those emails in
that timeframe. So we----
Mr. DeSantis. Why would the IG be able to find it if you
guys couldn't find it? You said you went through extraordinary
lengths.
Mr. Koskinen. Well, because the IG--when we discovered this
in the spring and then we reported it in June 6 weeks later,
within a couple weeks thereafter, the IG started his
investigation, so we had no more time. And I will tell you
today, if we started today, it's taken the IG--and I don't know
how much money they're spending. It's taken them over 6 months
to, in fact, recover whatever they're going to report, and that
was----
Mr. DeSantis. So let me ask you this: Did the IRS----
Mr. Koskinen. We don't have that capacity.
Mr. DeSantis. Did the IRS ever collect any tapes or send
any backup tapes to any forensic lab in your investigation, the
people you detailed to do this? Was that--any tapes recovered,
any tapes ever sent to a lab by the IRS?
Mr. Koskinen. No.
Mr. DeSantis. OK. Now, who told you that the backup tapes
would not yield any emails from Lois Lerner's crashed hard
drive?
Mr. Koskinen. I was told that by our information technology
department.
Mr. DeSantis. And what was--do you know the basis for that
Statement? Did you inquire as to how they could be sure of
that?
Mr. Koskinen. Basically what they described to me was they
have these disaster recovery tapes, they are actual tapes, and
then when the 6 months--they keep them for 6 months, and when
the 6 months is done, they simply reuse them and record over
them. And as you know if you ever had tapes, when you record
over them, then in the normal process, they're--data underneath
them is gone. And, in fact, I was told that we had no capacity
and no way that you could actually recover those. And, in fact,
they were not sure that there was any way you could recover
them.
Mr. DeSantis. Has the IRS communicated with Lois Lerner,
her attorneys about recovering the emails from any of her
crashed hard drives?
Mr. Koskinen. No. I've had no communication with Lois
Lerner about this at all. I've never met her.
Mr. DeSantis. Let me ask you this: In the course of the
IRS's response to this committee's investigation, has the IRS
withheld any information or documents from Congress on any
other basis other than 6103?
Mr. Koskinen. No. We've had some that we've asked the staff
to review in camera because there are basically personal
matters that have nothing to do with the investigation, but
we've exercised no privilege, we aren't trying to keep anything
from you. In fact, we've continued to respond to requests and
continue to provide any information we can find.
Mr. DeSantis. And you would say that your responses to the
requests from this committee have been above and beyond what is
required in this situation?
Mr. Koskinen. No, I don't think they were above and beyond.
We have--when you want information in escrow, we've have an
obligation to do our best to provide it, and we've done that. I
don't think that's above and beyond. Any time you want----
Mr. DeSantis. Extraordinary efforts aren't above and
beyond?
Mr. Koskinen. Extraordinary efforts were, in fact, when we
discovered the crash, then it was my decision and thought that
we needed to do whatever we could to fill in that gap, and we
did find 24,000 emails we provided. My understanding from news
reports, because the IG doesn't tell us a lot of stuff about
this, is that the IG may be able to find another 9-or 10,000
Lois Lerner emails.
Mr. DeSantis. So you've just--final question is, you've
made the effort. You were not cavalier about this. You made the
effort to find what the committee wanted. Is that your
testimony?
Mr. Koskinen. That's my testimony.
Mr. DeSantis. Thanks. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman. We'll now recognize
the distinguished gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The book of
Ecclesiastes teaches us there's a time and a season for
everything, and you convinced me earlier this evening that this
is not the time to question Mr. Koskinen. He was here for GAO-
related testimony and not IRS. And I don't know whether he's
prepared for the questions or not, but we'll not find out,
because I believe that you have agreed at some point he's going
to come back before the committee. And I was wondering if the
chairman might engage in a colloquy with me to make sure that
my chronology is correct.
I thought the last time that Commissioner Koskinen was in
front of us, there was a robust discussion about the time
period within which he was going to produce emails, and he had
asked us to narrow the scope so that he could prioritize and
get us those emails that we had asked for. And, of course, as
the chairman will recall, we need those emails, because the
emails we do have from Lois Lerner contain such jewels as
lamenting GOP wins, celebrating Democrat wins, forecasting
gloom and doom if the GOP, God forbid, ever controlled the
Senate, saying that we needed a plan to overcome Citizens
United.
Those were just some of the emails that I recall, Mr.
Chairman. And if my chronology holds, after Commissioner
Koskinen told us that he would prioritize the production of
those emails, of course, they--they magically disappeared. And
then the IRS, of course, Mr. Chairman, employed Herculean
efforts to recover those emails. They were not successful, but
then talismanically after the election, or just talismanically,
they did appear at some point, and now we are reading that 500
of those emails will not be made available due to the
invocation of a privilege.
Does the chairman know what privilege the White House is
relying upon to not produce those documents to Congress?
Chairman Chaffetz. I do not.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you think--do you know whether the President
has had an opportunity to review those 500 documents?
Chairman Chaffetz. That's a good question.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you think there is a chance that his
conclusion that not a smidgeon of corruption exists in this
investigation might be altered if he did have an opportunity to
review what's in those documents?
Chairman Chaffetz. Certainly.
Mr. Gowdy. Will you consider inviting Mr. Koskinen back to
update us on this--on this chronology?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, indeed.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. Well, Mr. Koskinen, Commissioner, I'm
not going to question you today, because I think the hearing
title was something else, but I hope at some point we can go
back to where we left off, which was an assurance from you that
you were going to prioritize email productions.
And I hope at some point, Mr. Chairman, we can evaluate the
refusal to turn over certain documents to Congress, the
invocation of privilege. And I hasten to add, as the chairman
remembers because of his service on Judiciary and Oversight,
this administration has invoked executive privilege before only
for us to then learn that that privilege was invoked to protect
an email that the Attorney General sent to his wife. Under what
theory of executive privilege is that email protected?
So I hope that I live long enough to see the production of
those emails, and I'll certainly hope I live long enough to see
the Commissioner come back before us. And with that----
Mr. Cummings. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Koskinen. Could I just make one clarification? During
the course of all of the document production, Treasury
Department turned over all of its Lois Lerner emails and the
White House made a representation that they had no Lois Lerner
emails. So in terms of that process, and, in fact, this
committee issued a report in December noting that, in fact,
there was no evidence that anyone outside of the IRS, whether
at the White House or Treasury, had any impact or influence
over the, as the IG said, improper use of criteria for the
determination process for (c)(4)'s. So I don't know what the
documents over there are. There's been litigation around the
inspector general investigating communications, but that's not
a case between us and--the IRS is not a party to that----
Mr. Gowdy. No.
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. And I don't----
Mr. Gowdy. No, it's not, which is in part why I directed my
questions to the chairman and not to you----
Mr. Koskinen. Good.
Mr. Gowdy [continuing]. But if you would like us to have
this conversation, I will ask you, do you understand why
Congress wants those emails? Can you understand, as a trained
attorney, why we might want access to all the documents?
Mr. Koskinen. I can understand that. My understanding was
that the White House some time ago certified there were no Lois
Lerner emails and Treasury gave you all of their Lois Lerner
emails.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, then what are they claiming----
Mr. Koskinen. But I look forward to coming back and we'll--
we'll have more occasions. I think this is my sixth appearance
before this committee. I look forward to the seventh, and we'll
talk about--and we'll be delighted to give you an update. And I
will be delighted if the inspector general can ever complete
his work, it's now going after 6 months, to produce those
emails, because then all of us will learn what was in them. And
I am--have been totally supportive of the IG. And my view
really is, if there are emails that can be done, and the IG
apparently--in the public press it's been said has been able to
find them, I think that will be a major step forward, and I
look forward to discussing that with you.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I know I'm out of time, but you can
appreciate our cynicism and our skepticism, because it appears
as if sometimes the strategy is just to delay and obfuscate and
wait and wait and wait until either the public loses interest
or until there's a new administration. So I know you can
appreciate our desire to have those documents sooner rather
than later.
Mr. Koskinen. I can. I thoroughly understand that.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Gentleman's time is expired.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes. I haven't had a
chance to ask questions, and I would like to remind my
colleagues why we are here. The five of you are very
presentable. You put a happy face on the difficult situation,
but here is the reality. Twenty-five years in a row your
agencies, these problems, have come before Congress, 25 years
in a row. This is the all-star team of problems. That's the
reality. You can try to put lipstick on this pig, but the
reality is it is ugly. To get on this list, you have to be
engaged in waste, fraud, and abuse in excess of $1 billion a
year.
Now, to get off the list, granted it is not easy, but here
are the criteria for getting off the list: Leadership
commitment, agency capacity; you have to have an action plan;
you have got to be monitoring efforts and show progress. That
seems like a reasonable five sets of criteria that you can
accomplish. I have the scorecard according to GAO. Twenty-five
years in a row you failed to meet those--hit the criteria on
those five, and consequently that is why we are highlighting
this. I think you are all well-intentioned. I think you are all
very talented individuals, but the massive bureaucracy within
the organizations that you represent here today, it is failing
to meet these modest goals, and that's what's so frustrating.
Things are going to pop up, challenges are going to rise, but
25 years in a row is just not good enough.
I heard you were making measurable progress. You know, six
Sigma levels. Good news to report. I'm sorry. You don't have
good news to report. The bad news is you're back again. We
don't want to keep having these hearings. We want to show the
progress, and I really do appreciate the good men and women who
spend untold hours and literally years going through the
details of what's happening within these departments and
agencies. As a followup, I don't expect you to do this off the
top of the your head, one of my concerns is who's held
accountable? Like, who actually is held accountable? We asked,
I think at the very beginning, one of our members asked a good
question: Has anybody ever been fired? I think it was Mr. Hurd
who asked. Has anybody been fired? Anybody dismissed? Anybody
transferred by not meeting these goals?
We have thousands of good quality people who work for the
Federal Government. These are employees that wake up, they're
patriotic, they work hard, they're trying to do their best, but
somehow, someway in these five areas, it's totally fallen down.
We're not achieving the goals.
Again, the criteria put forward by the GAO doesn't say that
you have solve this. It seems to say that you're on the
trajectory to actually getting it solved. So part of the
followup that we would appreciate is who's held accountable?
What happens if you don't meet these goals? Because some of
these are astronomically large. I mean, we're talking hundreds
of billions of dollars. If you just take--you want to wipe out
the Federal deficit? You just look at the uncollected taxes and
the problems that we have in waste, fraud, and abuse going out
the door through HHS. That more than wipes out all the deficit
right just there. Just those two things. It's not very easily
done, but the waste, the fraud, the abuse, and you look at the
people who work hard and pay their taxes and they're doing
everything that they can and then they hear hundreds of
billions of dollars going out that's either not collected or
going out erroneously, and the waste, and the fraud, and the
abuse, they throw up their hands. You know, their 2,500 bucks
means something in their lives, and yet the numbers here are so
big.
I do not understand why the five that are highlighted here,
there's six programs, two at the Department of Defense, why you
can't hit those five goals. And according to the GAO, like the
Medicare program, they've only met one of the five goals, four
partially. On the two DOD's--DOD programs, met one of the five
criteria. Four are partially met. At the Department of Energy,
one partially met, one fully met, three not met at all. So 25
years in a row. I don't want to come back and have this same
hearing at the beginning of the next Congress. I want you all
to solve it.
The committee would like to know and hear from you how are
you going to do that? How are you going to do that? And, again,
difficult for you to answer, but I'm telling you, you all are
giving a--painted a pretty picture. It ain't so pretty, but we
want to see what it is you're actually doing. What is the
action plan to create an action plan? That's the hope and goal,
and that's--that's my concern, and with that I want to yield
back. I think--are there any members who wish to ask a second
round of questions?
Gentlemen from Ohio.
Mr. Jordan. I appreciate the chair's indulgence. If we
could put up these two slides again, Mr. Koskinen, I just want
to----
Mr. Koskinen. I think it was noted by--agreed by
Congressman Gowdy and the chairman that I'll come back and
we'll have a full hearing about this, that we would not----
Mr. Jordan. No, we--I fully expect that.
Mr. Koskinen. But I'm happy to answer more questions.
That's fine.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. That's the way it works. We call you here
and we're allowed to ask questions because the American people
want to know why the Internal Revenue Service violated their
fundamental rights. So we appreciate your willingness to answer
our questions on behalf of the American people. That's awful
big of you, Mr. Koskinen.
Mr. Koskinen. Well, I'm just noting that we're going to
have another hearing on this, and I've had five hearings on it
already, but I'm happy to answer the questions.
Mr. Jordan. And we still haven't got the truth, as
evidenced by the headline yesterday, Mr. Koskinen. The press,
the mainstream press can't even get the documents they're
requesting.
Mr. Koskinen. Those aren't documents that they're
requesting from us.
Mr. Jordan. But they derive from your unlawful activity.
That's the point, and that's something you've got to
understand. As the guy who heads the agency with as much power
as you do, to have that kind of attitude, that's what
frustrates not just members of this committee, but all kinds of
Americans. That, Mr. Chairman, that is the problem.
Let's go back to this, because I want to know something.
This is what you told me when I asked you: When did you learn
you could not get all of her emails, you learned in April. All
right? Then you learned in April, and then let's put up the
next slide. This is the letter you sent to Senate Finance
telling them--in June, you sent this letter telling them--and
you used the word ``confirmed'' that no backup tapes--that
backup tapes no longer exist. So I want to know between April,
when you learned, and June when you told the Congress and the
American people what you did to confirm that those tapes didn't
exist, which we now know do exist. So what did you do to
confirm that the tapes didn't exist, Mr. Koskinen?
Mr. Koskinen. What I did was talk to our IT people who told
me that when the tapes were finished with their 6 months, they
were reused and then destroyed, and that as far as they were
concerned, there was no way--we had no capacity even if we knew
where they were to extract emails from them, and it's taken the
IG 6 months and they still haven't completed the process.
Mr. Jordan. That's all you did? You asked your IT people?
Mr. Koskinen. Right.
Mr. Jordan. Was it a long conversation? Did you ask them
one question? How did----
Mr. Koskinen. I asked them questions about how the backup
disaster recovery process worked. What happened to the tapes.
Mr. Jordan. So the word ``confirmed'' is based on one
conversation you had with IT people. Is that what you're
saying?
Mr. Koskinen. Yes. Those are the experts. They told me that
there was no way that those tapes could be found or would be
used because if they--they were reused----
Mr. Jordan. That's all you did?
Mr. Koskinen. That's all I did.
Mr. Jordan. Really? An issue where repeated lies from Lois
Lerner, false Statements given by Doug Shulman, the
unprecedented fashion in where you released the data ahead of
the inspector general's report with the plan in question that
you've already tipped off the Treasury and the White House
about, and all you do to confirm you lost the most important
documents from the most important person at the center of the
scandal, all you do is ask a question of the IT people?
Mr. Koskinen. We spent----
Mr. Jordan. That's it?
Mr. Koskinen. We spent 6 weeks looking at the hard drives
and the documents for 82 people that----
Mr. Jordan. No, no, no, no.
Mr. Koskinen [continuing]. To produce for you 24,000 more
Lois Lerner emails. That was what we did was----
Mr. Jordan. Who was this person? This one conversation you
had to confirm you lost valuable documents from the central
figure in this entire scandal, who was this one person you
asked that question to? Can you give us a name?
Mr. Koskinen. That would have been Steve Manning, who's the
senior IT guy, and I asked him could we find--were those tapes
available, and he said no, and then we decided what we could do
is what we did do was we looked at all of the emails to and
from Lois Lerner from 80 people and produced for you 24,000
emails.
Mr. Jordan. No, I'm focusing on the words you used.
``Confirmed.''
Mr. Koskinen. ``Confirmed.'' I told you, yes----
Mr. Jordan. ``Confirmed'' was one conversation with one IT
guy that turned out not to be true, and here's the big picture,
your chief counselor, Kate Duvall, knew in February you had
problems with Lois Lerner's emails. You learned in April, and
you didn't tell us until June. So from February to June, you
learned there's big problems, and the only thing you do to
confirm that there are big problems is one question to your IT
guy.
Mr. Koskinen. I knew in April we----
Mr. Jordan. About something where people's fundamental
rights were violated.
Mr. Koskinen. Lot of time to get 24,000 emails for you,
which was, at that time, we thought the most we could do, the
best we could do, we thought. In fact, it was an extraordinary
effort to go back through all of that to get you the additional
24,000 emails, which, by the way, you apparently don't have
much interest in them because they've been----
Mr. Jordan. One conversation, Mr. Chairman. One
conversation with an IT guy, and he writes the U.S. Congress
and tells the American people: We've lost Lois Lerner's emails,
and then one last question if I could, Mr. Koskinen. When did
you learn from TIGTA that they had actually found these tapes
and could recover her emails?
Mr. Koskinen. I haven't learned yet that they could
recover. I learned that we helped them find--they went through
the system and our people helped them find by the early part--
late July, early August they said they thought they had found
the tapes from that time----
Mr. Jordan. Wait, wait, let me--this is an important point,
Mr. Chairman.
So literally a month after you--in July and early August, a
month after you said ``we confirmed that backup tapes no longer
exist,'' TIGTA had the backup tapes?
Mr. Koskinen. TIGTA with our people----
Mr. Jordan. Within a month they got the tapes that you
confirmed didn't exist?
Mr. Koskinen. That's exactly right.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, my goodness.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Chaffetz. Recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. You know, we can--you know sitting here and
listening to all of this, I'm just trying to figure out how do
we move forward. You know, you all been on the list for 25
years. It's a long time. Administration after administration,
and at some point, we need to get off this merry-go-round, and,
you know, one of the things that I've noticed after being here
for 18 years now is that there's a tendency for--I think it was
Mr. Gowdy who said it, or somebody up there, that folks wait
for another administration or another Congress, and then we
just recycle the same problems.
And I guess my question is very simple to each of you: If
you were--if you had a magic wand and you could get this done,
what would you do to get yourselves off the list? I mean, I'm
serious. I mean, what does it take, and what--if you were us,
what would you do to get you off the list, or to have a kind of
accountability that the chairman talked about? Because I got to
agree with him. We're better than this. And we're just going
round and round and round. We're losing hundreds of billions of
dollars. We're wasting a lot of time, and it's very
frustrating, and I just believe--I mean, is it that we are too
big to have accountability? Is it that we are too big to be
able to say, OK. This is how it's supposed to be done and we're
going to do it this way and we're going to do it an effective
and efficient manner?
I mean, you all may feel that the questions are--been
unfair and tough. So I'm going to turn the table, and why don't
you all tell us what you would--what we--if you were us, what
would we have you do so that you can get off the list so that
we can hold you accountable. We're going to start with you, Mr.
MacWilliams, since you have such a wonderful smile.
Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you for your question. First of all,
the point that I would make with respect to the Department of
Energy and to the chairman's comments, is we have made
progress, but the GAO is essentially focusing on half a dozen
large capital projects where we have had repeated problems, and
we still do have problems, and so there's no effort on our part
to claim success on that, and we welcome your oversight and the
oversight of GAO.
What success we have had is in projects below the 750. I
won't dwell on those, but I will point out that in the
Department--in NSA, for example, the last 3 years, we're 7
percent below budget and on time. We've had other large
projects recently such as the national Synchrotron project come
in on budget.
The problems that we have, which are systemic, are in our
large capital projects which tend to be the nuclear projects
which are among the most complex projects in the world.
Therefore, what we're trying to focus on are structural changes
so that they last past someone like me. I've been testifying
before you for a couple of years, and that's why we've tried to
create a much improved ISEB, a new project risk management
committee, because that committee is meant to create
enterprise-wide dialog and challenge by all the project members
from across the programs so that we can avoid future problems
like this and hopefully get to the bottom of the problems that
we have.
The last thing I would just mention, sir, is both of you
talked accountability. That has been a significant issue at the
Department of Energy. When everybody's in charge of a project,
nobody's in charge. And so that's why, as I mentioned earlier,
we--the Secretary has mandated that for every project, we have
to have a defined owner, to the chairman's question, so that
that is the person that is accountable when things don't go
correctly.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, I'm going to yield to you. I
think we have a solution to this issue, and I--and I yield----
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The ranking member and I--Mr.
Cummings and I have chatted, and I think what we would like to
do is to send each of you a letter. We would request that you
would respond within a 30-day period what is your plan? Show us
your game plan and what you need to do to accomplish that plan.
Is that--does anybody have an objection to that? Is that fair?
Mr. MacWilliams. No, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does anybody have an objection to that?
Mr. Koskinen. No.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will you meet that 30-day timeline if we
send you a letter this week? Fair enough. This is--this has
been a long hearing. You've been very patient taking your time
here, but that's what we'll do. We will send a bipartisan
letter. We would ask you to respond within 30 days, show us
your game plan, and then that way I think we can go from here.
We do appreciate your commitment. We appreciate your agencies.
Again, most of the people there, they're good hard-working
patriotic people, but we're failing them, and if we don't
address it and put a plan in place, we will be back here again,
and we don't ever want to do that. So with that, this committee
will stand adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 6:40 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
