- FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY AFTER THE OPM DATA BREACH: HAVE AGENCIES LEARNED THEIR LESSON?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY AFTER THE OPM
DATA BREACH: HAVE AGENCIES LEARNED THEIR LESSON?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 16, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-125

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-915 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         TED LIEU, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       PETER WELCH, Vermont
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Mike Flynn, Counsel
Willie Marx, Clerk
------

Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 16, 2016................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Renee P. Wynn, Chief Information Officer, NASA
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     6
Mr. Jonathan Alboum, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Agriculture
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15
Mr. Robert Klopp, Deputy Commissioner and Chief Information
Officer, Social Security Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

APPENDIX

Statement from Representative Gerald E. Connolly................    44

FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY AFTER THE OPM

DATA BREACH: HAVE AGENCIES LEARNED THEIR LESSON?

----------

Wednesday, November 16, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:19 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hurd, Blum, Chaffetz, Kelly,
Connolly, and Lieu.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology will
come to order.
And, without objection, the chair is authorized to declare
a recess at any time.
Good morning, everyone. In September, the chairman
announced the release of a majority staff report on the data
breaches at the Office of Personnel Management. This committee
spent a year digging into what went wrong at OPM. We looked at
everything from how the hackers got in to what technologies OPM
was buying while responding to the incident. And while we
learned a great deal, there was an unfortunate conclusion that
the damage of this data breach could have been mitigated.
It's impossible to prevent all data breaches, especially
when we are talking about a determined and sophisticated
adversary. But we can deter and mitigate the effects of these
breaches. Some of that, like investigation, attribution, and
prosecution, is outside the agency's control. But other
aspects, like improving cybersecurity protections and
continuous monitoring, are squarely within agencies' CIOs'
control. That is why we need to get into the weeds on
everything from access controls to vulnerability management to
make sure we aren't making it easy for hackers to get access to
our sensitive data.
And this is a conversation that starts with the agency's
CIO. CIOs are the focal point for all things information
technology at every Federal agency, department, office, and
bureau. That is why this subcommittee has worked together to
ensure the continued implementation of FITARA and, more
broadly, making sure that CIOs have the necessary authorities
to finally bring Federal systems into the 21st century.
The House recently passed my bill, the MGT Act, cosponsored
by Mr. Connolly, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings,
ranking member and my friend Ms. Kelly, the majority leader,
the minority whip, and Mr. Lieu from California, which
incentivizes agency CIOs to modernize their agencies' outdated
legacy IT to fiscal responsibility. I urge the Senate to pass
the MGT Act this Congress so that the incoming administration
has the necessary tools to modernize our outdated and insecure
Federal IT. This is a shared responsibility. Congress can't
hold agency CIOs accountable for what's going on in IT if those
CIOs don't have the necessary authority to get the job done. We
need CIOs staying at their posts for longer than the current 2-
year average. If we're going to move the ball forward, we need
Federal CIOs not only with the necessary authorities to make
their vision a reality but who are sticking around long enough
to see it happen. This is why the OPM CIO was such a focus of
the OPM data breach report and its recommendations. We need
empowered, accountable, and competent CIOs, which brings us to
our panel here today.
We need a serious conversation about the role of the
Federal CIOs and information security. The President recently
announced the creation of a Federal CISO, the Chief Information
Security Officer, that will report to the Federal CIO. Should
that be a model for Federal agencies, the CISO reporting to a
CIO, or should the CISO report directly to the head of the
agency? Does the head of an agency need to hear two voices on
questions of IT procurement, computer systems, data storage,
and balancing the needs of the production environment with
those of cybersecurity? This is an open question that this
subcommittee has not yet explored. But I think it is an
important question moving forward as we continue to conduct
oversight of Federal information security policies and
practices.
And, finally, we need to address how these agencies
transition their information technology over to the new
administration. Each agency will have unique challenges. And I
would like to hear from our witnesses how they are going to
facilitate this transition. We are making progress in
information technology and cybersecurity, and I'm committed to
ensuring that we don't backslide on this profound national
security challenge.
Ultimately, cybersecurity is a collaborative effort that is
going to require continuous attention and effort from all
parties to make sure our data is safe.
And I'm glad my partner in crime in this endeavor is the
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Information Technology and my friend, and I'd
now like to recognize her for her opening statement.
Ms. Kelly. Good morning. And thank you, Chairman Hurd, and
welcome back. Thank you for holding this important hearing on
the state of Federal cybersecurity in the wake of the OPM data
breach. And I thank the witnesses for joining us today to
testify. Cybersecurity is a critical concern for both the
public and private sectors, as the recent breaches affecting
millions of people at the Office of Personnel Management and
Yahoo illustrate.
In our investigation of the OPM data breach, we discovered
that a sophisticated nation-state adversary targeted both OPM
and private sector companies performing services for the
government in order to steal sensitive information about
Federal employees. In fact, the OPM breach was achieved using
credentials taken from one of our OPM's contractors. The
minority staff memorandum concluded that Federal cybersecurity
is intertwined with government contractors and that cyber
requirements for government contractors are inadequate. In the
past 2 years, Congress passed and President Obama signed into
law the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014,
known as FISMA, and the Federal Cybersecurity Enhancement Act
of 2015 known as the FCEA. These laws create stringent
standards for agency information security programs and will
implement innovative technology, such as the EINSTEIN Federal
detection and intrusion prevention system, as well as
multifactor authentication--losing my words. Congress has a
responsibility to ensure that agencies are complying with these
enacted pieces of legislation.
This past July, the committee sent bipartisan letters to
the 24 CFO Act agencies requesting information on FISMA and
FISMA compliance and FCEA implementation progress. We are here
today to discuss agency compliance with FISMA and agency
progress on the upcoming December 2016 deadline for FCEA
implementation.
I understand that the Office of Management and Budget
recently issued a report on FISMA-required independent
evaluations of agency information security systems for fiscal
year 2015. This report shows a decline in agency FISMA scores
over the past year for our three witnesses' agencies here
today. Each agency's independent evaluation of their
information security programs highlights the strength of their
individual programs and areas that can use improvement. One of
the key aspects of FISMA is moving from a check-the-box
mentality of cybersecurity to an approach of continuous
monitoring and reporting. I would like to hear from our
witnesses as to how Congress can help them achieve that goal. I
would like to hear if any challenges are being encountered in
the implementation of FCEA-required programs and practices.
I want to again thank our witnesses for their testimony
today. Effective Federal cybersecurity is possible through
cooperation between agencies and Congress. I look forward to
having a discussion on how we can better work together to
develop policies that will secure not only agency systems but
private sector systems as well.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've long said that Federal
Government needs to lead by example when it comes to improving
our national cybersecurity. And I'm proud of this step we've
taken in this subcommittee toward this goal. But it's clear
that we have much more work ahead. And I look forward to
continuing our work together in Congress.
Mr. Hurd. I do too. I'd like to thank the ranking member.
I'm going to hold the record open for 5 legislative days
for any members who would like to submit a written statement.
I'd now like to recognize our panel of witnesses. I'm
pleased to welcome Ms. Renee Wynn, chief information officer at
NASA; Mr. Jonathan Alboum, chief information officer at the
U.S. Department of Agriculture--thank you for being here, sir--
and Mr. Robert Klopp, deputy commissioner and chief information
officer at the Social Security Administration. Welcome to you
all.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. So please rise and raise your
right hands. Raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow ample time for discussion, please limit
your testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written record will be
made part of our record.
And now I'd like to recognize Ms. Wynn for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF RENEE P. WYNN

Ms. Wynn. Good morning. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member
Kelly, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for allowing
me today to appear before you to address NASA's efforts to
effectively manage and protect our information technology
resources. Like other Federal agencies, malicious threats to
NASA's networks are constantly evolving, which means our work
is never done. Thus, I want to reassure you today that IT is a
top priority at NASA. As NASA's chief information officer, my
office works to ensure that NASA's IT systems are safeguarded
from attack, assessed against stringent Federal and agency
security requirements, and appropriately monitored for
compromise. Each day, thousands of NASA personnel, contractors,
academics, and members of the public access part of NASA's IT
infrastructure, a complex array of information systems
geographically dispersed. This infrastructure plays a critical
role in every aspect of NASA's mission, from transforming the
way we fly, to controlling spacecraft, to processing scientific
data.
Unfortunately, there is no single approach or tool that can
predict, counter, and mitigate the wide range of attacks that
threaten networks. NASA works constantly to identify and
counter attacks by implementing proactive and adaptable
security measures. We also work closely with the Department of
Homeland Security and other Federal agencies to implement new
technologies and share best security practices, partnerships
which have improved NASA's security posture. For example, under
FISMA metrics, NASA has made improvements in our anti-phishing,
malware, and network defense. We have significantly reduced our
cybersecurity risk as measured by the Department of Homeland
Security's cyber hygiene report. NASA now has a permanent chief
information security officer, or CISO, who works on operational
IT security and compliance matters with all of NASA Center
CISOs, as well as the Federal chief information security
officers.
Like all agencies, NASA is adjusting to new laws and
directives designed to improve the entire Federal Government's
IT security posture. While NASA is making progress in some
security metrics, much work remains. As we move forward and
find new ways to work across NASA, our metrics may
unfortunately dip as we uncover and we work to resolve new
issues. However, as new technologies come online and culture
issues are resolved, we expect to see improved metrics in 2017.
Through the implementation of our business services
assessment, or BSA, we took a hard look at how we manage IT.
This BSA outlined a series of steps the agency should take and
is taking to optimize and protect our IT assets. The BSA
results will ensure that IT is seen as a strategic agency
resource establishing clear direction for NASA's CIO to approve
the agency's IT spend plan for non-highly specialized and
highly specialized IT. In my personal opinion, this BSA is a
gift which says NASA supports you as the CIO, and we do want
you to transform the way NASA manages IT.
These are big steps forward for NASA, and NASA should be
commended for taking the necessary steps to improve. We know
there still is a lot of work to do. Thus, I want to end my
remarks by assuring you that protecting and evolving NASA's IT
infrastructure is and will remain an agency priority. We look
forward to working with Congress, the Government Accountability
Office, the NASA inspector general, and other Federal
stakeholders to effectively implement a restructured and
strengthened IT security program at NASA.
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Wynn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you for your remarks, Ms. Wynn. And thanks
for being here again.
Mr. Alboum, you're recognized now for 5 minutes for your
opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN ALBOUM

Mr. Alboum. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for your diligent work
on cybersecurity and the IT scorecard. I appreciate having this
opportunity to share USDA's efforts to strengthen its
cybersecurity posture over the last few years.
The Department of Agriculture touches the lives of all
Americans. Protecting USDA customer, partner, and employee data
is a top priority for Secretary Vilsack and me. Together, we
work across USDA to ensure we have the right tools and culture
as new threats emerge. In terms of cybersecurity tools, I'm
pleased to tell the committee that USDA has successfully
completed our initial implementation of EINSTEIN 3A. USDA
employs a risk-based approach to cybersecurity, prioritizing
resources where they will have the most significant impact.
EINSTEIN is key to this approach. Over the coming weeks, we
will continue to work with DHS to bring additional EINSTEIN
capabilities online. And we fully expect to meet all of the
December deadlines.
I'm also proud to share that USDA is one of the leading
agencies participating in the DHS continuous diagnostic and
mitigation program, also known as CDM. I've made this a
priority for the Department. We are currently implementing the
capabilities of phase 1, which gives us increased insight into
what is on our network. This improved visibility helps us to
prioritize future modernization initiatives and protect the
information of the people we serve. EINSTEIN and CDM, combined
with our security operation center, or SOC, position USDA to
proactively detect, prevent, and mitigate cyber attacks. The
USDA SOC is starting to use big data technologies to analyze
trends and anomalies by correlating security data from multiple
sources. We have partnered with the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, DARPA, to pilot many of these tools. As pilots
like these demonstrate positive results, USDA will explore the
potential for a departmentwide rollout.
Additionally, my team routinely conducts penetration
testing assessments to identify security vulnerabilities in our
systems. These findings are used to develop plans to remediate
risk and improve system security.
USDA also created a list of high-value assets and has
worked with DHS to perform additional penetration testing
assessments of these systems over the past year.
Effective cybersecurity is as much about education and
culture as it is about having the right tools in place.
Secretary Vilsack strongly supports my office in ensuring that
USDA senior executives and employees understand their daily
role in preserving the Department's reputation as a trusted
government partner.
In the past year, I created scorecard to build awareness of
the Department's cybersecurity posture. Every 2 weeks,
component agency heads are provided with a status of key
cybersecurity hygiene factors for their organizations. This
increased insight gives USDA officials the information they
need to balance programmatic requirements with continuous
improvements in cybersecurity. For example, this approach
supported our drive to increase the usage of personal identity
verification, or PIV, cards across the department. Over the
past 16 months, we increased our usage rate from 15 percent to
over 92 percent for nonprivileged users and from 6 percent to
over 96 percent for privileged users.
USDA employees face an increasing number of malicious
emails and social engineering cyber attacks like phishing.
Through a recent anti-phishing campaign, we recognized that
additional safeguards, like email subject-line warning
messages, were needed to render phishing attacks less
effective. As a result of these activities, USDA achieved a
greater than 50 percent reduction in the click rate of
simulated phishing attempts. Further, my team and I fully
support the push for additional measures to improve information
sharing across government to enhance cybersecurity readiness
and response. In May 2016, USDA became the first department to
develop and successfully test new procedures required by the
Federal Cybersecurity Enhancement Act for notifying Congress
within 7 days of a major incident.
As threats continue to proliferate and to adapt to existing
defenses, USDA, like all government agencies, will need
appropriate resources to employ emerging technologies and new
approaches to mitigate these risks. For example, the
Department's fiscal year 2017 budget included a requested
increase of $10 million to enhance USDA cybersecurity
capabilities. It is critically important that we discuss these
issues and related impacts.
So, again, I want to thank you for holding this hearing to
shed light on this important topic. I'm grateful for the
opportunity to share information about our progress in
strengthening USDA's cybersecurity program. USDA is committed
to an open and continuous dialogue with Congress about new
opportunities to improve our defenses. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Alboum follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Klopp, you're on the clock for 5 minutes. We welcome
your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT KLOPP

Mr. Klopp. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hurd and
Ranking Member Kelly.
Earlier I provided a status update in my written testimony,
which I won't repeat here. But I would like to share a couple
of updates, provide a review of our Department of Homeland
Security reporting, and share some thoughts tied to the OPM
breach report.
First regarding the status of our EINSTEIN implementation,
the agency completed phase 3 of this program in March of this
year. And it's been in production since then. So we were early.
Next, regarding our implementation CDM, which has been
mentioned here, we're on schedule to deploy phase one of that
in December. So we're on track there as well.
Now, I want to talk a little bit about some of the ongoing
Department of Homeland Security reporting. What we see is sort
of a continuous process of discovery and remediation. DHS has
come onsite twice to evaluate high-value assets. This resulted
in 16 recommendations. They called out two critical items, one
of which was a vulnerability. Eight of these items are
resolved, including both critical items. Five recommendations
are complete but require sort of continuous improvement. Two
are in progress and were resolved in this fiscal year. And one
around network segmentation is actually a very large project
which we'll begin in fiscal year 2017.
As you may know, the DHS scans the agency weekly, producing
cyber hygiene reports. I'm happy to report that it found no
critical vulnerabilities since the inception of this program.
DHS also produces monthly vulnerability reports. This
process sort of continuously reports that we score in the top
three, with the smallest number of vulnerabilities of any
reporting agency.
Proactively the agency runs daily inhouse penetration tests
managed through an automated system. In 2016, we identified
1,872 vulnerabilities and remediated them on the average of
every 22 days.
The agency participates in an annual financial statement
audit. In fiscal year 2015, auditors found no material
weaknesses, one significant deficiency, and produced 59
findings and recommendations. Since these findings, we have
implemented automated support to request new access to systems
to schedule the removal of access for departing staff and
progressed in all but one of the 59 findings.
Most importantly, I'm happy to report that the agency has
no major incidents to report to date.
Regarding the OPM breach report, we took this report very
seriously. In the interest of time, let me sort of focus on
what we think is the most far reaching of the 10
recommendations. That was recommendation No. 2 regarding the
deployment of a zero-trust model. I'd like to give you sort of
an example of our intention and direction on that. We are
implementing now a new zero-trust capability for systems
administrators where access is revoked and renewed with each
new administrative task. These administrators don't get any
permanent passwords. As you may know, systems administrators
hold the keys to the kingdom. By implementing a zero-trust
model for sys admins, first, we expect to significantly upgrade
our posture.
I think all of the, you know, witnesses here are testifying
about the increased threat of cyber attack. It's not a
surprise. And some are suggesting that we need to take a more
aggressive stance as a government with regard to that. But I
think our IT systems are sort of the equivalent of B-52s:
dependable, but outdated and vulnerable. We appreciate this
committee's awareness of the need for IT modernization and
appreciate even more the bipartisan measure, H.R. 6004, which
you mentioned. It's a really important step. But H.R. 6004 is
an unfunded vehicle. And what we need is funding. To defend our
IT assets to the standard you and the public expect, we need
the cyber equivalent of defense spending. And we need a fully
funded investment in IT modernization.
So I'd like to thank you for your support. And now I'm
happy to take any questions you might have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Klopp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
And I'll recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wynn, when did you start in your position?
Ms. Wynn. I started with NASA on July 13 in 2015. And I
became the chief--I started as the deputy CIO, and I became the
chief information officer at the end of September of 2015.
Mr. Hurd. Gotcha. So if my math is correct, about a year? A
little bit under?
Ms. Wynn. Just slightly over a year, going toward 14
months.
Mr. Hurd. So I guess we're in November now.
There's been plenty of reports about how, over the summer,
NASA's--the Agency Consolidated End-user Service, or do you
call it ACES--yeah--was operating under a conditional authority
to operate since July 24. My understanding is that you declined
to sign off on the authority to operate for ACES because of a
difference of opinion between your office and the contractor
operating the system. That--the issue was over patching, it
seems like. Now, I think this is a--actually a good news story,
right? Because you obviously felt you had the authorities to do
those kinds of things, and you're using your technical
judgement.
Can you walk us through the thought process during that
decision?
Ms. Wynn. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield just for a second?
Mr. Hurd. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. Forgive me, but I have a hearing upstairs,
but I didn't want to miss this. I just ask unanimous consent my
opening statement be entered into the record. Forgive me, I've
got to go back upstairs to another hearing on the census. But
someday hopefully the good Lord will give me the gift of
bilocation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Without objection. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Wynn.
Ms. Wynn. NASA will get to work on that bilocation.
Yes. So, yes, the authority to operate for our end-user
services, we have several of them. It's a very complex set of
systems. The one in particular had to do with the client-based
devices that we use, computers and that. And it was presented
to me on July 25. The presentation is on the security risks and
how those risks were being--to be mitigated. And upon that, I
asked if they can look me in the eye and say free and clearly
they would recommend signature. And on that date, they
presented to me the package as we usually go through. And at
that point, both on the operational side as well as the
gentleman who was brought in for security to serve as the
acting acting CISO as our acting CISO was on vacation, on the
operational side recommended--said that they could not
recommend to me signature because we had a discrepancy on
numbers of devices as well as the status of the patches and how
quickly they were being deployed and the status of that
deployment. So it was both a timing and an end effort. And the
gentleman who was acting as the acting acting CISO for me at
the time said that he also could not agree to--could not
recommend signature for the authority to operate. And so I
asked a series of questions. What does that really mean? And in
this instance, we didn't have enough data to make a sufficient
risk determination on whether the ATO should be signed or not.
And so, at that point, I said that I would not sign and that
work needed to be done on the side of both NASA as well as HPES
to get the work done. By that Friday--so this was a Monday--by
that Friday, I had signed the authority to operate because we
were able to see and understand the risks that I would be
signing off on.
Mr. Hurd. So did that give anyone at NASA heartburn? Did
you receive any flack for not signing off on an ATO? Because if
I remember correctly, the news coverage at the time--I think
the term was ``unprecedented step.'' And I imagine that a CIO
letting a major system authorization to operate expire turned
some heads.
Ms. Wynn. Yes, Chairman, it did turn some heads. So the
actions rate when one does this action, news of this
significance would spread fast. So I made sure that the chief
information security officers around our centers, as well as
our chief information officers around the centers, were aware
of my decision. And then my next step was to inform the
Administrator and the Deputy Administrator of the action that I
had taken, as well as letting our press office know, as well we
figured that there would be--this would leak out and become
information and headlines. And so I was supported by everybody
for making this decision. And I would do it again. I wish that
we hadn't ever reached that point. And so we worked on some
prevention efforts. HPES has definitely stepped up to the plate
in terms of working with us. And they and my team have actually
responded very positively that the authorities to operate, as
you said, are not to be rubber-stamped. If my signature's on
that and there had been a breach the next day, then it would be
very obvious that I would not have done the job that I was
asked to do on behalf of the NASA as well as the Federal
Government.
Mr. Hurd. Well, I'd like to commend you on making a tough
decision. And these are the kinds of decisions that we want to
see more CIOs making. That's the whole reason we're empowering
you to make these types of decisions.
So I'd like to answer a procurement question a little here.
And so if a system doesn't get the approved ATO, how does that
work? You know, does that--do you have the authority to change,
move? Does that void the contract? How does that--can you give
me some insight onto that process?
Ms. Wynn. NASA's procurement for an information system has
the security requirements--the Federal security requirements in
that I am--we would need to work on procurement clauses, and I
think these would need to be broad Federal Government clauses,
in terms of ramifications of an authority to operate and what
would happen after that. The CIO, in concert with the rest of
the agency, would need to be able to work out whether that
system needed to be shut down and modernized or upgraded or--
because not every system is the same. Others are not in a clean
position to say, ``Okay, we just can't do this anymore,'' and
go that. So we would need some flexibilities to make those
determinations. But I believe that procurement clauses would
need to be added for the benefit of the Federal Government.
Mr. Hurd. So am I understanding your statement correctly,
you would like to have that authority?
Ms. Wynn. I would like to have that authority.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Alboum, do you have any opinions on this
topic on ATOs and budget authorities and things?
Mr. Alboum. Sure. Thank you, sir. So, in the year or so
that I've been the USDA CIO, I have not been in a situation
where I've had to disapprove an ATO or not sign. However,
similar to Ms. Wynn, I see within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture the support to make the right decisions. We have an
enterprise IT board that we're able--that is composed of our
Under Secretaries, Chairman, the Deputy Secretary, where we can
bring challenging IT decisions before that board and have a
robust conversation. So we have done that. Not on an ATO,
however.
On the point regarding procurements, having that contract
language, I think, would be very good, and I agree that it
would need to be something that's government-wide. We'd have to
understand how that works, as oftentimes, with the
establishment of an ATO, there's a component that is--the
contractor's required to do. There's a component that the
Federal staff has to do. So having good very clear roles and
responsibilities and very clear timelines would be critical.
Procurement language--contract language would definitely help.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Klopp, any opinions on this?
Mr. Klopp. Actually, we had a very similar situation to the
NASA situation where we had a very large contractor who was
running our call center and how--was not compliant. We took a
little bit different approach, which was that we revoked the
permanent ATO and provided them with a provisional ATO that
extended for 90 days, and then continued to extend that and put
pressure on them threatening the unprecedented move that Renee
went to, but never actually pulling the trigger on it. In the
end, it took us about a year to get that system completely
compliant. But the pressure and threat of pulling the ATO is
what allowed us to do it. So I would probably--I mean, I would
certainly agree if we were able to have the kind of--some sort
of legal wording in there that forced venders to do this as one
more lever on top of them, that would be really valuable for
us.
Mr. Hurd. Because I would even take it a step further and,
you know, in the MGT Bill, when we get that passed the Senate--
Senate, I hope you're listening--this is an opportunity--
because if you had to change, if you had to move in a different
direction, I would consider that savings. All right? That is,
if some project had to stop, I would consider that savings and
would be able to go into the working capital fund that you
would continue to have access to for 3 years, right? So that is
an additional tool so that you're not having to run against the
clock. And I think what most people don't recognize is that
your systems, your networks, are so big and there's so many
devices on it that changing a system in the course of a year is
next to impossible. And that's why you need the additional
flexibilities with those resources. And so that would be the
next logical continuation of this topic.
Ms. Wynn, the ACES, is it currently operating on a
conditional or has it gotten a standard ATO?
Ms. Wynn. Our ACES contract is on an ATO that, like Rob was
talking about, that's running on an 18-month timeframe. So--and
we've got regular meetings on both the ATO as well as making
sure that our teams, NASA and HPES, are working together to
ensure that the next ATO is either longer or has the right
timeframe for checks and balances.
Mr. Hurd. And, Mr. Alboum, am I to infer from your
statements that USDA does not currently have any systems
operating without an ATO?
Mr. Alboum. No. That's not correct. There are some systems
that don't have an ATO. USDA's employed an ongoing assessment
process. And we assess one-third of all of the controls of each
system--we have 329 systems--annually. So it is possible,
during the assessment of those controls, we will find something
that requires us to revoke an ATO and work with an agency to
get back into compliance. So the number of systems we have and
the number of systems that have a valid ATO is in flux because
of this process. So, again, to your point, I think it's a good
thing if we find something that says we're not going to have an
ATO for this system right now. We're going to work to correct
it.
Mr. Hurd. Gotcha. Thank you.
I'd like to now recognize Ms. Kelly for her lines of
questioning.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I wanted to dig a little deeper into the cyber requirements
for government contractors. In my opening statement, I
mentioned that the minority staff of this committee found that
Federal cybersecurity is intertwined with government
contractors and that cyber requirements for government
contractors are inadequate. So, in response, OPM has
strengthened its contracting requirements by heightening
incidence reporting and access to contractors' systems.
Ms. Wynn, would you agree that having increased incident
reporting requirements and access to contractor systems will
enhance Federal cybersecurity? And if you agree, how so?
Ms. Wynn. Congresswoman, the answer is yes.
Ms. Kelly. And do you have similar requirements for
contractors at NASA?
Ms. Wynn. We have the--a lot of the standard clauses
required to pass along the Federal requirements onto those
contractors, and we work to enforce those as well.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. And has NASA taken any other measures
regarding cybersecurity in the wake of the OPM breach?
Ms. Wynn. Yes, we have. We've done a couple of efforts. One
is, is that, at NASA, given some of the sensitive work that we
do and intellectual property that we have, we are definitely a
target for hackers. And so we've got a number of--not getting
too technical, but we've got air gap systems. We take a look at
what our high-value assets are. In fact, we're working right
now to trim the list of high-value assets so that it's a single
list for the agency, instead of one from a cyber perspective
and another for safety. Because safety and cyber go hand in
glove for NASA, as they would probably for any Federal agency.
And we--with our new Federal CISO, we're also taking a hard
look--not Federal CISO. She works NASA. Sorry. She's taking a
hard look at our processes and procedures and making sure that
we are in fact doing the best that we can do with tools and
bringing in assistance from other Federal agencies.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. And our other witnesses, have your
agencies done anything to enhance the cybersecurity--cyber
requirements for contractors in response to the breach?
Mr. Alboum. Yeah. So we have an incident response policy as
USDA that contractors are required to follow if they're to lose
personally identifiable information or sensitive but
unclassified kinds of information. So that is something that
USDA contractors are required to follow.
Mr. Klopp. Yeah, I would say sort of two things. One is
SSA's really a little bit different than most other agencies in
that 75 percent of the work we do in the agency is done with
Feds instead of with contractors. So it's a little bit less of
a problem for us. But it's--the problem is still there.
I would say two things that we've done that are critically
important. One is we've just upgraded the sort of automated
support we have for managing contractors and--which means that
it makes it--there's a more automated mechanism for us to make
sure that when a contractor rotates out, that we instantly take
away all access they have to the systems. That is really
significant. We were having problems where people would leave,
the contractor wouldn't notify us, and they might have retained
access for some period of time. So I think we've got that
fixed.
The second thing I would go back to is this sort of, you
know, zero-trust rule. What we're doing now is, by implementing
this new system that allows systems administrators to really
have to renew a password every time they take on a task, it
basically allows us to give administrative rights to
contractors knowing that those rights will disappear within a
day.
Ms. Kelly. Is there a breadth or are there a breadth of
contractors that you can use? Or is it the same people all the
time, the same contractors? Or do you have a lot of options, do
you feel?
Mr. Klopp. Well, I mean, I think that there are, you know,
what we refer to affectionately as the ``cartel.'' Right? So
there's a bunch of big ones. But one of the things I think is
really an exciting new trend going on that was sort of driven
by the GSA 18F folks and by the U.S. Digital Services folks is
the idea of allowing us access through contracting vehicles to
smaller, more niche contracting agencies that have a really
different kind of a profile and a different attitude as well.
And so those things will, I think, improve the quality of some
of the contractors we get at the cost of having some
administrative issues because we'll be dealing with more
companies.
Ms. Kelly. Do you have any response?
Ms. Wynn. Yeah. So NASA does have a lot of contractors, and
we have a lot of partnerships, different types of partnerships,
with the private sector as well as academics and a lot of work
with the public. And so we use some of the bigger contractors.
We use some of the smaller contractors. We try to make sure
that we give a lot of opportunities to our small businesses.
So, on the backside of that, it means you're going to have to
have a lot of smart folks to be integrators, either whether
it's within the contracting community integration and ensuring
that they're collaborating and cooperating. The other side is
they bring systems to the table as well. And so you also have
to make sure that you've got really good systems integration.
And so NASA is pretty accustomed to systems integration. And so
for us to have a whole breadth of contractors and their
capabilities and what they work on allows us to then be in a
pretty good position in terms of managing those differences.
Because every time you add a contract, you had overhead and
responsibility on the Federal Government side. And you've got
to be good at that for that to be--to work for you.
Ms. Kelly. Any comment? It's up to you. You don't have to.
Mr. Alboum. No. Sure. I think what's been said is very
accurate. The government is going to rely on contractors to do
particular tasks and support work. And the idea of having
competition and having healthy competition between companies is
the way we want USDA to operate. We don't want to be locked
into vendors. The idea that some venders come into the
government, and they feel, ``Well, they'll always be here,''
we're working very hard to change that. That sort of mentality
breeds the opportunity for people to feel--sometimes the
contractors to feel like they are employees and to take
liberties or to maybe think, ``Well, these rules don't apply to
us.'' So we want to make sure that all of our venders that we
rely on and have good relationships with recognize that they're
there to do a particular job, that we will re-compete that work
as appropriate, and there are no guarantees that they will
remain in position to continue to do that work if they don't do
a good job, if we don't think that they're following
appropriate security protocols, they don't respect the
environment that they're operating within.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And now I'd like to recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Iowa, Mr. Blum, for his remarks and questions.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Hurd.
I'd like to welcome the witnesses today. Thank you very
much for being here, imparting your wisdom on us. I'd like to
talk specifically about the Social Security system, Mr.--it's
Klopp, correct? The Disability Case Processing System. I
understand, in 2008, we undertook a very large project to
consolidate I think it was 54 fragmented custom systems, which
we see a lot of this across government, and this is good to get
rid of these customized fragmented systems into one system. I
also understand we've spent, to date, over $400 million on this
project. I'm from Iowa. And in Iowa, $400 million is a lot of
money.
So, first of all, Mr. Klopp, I'd like to have you give me
an update on the status of this effort. Where are we at?
Mr. Klopp. Sure. So, in about 2010, we made the decision
that this project was, we'll say, too big for the--our IT staff
to execute. And so we did a competitive bid and outsourced the
development of this system to Lockheed Martin and their partner
MicroPact. They worked on this for several years. About the
time I came in, it became clear to me that this was off track
pretty badly. They had already spent about $300 million.
Mr. Blum. I'm sorry to interrupt. Just in your professional
estimation, how can it be off track when we're talking about
that kind of money?
Mr. Klopp. Yeah, you know, it's a great--it's a good
question. I think how it gets off track is--is, in this
particular case, I think that they just were off track from the
beginning. I think the way they were trying to solve the
problem fundamentally was broken. And, look, I mean, I'll be
really clear. I think that for this to have gone as far as it
did is a gigantic execution problem with our contractors and
also a problem on oversight. We should never have let it go so
far before we stopped it. I came in as CTO. Originally, I took
a look at the architecture, suggested some----
Mr. Blum. But if I could ask, what happened to the previous
CEO--CIO?
Mr. Klopp. The previous----
Mr. Blum. I assume they were terminated----
Mr. Klopp. No.
Mr. Blum. --since it was off track?
Mr. Klopp. No. The previous CIO was not terminated. I think
that there was some shuffling around within our oversight group
as people were sort of slapped for not overseeing this, right.
You know, I mean, to be honest, there's a variety of places
where oversight might have come from, and I think there was
failure across the board there. So the previous CIO did not--
was not fired as a result of this failure, but----
Mr. Blum. Was he promoted?
Mr. Klopp. No.
Mr. Blum. Do you know if he was given--was he given a
bonus?
Mr. Klopp. No longer at the agency. Yeah, I don't know
about that. That all happened before I came. So all I can say
is, you know, with that regard, is I came in, saw it was off
track, established some very objective engineering-level
criteria to be able to demonstrate that the software that was
being built was fundamentally broken. When in fact it was
proven it was fundamentally broken, we shut the project down.
We were still left with the problem that you identified, which
is we had 54 disparate systems that ran on green screens that
was just--it was just terrible. So, in October, we started a
new project, which we called DCPS2, extremely modern, deployed
in the cloud----
Mr. Blum. October what year are we talking about?
Mr. Klopp. Last year.
Mr. Blum. Just last year.
Mr. Klopp. Yeah, or a year ago in October. Yeah. So we've
been at it for a little over a year.
Mr. Blum. So this started in 2008, and in 2015, we started
over after 7 years.
Mr. Klopp. That's correct.
Mr. Blum. And how many hundreds of millions were spent,
would you estimate?
Mr. Klopp. I believe that we spend $340 million up to the
point that we shut it down.
Mr. Blum. That's breathtaking.
Mr. Klopp. Yeah, I don't disagree. Yep.
Mr. Blum. I'm sorry. Continue. What is the status?
Mr. Klopp. So the new system is now moving along at a, you
know, proper pace. Currently, our run rate is about $25 million
a year. So far less than these kinds of numbers that you heard
before. We will deploy our first production release to the
DDSes in December. So there will actually be cases running
through this thing. So we're well past all of this, is it going
to work; is it not going to work? That kind of stuff. And we
believe that we're on the right path. And in fact, what we
really believe is that--that we're--we're demonstrating, I
think, in a really profound way that using the kind of modern
software development techniques and cloud infrastructure that
we would hope to be able to use over and over and over again if
Chairman Hurd's bill gets through everybody, I think that this
proves that we can modernize. And the cost of modernization is
a fraction of these hundred million dollar projects. We will
complete this project for significantly less than the money
that was burnt last time.
Mr. Blum. When's your estimation of when it will be
complete?
Mr. Klopp. You know, that's an interesting question. One of
the odd things about agile software development, which is what
we do these days, is that really we view these things not as
projects anymore but as products. And like any product, we
could continuously improve the product. As technology changes
we would just try to incorporate those changes. And so the way
we look at it is more of a question of, is the $25 million a
year run rate that we spend on this, is it worth spending
another $25 million next year for the enhancements that we can
see in the backlog? So we view these--this thing as a product
development, not as a project that will have an end.
Mr. Blum. I'm from the private sector, and one thing that's
very frustrating is, in Washington, D.C., there seems to be no
penalty for failure. In fact, the answer usually to failure is:
Let's spend more money. We're not spending enough of the
taxpayer money.
And the money that we have wasted prior to you coming to
the agency is absolutely stunning. It's breathtaking. This is
what people are tired of. Is there a phase 1 document done on
the design of the system that people signed off on, Lockheed--
your contractor signs off on, people in government sign off on
and say, ``This is what we want built,'' and everyone agrees to
it? Is there a document that's created before the first piece
of code is programmed?
Mr. Klopp. Yeah. So I believe the first time through, there
was a detailed description of what needed to be built. I
wouldn't call that an architecture document. The architecture
and execution of building around those requirements was under
the control of the contractors. So what we did is very clearly
specified what we wanted them to build. And then there was an
execution problem in actually getting that built.
Mr. Blum. We need accountability. Either the contractors
made a mistake and we shouldn't pay them, which would happen in
the private sector, or the government officials who signed off
in the agency made a mistake and they should be terminated. One
or the other needs to be accountability, as I would think you
would agree.
Mr. Klopp. Yeah. So I would agree that there should be some
accountability. The contract with Lockheed Martin and MicroPact
was terminated. That was probably the best that we could do. I
guess I will say, in the defense of the Federal workers that
have to be responsible for this, is it's sort of tough if you--
the program basically punishes them for failure but doesn't
really reward them much for success.
Mr. Blum. And it's not the Federal workers that are the
problem. It's the people at the very top typically or the
contractors. One or the other.
But do you have a private sector background, by the way?
Mr. Klopp. Yeah. I came just a couple years ago just to try
to help out for a few years.
Mr. Blum. Very good. Very good. Best of luck to you, and
we'll be checking back in to see how the progress is. Thank you
for your testimony.
I'm over my time, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Before I go to Ms. Kelly, I'd like to ask a
followup question on that, Mr. Klopp. Look, you're considered a
political appointee, correct?
Mr. Klopp. I am, yes.
Mr. Hurd. So how do we prevent--you know, so $340 million
was wasted. How do we prevent the DCPS from getting off the
rails in a transition? Is that a fair question?
Mr. Klopp. I think it is a fair question.
Mr. Hurd. And, again, I don't know--either way, I don't
know what the status is, you know, of the next administration
and things like that. But if you're not going to be there to
oversee it, how do we prevent this from--how do we prevent this
from going off the rails?
Mr. Klopp. I mean, I think it's a--I think it's a very fair
question. I think one of the weirdest things for me as someone
from the commercial world is the whole idea that the entire
executive staff of not just the agency but the government is
now about to transition out and transition in. There's no
precedent for that in the commercial world.
What I will say is that, when I came in 2 years ago, I knew
that I had a 2-year time limit. And so, from the very
beginning, I started building an organization that was going to
be capable of continuing on after I left. I've completely re-
orged the system's organization. I've handpicked the people
that report to me. I've handpicked the person that's running
the DCPS project. And I'll actually tell you that I have no--
I'm really--especially with regard to DCPS, I actually have no
worries whatsoever about the continuing success of that
project. The bigger idea of how to modernize the whole of SSA's
IT organization I think is a much bigger challenge and has some
cultural impacts. And I'm actually confident that we're going
to do--that the people behind me are going to carry on and
modernize that organization. But I'm leaving them with a much,
much bigger job than the guy that's running DCPS.
Mr. Hurd. So are there already plans in place to have a 2-
week handover, 2-day handover, 2-hour handover? You know, what
planning is ongoing to ensure a replacement is----
Mr. Klopp. In the case of DCPS, I've been actually handing
it over from the day I started, really. So that's why I said
it--you know, you could have brought John Garrigues, the guy
who is running that project from a technical perspective in and
replaced me in this chair, and you would not have noticed any
drop in quality. And I think that you're going to see this same
thing when you hold hearings, you know, 3 months, 6 months from
now when I'm gone. I think you're going to see the people that
I've handpicked behind are switched on. They understand what's
going on. I mean, the Federal employees in the IT world, I
think, are much more qualified than they normally get credit
for.
Mr. Hurd. Are you interested in staying?
Your comments are being recorded. We'll let you think about
that and come back to you.
Ms. Kelly, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. I want to thank you, Mr. Klopp, for your
thoughtfulness and not thinking, you know, who you work for but
thinking about the American people and the industry and what
will be a lasting effect instead of a short-term effect. So
thank you for that.
In its fiscal year 2015 FISMA report to Congress, OMB
reported a decline in FISMA compliance scores for our witnesses
here today compared to their scores in fiscal year 2014. Does
that mean that the state of cybersecurity's going in the wrong
direction? No. The report caveats these results saying that a
new scoring methodology has contributed to this decline in
scores. In other words, you can't compare test results from
fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2014 because the tests changed,
and they got harder. So these results would not show the
situation getting worse.
What they do show, Social Security, let's turn to you, the
IG's audit made the significant conclusion about the choices
you have made. The IG said, and I quote, ``SSA focused its
limited resources on higher risk weaknesses and therefore was
unable to implement corrective action for all aspects of their
prior year's deficiencies.''
Now, Mr. Klopp, that sounds to me like the IG believes you
made rational choices. You prioritized which problems you were
going to address with the funds available to you. But you
didn't have enough funding to correct all the vulnerabilities
in the agency's IT systems. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Klopp. I do agree with that. We have spent a lot of
time trying to look and see what we need to do in order to be
more effective at cyber specifically. And what we find is
that--that, you know, the people are smart and capable. The way
we prioritize taking things on are the way you would expect us
to, picking off the high-value, you know, most significant
vulnerabilities first. And the problem is that the--as we
talked about in all of our--everybody's opening remarks, the
threat level continues to raise and the funding that we have
available to us in order to address that threat doesn't
increase with the threat. In the case of Social Security, the
funding available to IT is down 30 percent in the last 3 or 4
years. So we're trying to do more with less.
I think that, as I mentioned earlier, of the 59 findings
from the IG audit, we were able to make progress in 58 of them.
Frankly, the 59th one, we very explicitly elected to not make
progress on. So it wasn't that we couldn't. But more funding
would certainly help.
Ms. Kelly. With the lack of funding, how did you prioritize
which problems to solve first? Did you consider the sensitivity
of the PII that Social Security collects as one factor? Did you
consider the severity of the weaknesses in your cybersecurity?
How did you decide?
Mr. Klopp. You know, I mean, I think that there's a couple
of things we do. One is that we focus on sort of multilayered
defense. And so when we saw vulnerabilities that had to do with
the penetrating from the outside, those all become the highest
priority things. When we find vulnerabilities on the inside
that, if someone could get into, we focused on those high-
priority items. You know, I'm not exactly sure--and I don't
think the IG was very specific--I said in my oral testimony
that we are--you know, the Department of Homeland Security does
an audit of our outside penetration tests, and they've never
found a critical vulnerability there and that, in the inside,
when they look at those vulnerabilities, that we're
consistently rated as being the second or third best as far as
the least number of vulnerabilities. I mean, we have a very
vibrant relationship with IG. And we actually think that there
is a discrepancy between the way they evaluate us and the way
Homeland Security evaluates us, probably a bigger discrepancy
than in some other agencies. But it's okay. It just means that
we--you know, everybody had that college professor that gave
out tougher grades than other people, right? So we--we
appreciate IG's tough remarks. But we probably would disagree
that we prioritize wrong.
Ms. Kelly. Now, when it comes to funding, how much do you
think you will need to plug up all of the holes?
Mr. Klopp. I mean, that's a really interesting question.
What I would say is that, you know, one of the problems we have
is that all of the new modern products that would help us
improve our cyber defenses, those products are being built for
modern systems. They are being built for systems that will be
deployed across large clusters of servers like in the cloud.
They are being built for systems that are deployed using
modern service-oriented architectures and modern programming
languages and stuff like that. And a lot of our systems predate
all of those architectural things. And so for us to upgrade
cyber to the level that you would like us to be at really
requires the kind of modernization that we need from the bills
that you guys are trying to push through. So we believe that we
need a significant investment to fuel that modernization and
get to the point where we could sustain modernization using
sort of our--the base funding that we have now.
And we have asked for $300 million over 4 years in order to
do that. And it's in the President's budget, that request.
Ms. Kelly. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. I'd like to now recognize the gentleman from the
Golden State, Mr. Lieu for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
After the devastating breaches at OPM, one of the things
the administration did is they did this 100-day cybersecurity
sprint where they wanted agencies to go to what's called two-
factor authentication where, before you log on to your
computer, to get in, you would need more than just a password.
You would need a second form of authentication, either an ID
card or something to that effect. Have you all done that?
Mr. Alboum. Yes, sir. At USDA, during the period of the
Cyber Sprint and beyond, we have achieved--96 percent of our
privileged users use PIV cards and 100 percent use either a PIV
card or a multifactor authentication tool, a token of some
kind. And for our nonprivileged users, the rest of our
workforce, we are at 92 percent for PIV cards presently.
Mr. Lieu. And your goal is to get to 100 percent for
everyone at some point?
Mr. Alboum. That's the goal, but the reality is USDA has
about 100,000 employees. There's turnover. It takes time from a
point that someone comes on board to get them a PIV card. Our
biggest opportunity is to dramatically decrease the time it
takes for an individual to get a card once they come on board.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
What about NASA?
Ms. Wynn. At NASA, this is an area where we need to
improve, and we understand that. And so where we are with our
privileged users, during the Cyber Sprint, we made the 100-
percent mark. For unprivileged users, this is where we have
benefitted from having a permanent chief information security
officer on board for a couple of months. And she has taken a
hard look at how we measure it and who was considered in
needing a PIV card. And so, for NASA, we will report one metric
at the conclusion of fiscal year 2016. Our information is in
process right now. But we are changing the universe of who
needs to be covered by this requirement, so we are going to
take a dip, and then we are going to go back up.
And we have--Charlie Bolden, the Administrator, has already
met with the new Federal Chief Information Security Officer to
give his assurance that NASA will get to 100 percent.
We believe it is going to take until the early part of 2018
to make that, but we will make significant progress in fiscal
year 2017.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
What about SSA?
Mr. Klopp. I get to show off a little bit. We are at 100
percent of our privileged users are using PIV cards. PIV cards
are probably the most effective second factor because it's a
physical thing you have to have in your hand. And, right now,
we are at 98 percent of our unprivileged users. And, frankly,
the reason we are only at 98 percent is because there's a small
set of our unprivileged users who work in the 54 DDSes that was
mentioned earlier. They are actually State employees, not
Federal employees. And so it has just been slower for us to
negotiate with the States and State unions and stuff like that
in order to get that implemented.
But I believe that we are on track to get the last 2
percent of our unprivileged users onto PIV cards in December of
this year.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. Do you let some of your employees or
all of them access their work email from their mobile devices?
Mr. Klopp. No.
Mr. Lieu. Okay.
And how about NASA? Do you let any of your employees access
their work emails from their mobile devices?
Ms. Wynn. Yes, we do. NASA has a very open environment
designed for what--part of our mission is, is to share data
openly with the public and academic and other institutions. We
are taking a hard look and trying to thread the needle, so to
speak, between that balance of being an open environment to
exchange information, to advance technology and science and
engineering, and balancing that against cybersecurity. Our new,
as I mentioned before our new CISO is also taking a look at
that too so that we find that delicate balance between being
open and not putting our agency's mission at risk.
Mr. Lieu. I assume you have cybersecurity measures in place
for your network systems, you know, desktop computers?
Ms. Wynn. Yes, we do.
Mr. Lieu. If someone is connecting from a mobile device,
does your agency do anything to try to protect that mobile
device?
Ms. Wynn. If it is a NASA-provided device, there are a lot
of protections built into how we deploy it. If it's a
personally owned device, we have protections for the network
against that. But the device itself is not my responsibility.
But if we should have a--if that device is creating a problem,
we would act very swiftly on that point.
Mr. Lieu. So I see my time is up. I would like to just
conclude. I think the mobile device of your NASA employees will
be the weakest link in your defense system. And whether or not
you view it as your responsibility, it can cause you grave
problems if they are not protected.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Klopp, you said at the beginning, the last of DHS
technical vulnerability assessment, there were 16 progress
recommendations or progress--16 recommendations that came from
that? Is that correct?
Mr. Klopp. That's correct.
Mr. Hurd. And two were labeled--there were vulnerabilities
or critical vulnerabilities?
Mr. Klopp. Two were labeled as vulnerabilities. The rest
were recommendations.
Mr. Hurd. And you've addressed 8 of the 16 recommendations.
Mr. Klopp. We have completely satisfied the 16
recommendations, including both of the critical
vulnerabilities.
Mr. Hurd. Both of the critical vulnerabilities. That was
going to be my question. And then how are your own internal
ongoing assessments working in conjunction with what DHS is
doing?
Mr. Klopp. The DHS assessments are what's called a red team
assessment. And so, you know, we sort of let them in and let
them snoop around. And then they make recommendations to us.
It's actually not usual for them to identify specific
vulnerabilities. It's more usual for them to provide these,
sort of, general recommendations of where we need to go, pay
some attention. So----
Mr. Hurd. Are you just using automated tools?
Mr. Klopp. Pardon me?
Mr. Hurd. Are they just using automated tools?
Mr. Klopp. Not just using automated tools. I think they
actually bring some very highly qualified white hat hacker
people in to go and try to work their way into the system.
Mr. Hurd. And the times that they have come in, they
haven't found vulnerabilities?
Mr. Klopp. No, I wouldn't say that. What--for example, the
last time they came in, we were able to stop them from
penetrating through our sort of outer wall, and so we let them
in. They, once in, found that they were having difficulty
creating a beacon back out. And so we let them create a beacon
back out. And once they had--by the way, what the beacon out
means is that, now that they are in, they can start navigating
around because they can kind of control movement. And once we
let them in and they found that they could move around, they
actually found vulnerabilities in the system that we did not
know existed and were able to identify those for us so that we
could go get them fixed. That's exactly why we love these kinds
of exercises, right?
Mr. Hurd. No, it's a valuable resource and tool.
Mr. Alboum, so, in 2015, there was no major incidents at
USDA. In 2015, no--there was no major--you saw no major
incidents in 2015.
Mr. Alboum. That's correct.
Mr. Hurd. You are monitoring 100 percent of the traffic at
the external boundaries to determine if there is covert
exfiltration of data. That's a good thing. I wish more people
would be doing that. And you have deployed the EINSTEIN 3A
capability fully, right?
Mr. Alboum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. But the IG also still found that there was 26
outstanding recommendations that go back as far as 2009 and
that 27 systems were operating with expired ATOs. And OMB
scored y'all as--excuse me, that's the plural of ``you'' down
in Texas--you got a 43 out of 100, the fourth worst score, and
that's a decrease from fiscal year 2014. Are we looking at the
right data?
Mr. Alboum. I think that's a good question. The, you know,
the FISMA scores are based on the IG's interpretation of
requirements, and I don't know that every IG interprets those
requirements the same way. I think one of the things we can do
as a community is agree on the metrics and how to score them
and maintain the same metrics over a period of time so we can
track improvement.
So you look at those scores, they demonstrate that USDA has
opportunity to make further improvements. But the improvements
that you'd note from 2014 are not the same improvements from
2015. And that makes it hard to track our progress. And being
able to track progress and show positive movement I think is
very important from a, not just a morale perspective, but a
recognition of the programs we support. The money that's being
spent on cybersecurity is making things better and not just
going into some high IT black hole, which I know some people
fear.
Mr. Hurd. And that's fair, and I think that's what we try
to do on this committee in a bipartisan way: give you the tools
to be effective. Then we are going to hold you accountable,
right? And we can always--the answer is always going to be,
yes, we can have more money. But we have got to make sure that
we are using the money that we have effectively and
efficiently, because as we already talked about, we threw away
$340 million. All right, let's not talk about some of the her
interoperability at some of the other agencies. And so that's
always kind of been our goal, and we are going to continue to
do that.
And I appreciate y'all with your feedback today. It has
given us food for thought and ideas on how to strengthen some
legislation we are going to bring forward. And I appreciate you
taking the time to appear before us today.
And if there's no further business, without objection, this
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
