- WASSENAAR: CYBERSECURITY AND EXPORT CONTROLS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WASSENAAR: CYBERSECURITY AND EXPORT CONTROLS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,
AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 12, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-102

(Committee on Oversight and Goverment Reform)

__________

Serial No. 114-49

(Committee on Homeland Security)

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
23-401 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Troy Stock, IT Subcommittee Staff director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York

Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
Madeline Eda Matthews, Professional Staff member
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York              Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Loretta Sanchez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)

Brett DeWitt, Subcommittee Staff Director
John Dickhaus, Subcommittee Clerk
Christopher Schepis, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on January 12, 2016.................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Vann H. Van Diepen, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for
International Security and Nonproliferation, Department of
State
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12
Hon. Kevin J. Wolf, Assistant Secretary for Export
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19
Ms. Phyllis Schneck, Deputy Under Secretary for Cybersecurity and
Communications, National Protection and Programs Directorate,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25
Ms. Cheri Flynn McGuire, Vice President, Global Government
Affairs and Cybersecurity Policy, Symantec
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    32
Mr. Iain Mulholland, Vice President, Engineering Trust and
Assurance VMWARE, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46
Ms. Cristin Flynn Goodwin, Assistant General Counsel,
Cybersecurity, Microsoft Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53
Mr. Dean C. Garfield, President and CEO, Information Technology
Industry Council
Oral Statement...............................................    64
Written Statement............................................    66
Ms. Ann K. Ganzer, Director of Conventional Arms, Threat
Reduction, Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation, Department of State
Oral Statement...............................................    74

APPENDIX

Representative Sheila Jackson Lee Opening Statement..............    96
2015-12-16 Members of Congress to Ambassador Rice re Wassenaar...   102
2015-07-20 Members of Congress to Wheeler-DOC re Wassenaar.......   113
2016-01-12 Mr. Beckerman-Internet Association re Wassenaar.......   116

WASSENAAR: CYBERSECURITY AND EXPORT CONTROLS

----------

Tuesday, January 12, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Joint with
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, infrastructure Protection,
and Security Technologies, Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:23 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology]
presiding.
Present for Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd, Farenthold, Walker, Blum, Kelly,
Connolly, and Lieu.
Present for Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies: Representatives
Ratcliffe, Marino, Perry, Clawson, Donovan, McCaul (ex
officio), Richmond, Sanchez, Jackson Lee, Langevin, and
Thompson (ex officio).
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology of the
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Security Technologies of the Committee on Homeland Security
will come to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized
to declare a recess at any time. I would like to start off by
recognizing my friend and the chairman of the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies, and fellow Texan, the Honorable Ratcliffe, John
Ratcliffe. Over to you, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman for yielding. The
purpose of this hearing is to address the impact of the
Wassenaar Arrangement, which was recently amended to propose
export controls for cybersecurity products. I now recognize
myself for an opening statement.
The House Homeland Security Committee's Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies and the House Oversight and Government Reform's
Subcommittee on Information Technology meet today to hear from
key industry and government stakeholders about the impact of
the Wassenaar Arrangement, that it will have on American
people, on American businesses, and on the cybersecurity
industry.
I first want to start off by thanking my friend, Mr. Will
Hurd, the gentleman from Texas, for co-chairing this hearing.
Today, we are doing what Americans would like to see more of in
Congress. Two committees that don't often work together are
able to, and happy to come together to tackle an issue that's
extremely important and relevant to national security and to
the security of individuals' personal information. Congressman
Hurd and I share the belief that one of our core duties here in
Congress is to bypass the jurisdictional roadblocks, and make
real progress towards keeping our citizens safe.
To the issue at hand, we know that private industry in
America is excellent at responding to consumer demands. Many
companies, including some of those here today, pride themselves
on guaranteeing the security of their customers' personal
information. Others represented here exist solely to help in
securing that information. They also secure vital sectors of
society such as critical infrastructure and the financial
sector. Their success hinges, in part, on their ability to
guarantee their own security. Today, I hope to hear from our
witnesses on how the Wassenaar Arrangement in its
implementation would affect these objectives.
The Wassenaar Arrangement was established 20 years ago to
apply to conventional arms and dual-use goods and technology.
Changes made in 2013 sought to extend export controls to
cybersecurity intrusion and surveillance software and
technology.
These changes were motivated by a desire to prevent
authoritative regimes from repressing their people. This intent
is noble. If the administration's implementation effort
resulted in unified dissent from the technology and
cybersecurity industries, from academics and researchers, the
energy and financial sectors also voiced deep concerns. And
they were echoed by civil society groups who said that the
proposal could make communicating about security
vulnerabilities almost impossible in certain cases. The Federal
Government engages in countless ways with the American people
and our international partners. When proposing actions, the
government should, at a minimum, not do harm to its own people.
I'm interested to hear from our government witnesses how they
believe this arrangement will successfully deter the
accumulation of digital weapons, which aren't constructed in
factories, which don't need physical space for storage, and
which don't depend on traceable means of transport.
I hope to better understand how they believe this export
control framework can be effectively applied to intrusion
software. I agree that we should strive to limit dangerous
technologies from falling into the hands of bad actors. But
national security and Americans' personal security can't be
sacrificed in the process. There are many ways the United
States strives to combat human rights violators. And I hope to
hear today why this route wasn't chosen over other options. As
we can see by the variety and the size of our witness panel,
the Wassenaar Arrangement has broad implications. Recent
reports and the witness testimony today demonstrate that we are
far from a consensus on this issue. The administration's top
three stated priorities include, and I quote, ``protecting the
country's critical infrastructure from cyber threats, improving
our ability to identify and report cyber incidents, and
engaging with international partners to promote Internet
freedom, and building support for an open, interoperable,
secure, and reliable cyberspace.''
I assume that our government witnesses are well-versed in
these goals and their prioritization. Yet, in reading the
comments to the proposed rule and general thoughts on the
cybersecurity section of the Wassenaar Arrangement, one sees a
probable contradiction in the first two goals. Additionally, I
think it's unlikely that this arrangement achieves the open and
interoperable cyberspace that is in the public's interest. If
we are to expect the cybersecurity provisions of this
arrangement to be workable, we need to make sure that our
stated intentions and actions are not contradictory. If we
can't do that, I question why as a country we are agreeing to
this updated arrangement.
Just last month, Congress passed legislation to encourage
the sharing of cyber threat information. Both the private
sector and the Government stand to benefit from the increased
flow of valuable cyber-threat information. Today, we need to
hear whether the Wassenaar Arrangement would have a
counterproductive impact on such sharing, and whether it would
undermine the law that the President just signed. As a Nation,
we advocate for human rights, and we assist those harmed by
authoritarian regimes. However, we must, first and foremost,
safeguard the security of our Nation and our citizens.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about the best
path forward and how we can come together to best protect the
American people. And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. It's now my pleasure to recognize the
distinguished gentleman from the great State of Louisiana, Mr.
Richmond, the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies, for his opening statement. Mr. Richmond, you're
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Chairman Hurd and Chairman
Ratcliffe, also Ranking Member Kelly, for convening this joint
hearing on U.S. rulemaking regarding cybersecurity technology
issues in the Wassenaar Arrangement. I also want to thank our
panel of witnesses today, both the government and industry
representatives.
The Wassenaar Arrangement consists of America's efforts, in
collaboration with 40 of our trading partners, to put into
place export controls for conventional arms and dual-use goods
and technologies. As we know, dual-use goods and commodities,
processes are technologies used primarily for civilian
purposes, which can also be used to develop or enhance the
capabilities of military equipment or initiatives. We find
ourselves in rapidly changing times. And dual-use goods and
technologies now encompass cybersecurity technologies, which
are vital in protecting private, commercial, and governmental
data, and protecting the operation of our information networks,
both public and private. The 41 nations participating in the
Wassenaar Arrangement agreed to include cybersecurity issues.
And the United States has led the way.
The Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and
Communications Office, within the National Protection and
Programs Directorate, is the storehouse of a great deal of our
Nation's civilian cybersecurity expertise. And I'm glad to see
Dr. Schneck as one of our witnesses today, and look forward,
especially, to her perspective.
I found it helpful to frame the cybersecurity issues
contained in the Wassenaar Arrangement as a series of
questions. Does the proposed rule fulfill its intended goal?
Does the proposed rule have any negative unintended side
effects? Will modification of the proposed rule address
concerns adequately?
And, finally, should the Wassenaar provision be
renegotiated, or an alternative be found? If the critics of the
wording of the current proposed rulemaking are right, then I'm
sure the answers will be no, yes, no, yes. According to a large
number of professionals, the expert restrictions for the
defined cybersecurity products and technologies in the rule may
certainly reduce the likelihood of repressive governments
obtaining surveillance technology through legal sources, but
the criminal underground would not be subject to such
restrictions. And such repressive regimes might switch to those
suppliers.
But let us not speculate. While my subcommittee does not
appear to have any immediate legislative or oversight
jurisdiction on this matter, testimony today from industry and
government agencies involved, would help us to learn about the
impacts of the proposed rule as drafted and how it will affect
or impede not only research on the specifics of cybersecurity,
but possible effects on the larger global cybersecurity
community.
Mr. Chairman, at this time, I would like to yield 1-1/2
minutes to Mr. Langevin, who has been a leader and an expert in
our caucus on this issue.
Mr. Ratcliffe. [presiding.] The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
ranking member, Ranking Member Richmond, for yielding the time.
And I want to thank both chairmen and ranking members of the
committee for holding this hearing. I've been closely following
the intrusion software additions since BIS proposed the
original rule last May. In July, several of my colleagues
joined me in voicing our concerns with that regulation as part
of the public comment period. And last month, 125 members
joined Chairman McCaul and me in a bipartisan effort in
highlighting some of those thoughts in a letter to the
President's National Security Advisor.
Throughout this period, I've been thoroughly impressed by
Bureau of Industry and Security's efforts to be as open as
possible during the rulemaking process. And I commend you,
Assistant Secretary Wolf, and your staff, for your willingness
to listen to constructive feedback. I thank you for your work
in that respect. I think all of us here today believe that
intrusion software can be dangerous in the wrong hands. But the
original proposed rule had many unintended consequences that
must be addressed. I hope we will explore those barriers during
this hearing, which could be detrimental to both our economic
competitiveness and our national security, and that we will
also come out with a clear understanding of the way forward and
how to better incorporate stakeholder feedback from the outset
in future rulemaking.
With that, I would like to, again, thank Chairmen Ratcliffe
and Hurd and Ranking Members Richmond and Kelly for addressing
this very important topic. And I'll submit my full statement
for the record. And I would yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Richmond. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlemen from both Louisiana
and Rhode Island. The chair now recognizes the chairman of the
Homeland Security Committee, my friend, the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. I thank the gentlemen from Texas, both Mr.
Ratcliffe and Mr. Hurd, for having this hearing today on a very
important issue. It's consequential. Strengthening our Nation's
cybersecurity is of the upmost importance right now, and will
determine our Nation's position as a world leader in the
future. The playing field for international conflict is
constantly evolving. Cyber attacks can come from anywhere at
any time, and without any prior notifications.
As chairman of the Homeland Security Committee, keeping
Americans safe is my primary concern. And that is no simple
task in such a dynamic environment. Unfortunately, the
amendment to the Wassenaar Arrangement would depreciate the
research, development, and deployment of important tools that
we all use every day to secure against cyber attacks.
The United States has a duty to be a world leader. The
establishment of a multi-national arrangement to restrict the
trade of conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies
has only been possible through strong American leadership. To
continue fulfilling this imperative role, the United States
must ensure that such agreements support technically and
practically intelligent policies on cybersecurity.
If the matter at hand was simply a question of efficacy, we
wouldn't be here today. If the only concern was that the
Wassenaar Arrangement might have room for improvement, this
conversation would be very different. But what has been
violated here is the fundamental adage of do no harm. The State
Department agreed to an arrangement that would restrict a group
of information security tools and products. This agreement and
the proposed implementation could hobble the entire
cybersecurity ecosystem, as well as cross-border data flows,
and global collaboration that support it. Weakening our cyber
researchers and innovative service providers is bad enough. But
as we have seen again and again, any weakness in our cyber
posture will percolate to other industries and harm individual
Americans.
Furthermore, under the arrangement, participating States
already exchange specific information on a regular basis about
global transfers of certain goods and technologies. Part of the
Wassenaar Arrangement is looking at that information to find
dubious acquisition trends. I don't see any limitation on the
ability of the Wassenaar Arrangement to pursue the stated goals
of increased transparency without adding burdensome and
counterproductive licensing requirements.
I hope that the witnesses are able to speak today about why
the addition of intrusion software language to the arrangement
was preferred as the best means of achieving American goals,
instead of other options, such as through sanctions, which
would address bad actors more directly without unintended
consequences.
Lastly, the Homeland Security Committee worked hard in
putting together and shaping information, sharing legislation
which was signed into law in December. That legislation
facilitates a sharing of cyber information between the Federal
Government and the private sector to assist security experts
and others in rapidly identifying and resolving vulnerabilities
that threaten the security of our networks.
We must not backtrack on this progress. It is a priority of
the Homeland Security Committee to investigate whether the
domestic execution of the relevant cybersecurity section of the
Wassenaar Arrangement would obstruct positive collaboration on
cybersecurity that protects American information and
information systems.
I hope the backlash received and the response here in the
Congress will prevent the State Department from attempting to
take momentous negotiations upon themselves without
consultation from the stakeholders in the future. The
administration must not ignore the serious, broad implication
of the results. What we won't stand for is a de facto
regulation of a thriving sector and cornerstone of American
industry, an industry that provides the tools that we all,
including governments, use to secure ourselves. I expect this
hearing today will send an important message that the intrusion
software language in the Wassenaar Arrangement is simply
unworkable. We, in the Congress, expect that the administration
will work to correct the serious issues in this arrangement
moving forward. Again, I want to thank the chair and ranking
member for holding this hearing. And I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the chairman. The chair now recognizes
the ranking member of the Oversight and Government Reform
Subcommittee on Information Technology, the gentlelady from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the
witnesses participating in today's hearing on export controls
for certain cybersecurity tools. The export controls for
intrusion and surveillance technologies agreed to at the
Wassenaar Arrangement were intended to help prevent repressive
regimes from obtaining and using intrusive technology against
their own citizens. These are important human rights
objectives. It is also critically important that U.S.
cybersecurity policies advance our overall efforts to protect
information and systems from cyber attacks and data breaches.
Today's hearing is recognition of the fact that the Federal
Government and private sector must work together effectively to
thwart cybercrime. The Bureau of Industry and Security's
proposed rule to implement the Wassenaar Arrangement's export
controls on cybersecurity intrusion, and surveillance items
could seriously hinder the cybersecurity industry and our
national security. The language in the proposed rule would
interfere with the ability of businesses and of the Federal
Government to acquire and utilize cybersecurity tools that are
critical to the security of information systems and data, and
frustrate the real-time information sharing of vulnerability,
which is relied upon to prevent or to stop a cyber attack.
Going forward, BIS and its interagency partners should
reconsider their policy approach to this rulemaking, so that
the export controls do not negatively affect our Nation's
ability to defend against cyber threat and the policy conforms
with the broader U.S. cybersecurity strategy and national
security.
The Information Technology Subcommittee has held multiple
hearings examining the nature of cyber threats and how to
enhance the security of information and information networks.
We have learned that no company or industry is immune from
cyber attacks, and that cyber attackers are highly
sophisticated, and constantly evolving their tactics.
We are all aware of the major breaches that American
companies, contractors, and government agencies have sustained
in recent years. Given this persistent threat to information
systems, it is critically important that the U.S. policies and
regulations are designed to enhance the tools and capabilities
that ensure the security of critical information targeted by
cyber attackers.
Last month, the Democratic members of this subcommittee,
along with 120 other Members of Congress, signed onto a
bipartisan letter to National Security Advisor Susan Rice,
requesting the WhiteHouse's collaboration and advice in the
development of export control policies for cybersecurity tools.
In that letter, we expressed our concerns that the proposed
rulemaking pertaining to export controls of intrusion software
and vulnerability research could reduce the ability of private
businesses and the Federal Government to defend against cyber
threats and impair national security efforts.
I would like to commend BIS for anticipating the need to
assess the impact of the export controls on the cybersecurity
industry and requesting public comment on the effects of this
proposed rule. The Bureau is currently reviewing the 264 public
comments it received.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses on the
impact of this proposed rule and discussing a path forward that
achieves the human rights objectives of the export controls
without negatively affecting innovation and research on
cybersecurity tools and vulnerability. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I look forward to the witnesses' testimony.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlelady. The chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the Homeland Security
Committee, the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairman
Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, Chairman Ratcliffe, and Ranking
Member Richmond, for your leadership in calling this joint
subcommittee hearing today. I particularly want to thank the
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today. You all play
an important role in America's vital trade and business life.
And I'm grateful you took the time to come help us understand a
very complicated issue.
The concept of cyber and information security is
fundamental to our economy across all sectors, not only for
business computers and networks, but also because the issue
crosses the lanes of private, personal information, and
policies that governance consideration. Cyber and information
security are also issues that involve the ingenuity and
initiative that makes American entrepreneurs and computer
software scientists leaders in the world market.
The Wassenaar Arrangement for the export control of dual-
use cybersecurity products is not only technically complex, but
also involves moral and ethical considerations that must be
taken into account.
The United States economy is the largest in the world and
the most creative, innovative, and productive. The strength of
our engineers, scientists, and industrial leaders and across
all sectors of American industry is unmatched. While the
American worker is recognized as the most productive worker in
the world, the electronic world dominates our business,
information, security processes. And we depend most heavily on
effective functioning of machine and computer system controls
to achieve our high level of productivity. We cannot maintain
these high levels of productivity without comprehensive and
massive security efforts to protect not only machines and
computers, but the electronic networks that we all depend on in
our daily lives, ones that sustain the highest standard of
living in the world for American families.
The United States leads the world in the production of
cybersecurity products and systems that not only produce the
software applications that keep our economy running, but also
the information security products that protect our vital
personal data, business information, and communications
network. The treaties, agreements, and arrangements we have
with our international trading partners play a fundamental role
in allowing our U.S.-made products to be exported easily and
without interference. And those are often intricate and
detailed provisions. I am very pleased we are holding this
hearing to learn more about one of the most complex issues
facing international trade today. I look forward to the
testimony of our witnesses. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the ranking member for his remarks.
The chair how recognizes the chairman of the Oversight and
Government Reform Subcommittee on Information Technology, my
good friend from Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I look forward to
getting this institution focused on solving problems rather
than jurisdictional issues. And I would like to thank Chairman
McCaul and Chairman Chaffetz for their leadership and Ranking
Members Thompson and Cummings for working on issues like this
in a bipartisan fashion. It's great working alongside you, Mr.
Richmond. And I would especially like to thank my good friend,
Robin Kelly, for her partnership over the last year. And I'm
looking forward to working together with you this year.
This is an important topic, eight panelists, a bunch of
chairmen, a bunch of subcommittee chairmen, a lot of ranking
members. And one of the reasons is that it's been estimated
that 97 percent of all Fortune 500 companies have been hacked,
and the other 3 percent have been and just don't know it. And
this is the size and scope of the cyber problems this Nation is
facing. BlueCross BlueShield, Anthem, most recently, Juniper
Networks and OPM, where the sensitive PII of 21.5 million
Americans whose data was stolen are just a few examples of the
ongoing digital threat our Nation faces every single day.
Our adversaries are constantly targeting our information
technology. And in doing so, they steal our intellectual
property, healthcare data, and the most private details of the
lives of millions of Americans. So when in May of last year,
the Bureau of Industry and Security at the Department of
Commerce published a draft rule implementing an export control
regime on some of the most basic cybersecurity tools and
methods, I became deeply concerned about the potential for
unintended circumstances and consequences.
The truth is that cyber weapons are not analogous to
conventional weapons that the Wassenaar Agreement has been
discussing and regulating since its inception. The same code
that can be used to steal, disrupt, or destroy can also be used
to protect. My concern, a concern shared by many of those
companies and experts who submitted comments to BIS over the
summer, is that the language of the proposed rule is so broad
and vague that if implemented, it would do profound damage to
our Nation's cybersecurity posture. The IT Subcommittee is very
interested in the process that the State Department employed
when adding these highly technical and complex cybersecurity
items to the Wassenaar's export control regime, were experts,
the cybersecurity industry, or the IT community at large,
included in the discussions leading up to the agreement? If
not, why? And how can we make sure they are consulted in the
future so this kind of thing doesn't happen again.
Cybersecurity practitioners have to move at the pace of
technology. They cannot stop and wait to push a critical patch
out to their international partners or clients who are left
vulnerable while regulators delay and bureaucrats impose
mountains of red tape. In the cybersecurity business, the clock
starts when you know you've got an indicator of compromise and
doesn't stop until you know it's been patched. In no time at
all, a vulnerability can be exploited and data extracted. With
months, hackers can take their time and do unspeakable damage
to American interests.
One of the reasons the IT Subcommittee exists is to examine
the impacts information technology has on our laws,
governmental structures, society writ large, and our regulatory
approach.
The question here today is not only whether or not the
Wassenaar nations need to re-think and re-draft those cyber
tool controls, but also, whether or not an export control
regime is the correct institution to solve the problem of
keeping dangerous digital tools out of the hands of despots. I
thank Chairman Ratcliffe for his shared interest in this issue.
And I look forward to today's discussion. And I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman from Texas. Other
members are reminded that opening statements may be submitted
for the record. And as noted by others, we are pleased today to
have with us a very distinguished panel of witnesses on an
important topic, including Mr. Vann Van Diepen, the principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of International
Security and Nonproliferation at the U.S. Department of State;
Ms. Ann Ganzer, the Director of Conventional Arms Threat
Reduction for the Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation at the U.S. Department of State; the Honorable
Kevin Wolf, the Assistant Secretary for Export Administration
at the U.S. Department of Commerce; Dr. Phyllis Schneck, the
Deputy Under Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications for
the National Protection and Programs Directorate at the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security; Ms. Cheri Flynn McGuire, the
vice president for Global Government Affairs and Cybersecurity
Policy at Symantec; Mr. Iain Mulholland, the vice president for
Engineering Trust and Assurance at VMware; Ms. Cristin Flynn
Goodwin, the assistant general counsel for Cybersecurity at
Microsoft; and, finally, Mr. Dean Garfield, the president and
CEO of the Information Technology Industry Council.
Thank you all for being here today. The witnesses' full
written statements will appear in the record. And at this time,
I would ask all of the witnesses to stand and raise your right
hand so that I can swear you in for your testimony.
Do each of you swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to provide today shall be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth so help you God? Let the record reflect
that the witnesses answered in the affirmative. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Van Diepen for his opening statement.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF VANN H. VAN DIEPEN

Mr. Van Diepen. Thank you, Chairman Hurd and Chairman
Ratcliffe, Ranking Members Kelly and Richmond, and members of
the committees, for the opportunity to talk today about export
control efforts in the challenging new area of cyber tools. As
we've heard from you all, we hear almost daily about malicious
cyber activities that disrupt businesses, compromise privacy,
or threaten national security.
Congress itself has also recognized the overall
cybersecurity threat in legislation. The 2014 National Defense
Authorization Act required developing an integrated policy to
control the proliferation of what it termed ``cyber weapons,''
including through multilateral enforcement activities and
diplomatic engagement. To be most effective, export controls
should be multilateral. The Wassenaar Arrangement has the
responsibility for multilateral national security export
controls on dual-use items not related to weapons of mass
destruction, such as cyber tools. This 41-country regime was
established in 1996 to contribute to regional and international
security and stability by promoting transparency and greater
responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and related
dual-use goods and technologies, thus preventing destabilizing
accumulations.
Upholding our international export control commitments is
central to our ability to get other countries to uphold theirs,
not just in Wassenaar, but in the nuclear, chemical,
biological, and missile control regimes as well. Because these
same cyber tools can also be used for beneficial purposes, such
as identifying vulnerabilities and improving cybersecurity, we
need to strike the appropriate balance in implementing such
controls to promote national security objectives, while making
sure that the controls' benefits clearly exceed any commercial
or national security costs.
Recognizing the challenge in implementing the cyber
control, the U.S. Government took the uncommon step of going
through a public notice and comment process. The comments were
instructive. And we take them very seriously. It is clear from
the comments received that the first version of the proposed
U.S. rule to implement the Wassenaar control missed the mark.
And the interagency continues to work through the concerns
raised.
Fortunately, the cyber control is included on the least
sensitive portion of the Wassenaar list. This provides us with
substantial flexibilities we can employ in the process of
implementing that control nationally, just as most other
Wassenaar members have done in already having implemented the
cyber control for over a year without apparent controversy.
We appreciate your committee's interest in this issue. And
we are committed to working closely with all the other
stakeholders in the interagency, as well as industry, and the
other relevant external stakeholders, to seek a balanced way
forward that meets our important policy objectives while
addressing the concerns raised. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Van Diepen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Van Diepen. The chair now
recognizes the Honorable Kevin Wolf for his statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. KEVIN J. WOLF

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Chairmen Hurd and Ratcliffe, Members
Kelly and Richmond. My colleague from the State Department
described well the background and purposes of the Wassenaar
Arrangement. The U.S. Department of State leads the U.S.
delegation to the Wassenaar Arrangement. But it is my agency,
the Commerce Department's Bureau of Industry and Security,
which is responsible for developing and administering the set
of regulations, the Export Administration regulations that
would implement the multilateral agreements that were just
described. And in this case, the Wassenaar Arrangement for us
pertains to dual-use items and some military items on the
Wassenaar list.
Other agencies, primarily the Department of Defense,
participates in developing proposed changes to these lists,
proposed controls to submit to the Wassenaar and other
arrangements, deciding which ones to agree upon, and then
review the regulations that we would implement to implement the
agreement. And then Congress also has technical advisory
committees that work with us on reviewing the proposed changes
and proposals to be submitted to the various regimes.
In December of 2013, the Wassenaar Arrangement approved new
export controls on command and delivery platforms for intrusion
software and related technology. Specifically, the entries in
category 4 dealing with computers of the dual-use control list
would control non-publicly available software that generates,
operates, delivers, or communicates with intrusion software.
And an intrusion software was defined as software designed to
covertly gain access to a computer or other network device and,
once inside, to extract or modify data or modify an execution
path of the device to allow the execution of externally
provided instructions.
Related hardware and technology entries would control
systems and equipment for generating, operating, delivering, or
communicating with this intrusion software. And then, also,
technology for developing the intrusion software was controlled
as well.
The original proposal for these controls came from another
Wassenaar member in 2012. And the examples of the types of
commercial hacking software intended to be captured by the
control included those offered by Hacking Team from Italy,
Gamma/Fin-Fisher from Germany, and Vupen in France.
The controls were novel in that they were the first foray
by a multilateral regime into the area of offensive cyber
tools. The agreed-upon entries covering software intentionally
excluded intrusion software itself from control, that is,
certain kinds of malware, because of a general understanding
that everyone with a mobile device might have such software
unwittingly on their device and didn't want to expose them to
perpetual liability. In beginning, however, the process at
Commerce of drafting the regulation to implement the control,
we grew concerned that despite several exclusions set forth in
the definition of intrusion software, the scope of the
controls, particularly the developmental technology controls,
might be far broader in scope than originally understood by
Commerce and its advisory committees.
We particularly became concerned that the category 4
technology control list entry in the draft regulation
technology for the development of intrusion software could
inadvertently significantly harm both U.S. Government and U.S.
private sector cybersecurity programs and efforts if
implemented.
So in order to not take action that would inadvertently
harm our Nation's ability to engage in critical cyber defense
and related research work, we decided, in May of 2015, to take
the unprecedented step of publishing these Wassenaar control
list entries as a proposed rule with a request for private
sector comments, rather than our usual step of publishing it as
a final rule.
Our hope was that the private sector comments would give us
a better sense for whether the rule would have unintended
impacts on our cyber defense and cyber research ecosystems. All
dual-use controls have consequences and impose cost on the
private sector. That's the nature of controls. But this one was
different because the impact would not just be on the economic
bottom line of a company, but on our Government's and our
Nation's ability to share efficiently and quickly the types of
technology necessary to conduct cyber defense and related
research.
Also, immediately following the publication of the proposed
rule, we received questions from U.S. private sector and others
in the U.S. Government about the intended scope of the
controls. And in order to make sure that we addressed all of
their concerns, we published a series of FAQs. As will be
described later by our industry panelists and as is described
in more detail in my testimony, we received over 260 comments,
generally, all of them negative, describing several concerns
that you've all summarized well in your opening statements.
I want to make clear that the administration has not made
any decisions regarding what the next step will be other than
that the next step will not be a final rule. We're continuing
to review the comments. We're continuing to work with our
colleagues in government and industry with expertise in
equities and cyber defense and related research. We welcome all
views and all information, which is why we thank you for this
hearing and whatever input or suggestions or advice that you
have for us. So thank you very much.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Wolf follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Wolf. Dr. Schneck, you're
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK

Ms. Schneck. Thank you. Chairman Hurd, Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Member Kelly, Ranking Member Richmond, and members of
these committees, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. And thank you as well for all the support that all of
your committee continue to provide to the Department of
Homeland Security, most recently in the Cybersecurity Act of
2015, which was discussed earlier. Because of that legislation,
we will be able to, at the Department, with our industry
partners, with our interagency partners, and global partners,
share cyber threat information more rapidly, and in near real
time.
We appreciate the critical part that export controls play
in ensuring that bad-intentioned people do not get their hands
on good technology to hurt others. We also appreciate the
concerns expressed by our partners and mentioned in previous
testimony that show how some of these controls that are talked
about today can actually potentially hurt cybersecurity
efforts.
So based on these concerns raised by industry and the
potential impact on the Nation's cybersecurity, the Department
of Homeland Security believes that the interagency together
should reexamine the merits of the proposed rule. DHS plays an
increasing role in cyber and in export control. And we seek a
balance between getting to that right place in protecting dual-
use technology, and also incorporating the best expertise
globally and protecting our cyber infrastructure from the very
rapid change that we see and the sophistication of the actors
of which I and others have testified before you.
In my experience, before the 2-plus years I've spent at the
Department, I was in private industry. I experienced product
design. I experienced research. I experienced threat
dissemination and sharing with both other private sector
colleagues and companies, as well as our interagency partners
in government, as well as around the world. That is the best
thing that we can do to protect our cyber infrastructures is,
as the Cybersecurity Act that you just gave us allows us to do,
put threat pictures together, put indicators together, work
with the smart people around the world at the speed of light,
in the speed of cybersecurity that our adversaries are
operating in.
We hear a lot about the Internet of things. That means that
almost anything you can see and touch has a computer processor
in it in the future. That means that all those things are
exposed to cybersecurity vulnerabilities. And that means we
need the power of speed to put that story together, to
disseminate it rapidly, to share research, and design products
that protect better. We need the collaboration.
In this environment, researchers and developers need to be
able to work together with alacrity. They need that in the
government. We need it in the private sector. And we need to be
able to work together at the very speed and hopefully greater
than that speed at which our adversaries are working today. A
good example of how the Department works was in the Heartbleed
episode in April, 2 years ago. The Department of Homeland
Security received information from another government that
there was a vulnerability in an open source encryption
algorithm, as you well know. We were able to, through our
United States Computer Emergency Response Team, disseminate
that information internationally. Our CERT works, that's the
Computer Emergency Response Team, our CERT works with over 300
different CERTs internationally to get that information out
there.
Our cybersecurity companies and our private sector are
global. Our government needs to work with other governments.
The U.S. has taken a leadership role because of our ability to
share and collaborate and push cybersecurity and cyber threat
information out as far as we can. And companies and governments
need these tools and need to be enabled to have the same
alacrity with which our adversaries are enabled.
Our adversary works, as I mentioned before, without
lawyers. They have plenty of money. They have no boundaries.
And as was mentioned earlier, we want to bypass jurisdictional
roadblocks. We thank you for that. We in cybersecurity need to
bypass competitive roadblocks. We need to bypass time
roadblocks. And we need to be able to collaborate, again,
without interruption.
Cybersecurity is a joint effort, involving government,
private sector, and academia. We welcome the chance to work
together, our three agencies, our entire administration, the
interagency, with all of our government partners to ensure,
again, our global leadership in cybersecurity, our global
ability to share this threat information. This is the main
thing our adversaries cannot do. This is the product set that
our companies can build for us. This is the ability for us as a
government to leverage all that innovation in the private
sector and push it forward.
And our position is we would like to, as an interagency
together, reexamine the merits of that rule by striking a very
good balance, getting it right, ensuring that we have all the
benefits of the hard work that's done in export control, but
also ensuring that cybersecurity doesn't stop. Anything we do
to delay the collaboration between any smart mind that we can
find, human or machine, enables our adversary. So thank you.
And I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Schneck follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Schneck. The chair now
recognizes Ms. McGuire for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CHERI F. MCGUIRE

Ms. McGuire. Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairman Hurd, Ranking
Member Kelly, and Chairman Thompson, other distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of Symantec Corporation. This hearing
is extremely timely. And we very much appreciate your shining a
spotlight on a vital issue that threatens the cybersecurity of
not only the U.S. technology industry, but also that of all
U.S. critical infrastructure companies and organizations that
rely on cybersecurity.
The proposed U.S. cybersecurity export regulation under the
Wassenaar Arrangement would severely damage our ability to
innovate and develop new cybersecurity product, conduct real-
time global research, and share information on vulnerabilities
and exploits, as well as to test and secure global networks and
new technology products.
These new regulations would restrict the free flow of
information across borders and impose major new export
compliance burdens on all U.S. multinational industries. While
the regulation grew out of well-intended concerns over the
availability of intrusion and surveillance software to
repressive regimes, the end result has swept in the core
functionality of cybersecurity products and technology, and
puts untenable restrictions on security testing and research.
The fact is, this is not an export control on a few
specific tools. It is a stringent new regulation on the entire
cybersecurity industry, and our customers that would harm the
economic and national security of the United States.
Ultimately, it would leave every American less protected and
vulnerable to cyber criminals and cyber terrorists.
The regulations would capture many common and critical
security tools. One of these is penetration testing. These
tests are designed to stress systems just as real attackers
would and expose weaknesses that would allow an organization to
improve its defenses. Yet, under the proposed regulations,
financial services, health care, energy, and other
multinational companies would need export licenses merely to do
security testing on their overseas systems and products.
We have other concerns, but I feel compelled that I need to
raise one more. As you all know, Congress and the
administration have just acted to improve cyber threat
information sharing. Yet, these regulations would undo much of
that effort. As many of you have said today, cybersecurity
knows no borders. But at Symantec, in our business practices,
we also operate security operations centers around the world.
Under these regulations, we would be required to apply for and
wait for an export license before discussing much of our
security research with a U.S. citizen who was working in one of
our international centers. And the underlying rule does not
even envision the accommodation of real-time machine-to-machine
information sharing across borders.
As we all know, cyber threats move at light speed, not
bureaucratic speed. And as Chairman Hurd said, the clock starts
ticking when an indicator of compromise is identified.
To provide some perspective, Symantec's intrusion
prevention systems blocked approximately 300 million exploit
kits for our global customers in 2015, one of the exact
technologies that would be restricted under this rule.
Companies like ours rely on unfettered research and
communication to innovate and develop the next generation of
security technologies. At Symantec, our preliminary assessment
showed we would need at least 1,000 new licenses. Today, we
need less than a dozen. But the truth is that we've stopped
counting, as the number is likely to go even higher. Coupled
with an average lead time of 6 months to develop a license
application, there is no doubt that these new burdens would
cripple our ability to respond to real-time threats and cyber
attacks.
Another issue is that countries that are party to the
Wassenaar Arrangement and have implemented the rule have taken
vastly different approaches. There are multiple interpretations
of the underlying language that have led to confusion, and
implementation differs significantly from country to country.
In fact, today, we at Symantec are holding up a product
released in one country, while our lawyers try to figure out
the next steps that should be taken. And we've seen other U.S.
companies who are already pulling back on international
research engagements because their attorneys say there is too
much risk for cross-border research flows.
The simple fact is that the rule will do little to stop the
spread of malicious intrusion and surveillance tools, or
curtail illicit hacking and intrusions in any way. In fact, the
current rule would do just the opposite. It would handcuff
security vendors and multinational companies from using all the
tools available to them, while imposing no restrictions on
cyber criminals. After hearing significant concerns, the
Department of Commerce, to its credit, quickly withdrew the
proposed rule. The conversations that have followed have been
extensive and frank, but, ultimately, unsuccessful. This is not
because of a lack of good faith on either side, but because of
defects routed in the 2013 Wassenaar cybersecurity agreement.
For this reason, we strongly recommend that the rule be
remanded back to Wassenaar to be renegotiated and more narrowly
defined. Of course, we look forward to continuing to work with
Congress and our U.S. Government partners, to share our
technical expertise on this very important issue to our
industry and critical infrastructure in the U.S. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. And I look forward to any
questions you might have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. McGuire follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. McGuire. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Mulholland for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF IAIN MULHOLLAND

Mr. Mulholland. Chairmen Hurd and Ratcliffe, Ranking
Members Kelly and Richmond, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today at this important hearing. I'm Iain Mulholland,
the head of the Engineering Trust and Assurance Group at
VMware, and I am our senior security engineer. VMware is
headquartered in Palo Alto, California, and is the fourth
largest software company in the world, with 2014 revenues of
over $6 billion and over 18,000 employees globally. Ironically,
I may be one of the few people in the room, other than,
perhaps, Ms. Ganzer, who has actually spent any time in
Wassenaar, as my then-fiancee lived there in the 1990s. I spent
a summer in Wassenaar reading books on computer security during
my transition out of service in the British military.
I now have almost 20 years' experience in the software
security engineering field. I came to the U.S. in 2002 as one
of the early members of the Microsoft Trustworthy Computing
Group. And in 2011, I established VMware's Product Security
Group.
If implemented, the 2013 Wassenaar Arrangement could
undermine our strong security posture and hinder our ability to
adequately protect our customers and our products. It would
introduce significant hurdles to rapidly receiving and sharing
threat information, in particular, vulnerability exploit code
that is critical to the swift development of security patches
that protect software users, something that Chairman Hurd
alluded to.
This introduction of a requirement to apply for and obtain
licenses during critical, time-sensitive responses to security
vulnerabilities, which may already be under active
exploitation, creates an asymmetry that is to an attackers'
advantage, since, unlike the defender, the attacker has few
such constraints.
In my written testimony, I included three different
examples that speak to the core challenges that implementing
the 2013 rules would present not only VMware, but as some
testimony has already alluded to, other U.S. technology
companies. In the interest of time, I would like to share one
of them with you. In the last 12 months, VMware has
collaborated with several small security research organizations
in Europe to remediate critical security vulnerabilities that
they identified in our products. These vulnerabilities, if left
unpatched, could have allowed a malicious attacker to take
complete control over critical infrastructure. During the
course of our investigations, researchers often provide VMware
with sample exploit code that demonstrates the flaw to our
security response team.
Exploit code is often key in accelerating the speed with
which our engineers are able to understand the flaw and develop
a patch to protect our customers. If a picture paints 1,000
words, then in the field of software security, the exploit is
our picture. In one example, the security researcher was in
Poland, his parent company, in the Netherlands, the
coordinating VMware incident response team in the U.S. and
Canada, and the team responsible for developing the security
patch, in India. In addition, several of our U.S.-based
employees were non-U.S. persons. In this example, VMware and
the researcher would have required multiple licenses, one from
Poland to the Netherlands, from Poland to the U.S., from the
Netherlands to the U.S., from the U.S. to Canada, and several
within the U.S. just to share information across cubical walls
with non-U.S. persons based in the United States.
Security vulnerability reports typically come through our
industry standard security at VMware.com email address, using a
security research protocol that has been in use in our industry
for over 15 years. In 2015 alone, over half the security
vulnerabilities reported to VMware came from individuals or
organizations located in Wassenaar countries. In most cases, an
export license would have been required for the researcher to
report the security issue to us. A security researcher may not
even have known who or where they were exporting an export to,
since security at VMware.com is staffed on a rotational basis
by a global team, half of whom are outside of the U.S. or non-
U.S. persons.
It is improbable that these small research companies or
individuals will take on the administrative and financial
burden of applying for potentially multiple export licenses
simply to report a security vulnerability. And as a result,
this important source of information will dry up, or much
worse, end up in the underground vulnerability market, leaving
vulnerabilities unreported, unpatched, and under active
exploitation.
Moving forward, we recommend the BIS and the Department of
Commerce continue to keep all options on the table. We applaud
them for reconsidering their original draft, and hosting a
series of public forums with a range of stakeholders to try and
find a reasonable solution which we are pleased to participate
in.
Ultimately, however, the U.S. should return to Wassenaar
and renegotiate the 2013 arrangement. We live in a global
digital ecosystem that is not constrained by borders. We
receive information about threats that affect the security of
our products and our customers from all over the world. Even if
the U.S. fixes its domestic policy, it will not enable us to
continue to receive and share critical and timely information
that affects the security of our customers on products from
outside our borders. We must have the tools and resources on
hand to act immediately and continue to provide world class
secure software and services and ensure customer safety.
Unfortunately, the 2013 Wassenaar agreement would undermine our
ability to do so.
I applaud the leadership of the committee for holding this
hearing today. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. And I
look forward to answering your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Mulholland follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Mulholland. Ms. Goodwin,
you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CRISTIN FLYNN GOODWIN

Ms. Goodwin. Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairman Hurd, Ranking
Member Richmond, Ranking Member Kelly, Chairman McCaul,
Chairman Thompson, members of the subcommittees, my name is
Cristin Flynn Goodwin. And I'm assistant general counsel for
Cybersecurity at Microsoft. I advise a wide range of teams on
cybersecurity legal issues, and I manage Microsoft's government
Security Program working with governments around the world.
Thank you for convening today's hearing and your bipartisan
leadership to support our Nation's cybersecurity. Microsoft has
a deep commitment to cybersecurity. And I'm happy to be here
today to discuss our perspective of the Wassenaar Arrangement's
controls on intrusion software agreed to at the December 2013
Plenary and the proposed U.S. implementation.
As detailed in my written testimony, Microsoft believes the
Wassenaar Arrangement's approach to controlling intrusion
software and the broad export licensing requirements proposed
in the U.S. would undermine security research, incident
response, cyber collaboration, and product innovation. We agree
with your assessment, assessed in a bipartisan letter to
Ambassador Rice last month, that without a significant
overhaul, these broad licensing requirements could seriously
hinder national security.
The intent of the drafters of these provisions was to
prevent the export of surveillance software to criminal
organizations or repressive regimes, which is admirable and
important. Unfortunately, due to the very broad definition of
intrusion software, extensive range of security technologies
will now be subject to broad and burdensome licensing
requirements in the U.S. If left unchanged, the proposed
definition will have a chilling effect on the development of
products and services and on the discovery of existing
vulnerabilities. It will also significantly impact security
incident response, and create new barriers for those seeking to
secure themselves against increasingly persistent and
sophisticated cyber threats. To demonstrate the impact,
consider these three very common cybersecurity scenarios.
First, a large critical infrastructure provider based in
Germany is concerned that there is an attacker present on its
corporate network and stealing sensitive information. The
company calls in an American security company to come to
Germany to help investigate whether the attacker is still
present, and to use tools to find out what the attacker might
be trying to steal or access without tipping them off.
Second, a cybersecurity researcher with a small company in
the United States finds a new piece of malware that hides
itself on a user's machine, and then automatically deletes log
files that indicate where an attacker is hiding on a machine.
The researcher wants to share his analysis of the malware and
collaborate with a software vendor in the U.S.
Third, an American software company is developing a new
product for commercial sale. Its internal security team, with
members in the U.S., Australia, and Japan, wants to develop a
tool that will help them test the product's security measures
before it is sold.
What do these scenarios have in common? Security response,
collaboration, and product innovation stops until new export
licenses can be processed, which can take weeks or even months.
It also means that the attacker will be present for weeks on
the German network. The malware identified by the researcher
will continue affecting machines. And the software company will
be delayed in its effort to develop a new product.
Clearly, none of this is in the best interest of American
cybersecurity. The United States must lead the effort to re-set
this flawed approach internationally. Security experts should
not have to pick up the phone in the middle of the night to
call in an export control adviser to determine whether they can
share certain technical information about an ongoing attack or
as part of their day-to-day work, wait to collaborate with
internal or external colleagues on security priorities. In
today's global security environment, the ability to collaborate
with peers and colleagues should be the default, not the
exception.
As both of your subcommittees know well, developing
cybersecurity policy requires a deep understanding of the
problem, broad input from experts, engagement with the
executive branch and Congress, and a transparent process.
Regrettably, to the detriment of cybersecurity, the
Wassenaar Arrangement definition of intrusion software does not
reflect this type of inclusive process. It must be
renegotiated.
In conclusion, Microsoft is a committed participant in the
public-private partnership, and strongly encourages Congress
and the executive branch to take the necessary steps
internationally, and with our Wassenaar partners, to undo the
overly broad and complicated export control requirements.
Concurrently, the administration should suspend any related
rulemaking efforts until a new agreement can be reached, making
use of a robust, consultative process.
Ms. Goodwin. I commend you for examining this issue today,
and thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
answering your questions and working with you on this important
issue. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Goodwin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Goodwin. The chair now
recognizes the very patient Mr. Garfield for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DEAN C. GARFIELD

Mr. Garfield. Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairman Hurd, Ranking
Member Kelly, Ranking Member Richmond, members of the
committee, on behalf of 64 of the most dynamic and innovative
companies in the world, some of whom are also at this table, we
thank you for hosting this hearing, inviting us to testify, and
for your bipartisan approach on this issue, including the
letter that you sent at the end of last year. I've listened
carefully to the testimony of the other folks on this panel,
and rather than repeating what they've already said so
eloquently, I'll try to focus in on some of the questions that
were implicit in your testimony, including why is this
important? What should we do about Wassenaar? Can we simply
revise the rules? And what are our recommendations or next
step?
As to the first, why is this important, our company, the
companies that are members of ITI, are really the technology
platform for the entire world. There is no sector or industry
that's exempted from the implications of the Wassenaar
Arrangement. Increasingly, cross-border data flows are the
steam of the economic engine worldwide as well as innovation,
the innovation ecosystem. The Wassenaar Arrangement impacts all
businesses, whether they are technology-based or otherwise.
Can the defects in the rules be cured? Our recommendation
and answer is no. In spite of the best intentions of the
drafters, the fundamental flaws in the proposed rules emanate
from the arrangement itself. And I'll point to three areas that
are--that speak to that.
One, the presumptions, the problematic presumptions, around
drawing lines between intrusion software, as well as drawing
lines around IP network surveillance systems are found in the
rules themselves, but are very much, in fact, grounded in the
Wassenaar Arrangement as developed in 2013.
Secondly, the question that Chairman Hurd raised and
Ranking Member Kelly alluded to around whether you can actually
deal with the fast-paced world of cybersecurity in cross-border
data flows through the lumbering world that is limited by
borders in export controls, the answer is no.
Third, what is really needed here is a multinational
approach, as a number of the members on this panel and the
committee have noted, given the nature of our economy today,
its heavy reliance on cross-border data flows, as well as the
nature of cybersecurity that's been advanced by the work of
this Congress through the Cybersecurity Act of 2015, as well as
the Department of Commerce through NIST.
Increasingly, the way to deal with cybersecurity issues is
on a multinational basis through the sharing of cyber threat
information. The Wassenaar Arrangement stands in the way of
that.
Relatedly, there are a number of nations that are a
critical part of advancing cybersecurity that are not a part of
the Wassenaar Arrangement, including Brazil, India, and China.
So what do we do? Our recommendation is consistent with the
private sector witnesses on this panel. Given that the root of
the challenge is grounded in the 2013 developments in Wassenaar
and the Wassenaar Arrangement, our recommendation is to go back
to Wassenaar to cure those fatal defects. We say that not out
of taking any pride in suggesting that the United States go
back and renegotiate this agreement, but from our perspective,
it's truly an opportunity to exercise leadership.
There are a number of countries that are struggling with
dealing with these same issues, and the United States has an
opportunity to provide global leadership in dealing with what
are truly complex issues.
Secondly, it's important that whatever is done next is
informed by experts, including many of those that are in this
room, and some of who are not.
I thank the committee, again, for this opportunity to
testify. And I look forward to your questions and to working
with you towards a solution. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Garfield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Garfield.
The chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes of
questions.
And I want to start, Ms. Ganzer, with you, because you were
the only witness that didn't have a statement, and there was
some intimation about--about your role, perhaps, in negotiating
the Wassenaar Arrangement of 2013 and the inclusion of
intrusion software. And so I want to take just a minute of my
time to give you an opportunity to address whether or not
that's accurate, or what your role was, if any?
Ms. Ganzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here today. In my role as the Director of
Conventional Arms Threat Reduction, I am the head of delegation
for the Wassenaar Arrangement writ large for the United States.
So I was in the chair for the United States when the control
was adopted and agreed to on behalf of the United States. I was
not responsible, specifically, in the room when it was
negotiated. The administration has an integrated team of
members from the interagency generally, including the Commerce
and Defense Departments; Homeland Security may be there; Energy
may be there; depending on what issue is being negotiated. But
the administration and an integrated team negotiated these
controls. And, so, there would have been an integrated team
that agreed to the specifics.
I would note that the control was intended to capture
purpose-built suites of operated control--operator controlled
software that extract--are designed to extract data from a
system, modify a system or its data, or modify the system to
execute a malicious operator's instructions without the systems
owner's knowledge. That was what we intended to control, and
that is what we thought we controlled. So the reaction from our
industry colleagues here was quite a prize to us. And we
continue to work the issue within the administration to--to do
no harm, as some of the members mentioned in their statements.
Thank you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you. That's helpful, Ms.
Ganzer.
So based on that, and you answered my next question, was
based on the comments you heard today and the more than 300
formal comments from industry, were you surprised? And you said
that you were.
As a follow-up to that, do you think those comments are
justified?
Ms. Ganzer. Sir, the industry knows what they are doing.
So, absolutely. Many of the comments were very serious, went
into very detailed analysis of the proposed rule, many proposed
exceptions or different ways that we could address some of
their concerns, and many of them were amplified, or reiterated
through the process of meetings that the Department of Commerce
hosted, in which I and several members of my team attended to
listen to these concerns from industry.
So, absolutely, they--they were, in many cases, right on
the mark, and we are taking them very seriously.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you.
So let me follow up on the specifics. One of the comments,
I believe, was from Ms. McGuire and others in the industry, as
drafted, what keeps bad actors that the Wassenaar Arrangement
is seeking to stop from purchasing unlicensed products, or
purchasing products in a nonparticipating state?
Ms. Ganzer. Thank you for that question. That's a difficult
one to answer. As Mr. Van Diepen has already indicated, export
controls are most effective when they are multilateral. And so
this is why we work through organizations like the Wassenaar
Arrangement when we establish controls, because, first of all,
41 members of the Wassenaar Arrangement, including many of our
allies who developed this sophisticated technology, commit to
the controls in the Wassenaar Arrangement, and there are a
number of other countries that unilaterally adhere to the
Wassenaar Arrangement controls.
So we do capture a good portion of the market by
establishing controls in a multilateral form like the Wassenaar
Arrangement.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Well, I appreciate that.
Do you think, or would you agree, that as written, there's
a security consequence to the domestic implementation of the
Wassenaar Agreement as some folks in industry have indicated?
Ms. Ganzer. It--just to clarify, it was a proposed rule.
Nothing has actually been implemented yet. But indeed, since we
did not intend to capture many of the scenarios that were--were
presented to us by industry, this is something that we need to
fix, and we are working interagency, analyzing the comments,
following up with them to determine what our next steps forward
will be.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So I appreciate that.
So as my time expires, in terms of coming to that solution,
you've heard some calls here from folks in industry for this to
be renegotiated. And so my question to you is, why or what are
the impediments, if any, to doing that? Because as I was
understanding the arrangement, it meets every year.
Ms. Ganzer. Well, first and foremost, we have not yet
determined whether we need to do that. The interagency
continues to work that issue. So saying we are going to go back
and negotiate would be premature. But I would note that the
Wassenaar Arrangement operates by consensus. All 41 members
will have to agree, and 31 members have already implemented
this control. So that is--we are also looking at how other
countries are controlling this or have implemented it, and that
will all be taken into account in the administration's decision
on what we will do going forward when we--when we get there.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you, Ms. Ganzer.
My time has expired. The chair now recognizes the ranking
member, Ms. Kelly, for her questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As I stated in my opening statement, today's hearing is a
recognition of the fact that the Federal Government and the
private sector must work together effectively to thwart
cybercrime and to support advancement in cyber defense and
research.
Mr. Garfield, you talked about meeting a multinational
approach, sharing information, curing fatal defects, exercising
leadership, and that leadership that we exercise needs to be
informed by experts.
What role do you see that Congress can play to ensure that
the private sector's concerns pertaining to the proposed
Wassenaar regulations are adequately addressed?
Mr. Garfield. Thank you for listening so carefully. You've
recounted my testimony more effectively than I did.
I think the thing you can do you are, in fact, doing. So
the letter that was sent in December making sure that there's a
recognition that this is not political, it's bipartisan, and
it's critically important. I think the second thing is, in
fact, Congress insisting on getting real answers on what's
going to happen next. And so continuing your oversight, I
think, is an important part of the role that you can play in
this area.
You've done a lot through the bills that you've passed on
cybersecurity, including the Cybersecurity Act of 2015, and we
commend you for that.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. This rulemaking is an opportunity for
the government and private sector to demonstrate that working
together can produce positive results with no unintended
collateral harm to cyber's defense capabilities.
Ms. Goodwin, one area of your testimony focuses on the
importance of the public-private partnership in cyber security
regulation. I was wondering if you could, if possible, offer
examples of private-public partnerships in cybersecurity that
are working, and that could serve as an example for how the
implementation of the Wassenaar Arrangement export controls
might be revised to meet the government and private sector?
Ms. Goodwin. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly. There are a
number of things that we can point to in the public-private
partnership space. The collaboration and coordination that the
private sector and companies like Microsoft has with the
Department of Homeland Security's Computer Emergence Response
Team, U.S. CERT, its collaborative way in which it comes
together to triage incidents that the security community's
conferences and hacking competitions and prizes to find the
best way to disassemble the vacuum cleaner and put it back
together, this is a robust community where the ability to
exchange information with the government and with other
companies is absolutely essential to our ability to secure
ourselves and our customers.
Imagine if Congress were to pass a bill without any
constituent input, without any consultation with experts, and
then once the bill had been signed into law, then to say, well,
we'll work on the implementation after the fact. The reality is
that we have a very robust public-private partnership that
we'll have to leverage. In the event that additional export
control ideas are floated in a community where the private
sector may not play, we have to rely on our government partners
to bring this to us and to triage them and to think about the
implications and consequences before we take any position.
This--Mr. Wolf said that this was an issue of first
instance in his testimony. We had not attempted to tackle
cybersecurity quite like this in the export control space, so
this is an opportunity for us to rethink the process so that
the public-private partnership can be brought to bear in these
types of questions, so that we don't have to, like you said, to
regulate first and ask questions later.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Mulholland, as the engineer on the panel, do you think
it would be sufficient that the administration, through a
revised policy, puts in intracompany license exemption into a
new rule?
Mr. Mulholland. Thank you, Congresswoman Kelly, for the
question. The simple answer to that is no. The reality is that
might help our situation domestically, but the reality is, is
that as a global company, I will seek threat information on my
products from anywhere.
You know, we heard a few minutes ago that there are 31
countries have already implemented Wassenaar. The reality is,
in my mind anyway, Wassenaar is not 41 countries in this space,
it is 40 plus one. There is one country in this world and one
country and not 41 who provides overwhelming leadership in the
technology sector. The reason why I don't think we've actually
seen any negative consequences from the other 31 is because,
frankly, their expert ratings are not likely to be injurious to
their industries, because, frankly, they don't have
particularly vibrant industries.
And I, you know, heard many of the members have commented
on our leadership. Ms. McGuire cited an example where a U.S.
company pulled out of Japan, pulled out of participating in a
very long, established security research conference in Japan.
Does that injure Japan's technology industry, or does it injure
the U.S. industry? My vote is that it injures the U.S.
So in short, no, BIS fixing the situation here in the U.S.
does not fix the problem. The only way the problem gets fixed
is to go back to Wassenaar, or perhaps, even concerning whether
export controls is the right way to tackle this problem.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. And I'm out of time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlelady.
At this time, I ask unanimous consent to insert into the
record a letter from more than 100 Members of Congress to
Ambassador Susan Rice regarding our collective concerns about
the addition to the Wassenaar Arrangement to export controls of
intrusion software that, in our opinion, could seriously hinder
national security.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Ratcliffe. At this time, the chair recognizes my friend
and colleague from Texas, Congressman Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I wanted to start out with Ms. Goodwin from Microsoft.
We've talked a little bit about, today, about how some of this
software is available from countries that aren't a party to our
agreement. I know Microsoft is active in fighting software
piracy as well. Even in the domestic, international stuff that
we're seeking to regulate, software is pretty portable and
pretty easy to pirate. Do you think there's a practical way we
can actually put export control on software against, obviously,
a hacker who would be typically unethical to begin with, or a
state actor that's hostile to us? I imagine y'all struggle
pretty hard from keeping Microsoft Word from getting pirated?
Ms. Goodwin. That's a great question, Representative. Not
only is it a challenge from a piracy standpoint, it's also a
challenge from a legal standpoint. If you look at the
implementation of the Wassenaar Arrangement thus far, I would
point to the hacking team, which is a company that creates this
type of intrusion software, and over in the gov--in Italy. And
the Italian Government issued them a license to continue to
sell this software.
And when the hacking team was actually hacked itself, and
its email was disclosed around the world, it was found that
this software, which had been licensed by the government in
Italy under this regime had been sold to regimes like Ethiopia
and Sudan.
And, so, part of the challenge in thinking about how do we
apply export control in the space is what do we do when you
have uneven, or different implementations that software
actually can be licensed, and then sold and used in ways that
are contrary to the original intent of the regulation? So it is
extremely difficult to figure out how to solve a challenge like
that.
Mr. Farenthold. Let me ask you another question. It seems
like we're focusing on regulating the tools rather than the
people. I mean, I think that kind of goes along the--you know,
not just even the developers, but the folks that are using it.
I mean, where do you--where do you see--do you think that's a
better idea, and do you think that's more doable?
Ms. Goodwin. There are criminal laws in place today that
can be used to leverage to pursue those that are violating
cybercrime laws. The European convention on cybercrime is a
multilateral tool and instrument that we can use as well. And
so what we can do is focus more on prosecution and looking at
negative implications of how these tools are used. Yes,
absolutely.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
And let's talk to, I guess, Ms. Ganzer from the State
Department. As y'all's team was getting ready for the
negotiations, did y'all go out and talk to companies like
Microsoft or Symantec or VMware? What was your engagement with
the industry?
Ms. Ganzer. There's--thank you for the question,
Congressman. There's an established process by which we share
this information with the Commerce Department technical
advisory committees who are made up of industry. I actually
think it might be more appropriate----
Mr. Farenthold. Kevin, do you want to--Mr. Wolf, you want
to take that one?
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Before agreeing to or submitting a proposal
to Wassenaar or any of the other regimes, we share it with one
of six technical advisory committees that are all volunteers,
industry participants, experts in the area. And the original
idea was shared with the relevant groups, and they didn't have
any objection on the thought that----
Mr. Farenthold. Did it come as a surprise to you that we
got so many negative comments?
Mr. Wolf. Well, by the time we received the comments, no.
At the time we agreed to the control, it would have, because
the original understanding was that it was a quite narrow,
specific, a very small number of products that would be
affected. And as we began to learn more and engage in the very
industry output that is being discussed here, we began to get
more and more concerned of unintended consequences, and that's
why I said I think this is the first time we, Commerce, have
actually pulled out from the implementation rule for a regime
rule. And instead of gambling and potentially getting it wrong,
went out to industry to confirm if our suspicions were correct,
or maybe we were being too concerned, and then the comments
came in.
And that was actually part of the plan, was to see if we
made a mistake, needed to do something differently at whatever
level. So in a way, the process is actually working exactly as
intended.
Mr. Farenthold. Would you agree with that, Ms. Ganzer?
Ms. Ganzer. Absolutely.
Mr. Farenthold. And were you surprised with the comment,
the number of comments as well or the----
Ms. Ganzer. Much as Assistant Secretary Wolf said, by the
time they came in, no. But when we first started this process,
yes. Because we had thought, based on the comments from our
Wassenaar partners, that we had negotiated a rather narrow
control. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold. I see my time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Sanchez.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And it's fascinating. Every time I come to a cyber issue,
it's just incredibly fascinating. I remember--I'm from
California, so, of course, we think that we have encryption and
cyber as far cutting edge as possible.
I remember, Mr. Chairman, 20 years ago, when I sat on the
Armed Services Committee, we had instituted a military--a bloc
on sending encryption out. And at the time, it was Adam Smith
and myself were the only ones who were going, wait a minute, if
we do that, we're going to lose encryption ability, or
technology lead in California or the United States. And, in
fact, we struggled, as Symantec and others will tell you, prior
to the company, we struggled quite a bit until we were able to
undo some of those restrictions.
So you were surprised, even though you had--you thought you
had industry covered through the system. So my question to you
would be, have you gone back and rethought different levels you
might have interacted at the time with respect to that so we
don't have the same type of surprise again? Because these
issues of export controls and what is used and what is the
standard and who's setting the standard and who's got the keys,
it's going to come up over and over and over again.
So have you--have any of you gone back and rethought it,
say, there might--where you could have interjected industry
earlier, or was industry just sort of like, yeah, yeah, yeah?
Sometimes that happens here in the Congress. You know, someone
comes up to you, yeah, yeah, yeah, sign me on. Then you go
back, and you think about it, and you have to pick up the phone
and say, wait a minute, maybe what I agreed to isn't exactly
what I was thinking at the time.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. I would cite the fact that--as I just said,
we pulled out of the implementation rule this specific topic
only, and instead of just implementing it, shooting first and
asking questions later, as was referred to earlier, asking for
industry input before deciding.
This is also highlighted the complexity of this topic in
general, and we're always looking for new volunteers and
participants with different areas of expertise to join our
technical advisory committee. It's a volunteer organization.
And so absolutely, on a going-forward basis, I plan to have
more experts in this to help us review this, and to the extent
this type of issue comes up in the future.
In the short term, in the meantime, we have this particular
issue. And, you know, with the great benefit of our colleagues
from other parts of the U.S. Government and other industry
participants and the actual comments that have come in, the
goal is to think through all the various options and ways to
address all the various concerns that were described today to
achieve the objectives, but without the harm. So the short
answer to your question is yes.
Ms. Sanchez. Good. That's what we like to hear.
Mr. Wolf. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sanchez. Secondly, so some countries, or signatories to
this, have already started to implement, as you say. And, of
course, the big gorilla in the room is the United States, as
you know, because we--I think, again, we still hold the edge on
this area in the industry, and probably the industry itself.
So what is the process to go back and renegotiate if we've
already--if some countries have already started implementing?
What would we--what does Congress need to--do you need Congress
involved in this? Or is it just an administrative thing where,
you know, the administration could go back and say, Hey, guys,
we were kidding; let's sit down; we've got to redo this?
Mr. Van Diepen. Well, Congresswoman, again, we're still, as
an administration, working through the comments and then the
various options we have for mitigating the problems and then
consulting with industry. I think one of the things we'll do as
part of that is consult with the Wassenaar, or the 31-plus
Wassenaar countries that have already been implementing this
control for a year without apparent controversy to find out
from them well, what has their experience been? Once we sort
of, you know, canalize the comments, how do you guys deal with
issues like this and get from them ideas that could help us?
Ms. Sanchez. And if that doesn't work, the reality is that
we do need to renegotiate?
Mr. Van Diepen. If at the end of the day, we think that we
need to try to renegotiate the control, you know, then, at that
point, you know, it's a diplomatic discussion amongst 41
countries. And as noted, at the end of the day, any change will
require consensus. All of them would have to agree. And for a
number of them, and, presumably, their starting point is going
to be, Well, wait a minute, we've been implementing this
control for a year plus. We haven't had any problems. Why are
you guys having problems? And so we'll have to have that kind
of discussion going--going back and forth. But at the end of
the day, it would require us to be able to convince the other
countries to go along with some sort of modification.
Ms. Sanchez. Great.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time. And let me just say
that I think this is an important issue and, hopefully, we can
get a timeline out of the administration about where they might
be and--so that we can make sure that we keep up with what's
going on on this in case it needs to be renegotiated.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlelady for her comments.
And at this time, the chair recognizes the former U.S.
Attorney from Pennsylvania, my friend, Congressman Marino.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for being
here.
Ms. Ganzer, can you clarify something for me, because I was
running in and out to other--other hearings.
What specifically was your role in this negotiation? Are
you--were you the person that made the final decision in the
Wassenaar Agreement?
Ms. Ganzer. As I said, ultimately, it's my responsibility,
Congressman, but, in fact, this had to be agreed across the
administration. We all agreed to the control before we said
okay.
Mr. Marino. What part did--maybe Mr. Van Diepen--am I
pronouncing that correctly? What part did you play in this,
sir?
Mr. Van Diepen. I am the Deputy Assistant Secretary
supervising Ms. Ganzer's office. So among other things, would
have approved the interagency guidance cable that set out the
parameters of what proposals we could and could not agree to in
the Wassenaar----
Mr. Marino. Okay. Now it's starting to make sense.
Mr. Wolf and Ms. Schneck.
Mr. Wolf. No, I would like to concur. This is--all
agreements with Wassenaar are as a result of consensus of the
Departments of Commerce, State, and Defense. And so it wasn't
just State, you know, unilaterally agreeing to it. It was the
consensus of the departments participating.
And as I said, we had doubts about it later, but at the
time, it was a consensus decision of the administration.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Ms. Schneck, am I pronouncing that
correctly?
Ms. Schneck. Schneck.
Mr. Marino. Schneck. I'm sorry.
Ms. Schneck. Close enough.
Mr. Marino. Okay. What part did Homeland Security play in
this?
Ms. Schneck. So we provided technical insights. Our Office
of Science and Technology holds our export controls portfolio,
which includes Wassenaar. Where I sit, which is a different
directorate, the national protection and programs directorate,
provided some technical advice. We've had a challenge in
finding a way to adopt export controls in a way that supports,
again, our national security without affecting our homeland
security cybersecurity operations that I oversee and the
technology----
Mr. Marino. Okay. Now, I heard Ms. Ganzer say that industry
was consulted, and I think Mr. Wolf said industry was
consulted. Is that true?
Mr. Wolf. Through the technical advisory committee process,
yes, not through a proposed rule, which would have more broader
industry----
Mr. Marino. Okay. Did State do that, have that discussion
with industry? Then did Commerce have that discussion with
industry? And Homeland have that discussion with industry?
Mr. Wolf. No, it really wouldn't be State's process to do
that. That's really the role of the Commerce Department to use
its advisory committees to get industry input and then feed
that out to the other departments.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Now, you talked about, what was it, 30-
some or 40-some other countries have already implemented this
rule?
Ms. Ganzer. 31.
Mr. Marino. My question is, what weight is that going to
carry? You know, are these other countries going to have more
weight in this? Do they have a bigger dog in this fight than
our own homegrown U.S. companies?
Mr. Van Diepen. Congressman, I'm not sure it necessarily
ends up being a weight issue. Again, we are going to have to
determine----
Mr. Marino. Well, certainly, it's going to be a weight
issue, because it involves jobs here in the United States. It
involves security. It involves business in this country that
create tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of jobs. And
the point I'm trying to get across is, I want enough attention
paid to industry here in the United States than letting someone
in Europe making the determination of how we're going to play
football over here.
Mr. Van Diepen. Absolutely, Congressman. And what I was
trying to just say is the first instance will be, do we think
we can come up with a U.S. method of implementation of the
Wassenaar rule that is satisfactory? If that's the case, we
have the entire unilateral national discretion to implement it
that way, and no one else can gainsay us. So that would be a
problem.
Mr. Marino. Now, is this a still an open, ongoing process?
Mr. Wolf. Absolutely.
Mr. Marino. And are you going to communicate with four
people at the end of the table here and others that I see in
the gallery here about what is the most efficient way to do
this and what is the best bang for the U.S.? Because I'm tired
of us taking a back seat with this administration and worrying
about what other countries want.
So are you giving us your word here that you are going to
talk with these people and not be disingenuous about the
meetings with these people, about what they need to continue to
provide jobs here in the U.S.?
Mr. Wolf. Well, a couple--absolutely. And a couple of
things. Unlike any other country, the U.S. Government went out
and asked for industry comment through a proposed rule. No
other government did that. We have had multiple open, public
sessions with these attendees and many, many other countries to
overtly, deliberately, aggressively ask their views and
expertise. That process is going to continue over the course of
2016----
Mr. Marino. Okay. I see my time has expired. I would like
to see an emphasis put on what we need here in the United
States. And I trust that you will do that.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to a very
large panel.
Mr. Wolf, I want to go back to the beginning to understand
the process. So the Wassenaar Arrangement involving 41
countries, a lot of those members come to us saying, will you
help? We think we need some kind of expert control over
cybersecurity countermeasures. Is that correct?
Mr. Wolf. That is correct, as part of the Wassenaar
discussions.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Right. Normally, the Wassenaar
Arrangement involves things, right, defense, goods, and
products?
Mr. Wolf. Well, it involves physical things, commodities,
both do or use and military, but it also involves software for
those things and technology for those things.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Okay. All right. Would you not agree
that, in the terms or--in the context of export controls,
controlling things, widgets, is easier than controlling thought
processes and methods?
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. So different challenge, what we're being
asked to do. So you take that--not you, collectively, take that
request, come up with something that helps us, because we're
worried, your partners in Wassenaar are worried, and you come
up with a draft rule. Is that correct?
Mr. Wolf. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. You submit that rule to public comment,
including industry comment. Is that correct?
Mr. Wolf. Well, normally, not. Normally with Wassenaar, we
rely----
Mr. Connolly. No. No. I was not asking that question. You
did?
Mr. Wolf. Oh, yes, absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. I'm just trying to get the sequence.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Connolly. So let me ask the question. Why wouldn't--
because you had to pull the rule. So why wouldn't we have
reversed that sequence and sought industry's input before we
actually issued a draft rule?
Mr. Wolf. At the time of the administration's agreement
with the proposed rule, or the control within Wassenaar, our
understanding and the understanding of our industry advisory
groups was that the scope of the control was quite narrow and
only would affect a very small number of products.
So there was no need to do that, or something along those
lines. It was only after the fact, as we began to learn more
and see how other people read exactly the same words that we
had read in 2013, that you can come to other very reasonable
conclusions about the broad--the breadth and the scope and the
impact of the control.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And to your credit, you pulled them?
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. But I guess I'm a little concerned about the
process moving forward, because, okay, this time, we spared
ourselves either an embarrassment or a significant, you know,
problem. But I'm--I'm looking at something you said, Ms.
McGuire. You were talking about the licensing requirement of
the rule. And you said, asking a multinational corporation, who
is at risk of a cyber attack, to wait months for a license, to
be able to test its network defenses, or to receive the latest
protections because security providers are hampered from
communicating across borders is downright dangerous.
Do you want to comment on that in terms of the process?
Again, I fully commend, you know, the executive branch for
seeing an error and pulling it. We don't always do that. Good
work. But I'm still worried, though, that maybe the process
could have been perfected so that we could have avoided even
that. Your comment.
Ms. McGuire. So, thank you for the question. And I think
the process piece of this is--is critically important. And
while the technical advisory groups within the Department of
Commerce were consulted on this issue, no cybersecurity
industry was consulted on this issue. There were none that were
sitting on the advisory groups, to our knowledge, at the time.
Mr. Connolly. Another problem with the process.
Ms. McGuire. In addition, the advisory committee, our
understanding was that the language that was part of the
original proposal that the advisory committees saw was not the
language that ultimately was adopted at Wassenaar.
So while they may have--they may have said, we don't think
there's going to be a lot of problems, what ultimately became
enacted was not what was put in front of them.
Mr. Connolly. That's why I suggested--I mean, I've always
been a skeptic about export controls, frankly. I mean, maybe
good intentions, but we don't live in that kind of world
anymore. And trying to actually contain knowledge, very
difficult to do.
I know, Mr. Mulholland--are we Irish?
Mr. Mulholland. I am, sir.
Mr. Connolly. God bless him. Let's give him an extra--give
him an extra little bit of time here.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I am Irish, too. You get all the time you
want.
Mr. Mulholland. We'll take it.
Mr. Connolly. And let's call it Irish fairness, right?
Mr. Mulholland. I just want to join your point about
things. So I used to be in the military, and actually was
subject to a predecessor of the Wassenaar inspection and some
Russian officers turned up and said, we have a list here that
says you have 36 missile launchers. And so we dutifully took
them through into our hangars, they pointed to 36, and life was
good.
The thing that we're trying to control today is this. And
this is actually--Ms. Schneck mentioned partly. This is the
code for the Heartbleed security vulnerability. I've blown it
up for the sake of illustration, but it's actually 40 lines of
code. If I want to proliferate that, I take it around the
corner, and I photocopy it, or I email it, or I post it on the
Internet. To your point about trying to control knowledge,
we're trying to use, and, frankly, in my view, the wrong tool
to control this. We're trying to take a physical construct
that's worked pretty well for 20-odd years, and we're trying to
drop it into the digital world. And, frankly, my view is that
that simply does not work.
Mr. Connolly. I couldn't agree with you more.
Mr. Chairman, and I hope the Congress, on a bipartisan
basis, will use this and other forums, Mr. Chairman, to explore
a radical rethinking of what's in place right now. And it's all
well-intentioned, but I just think we're in a new world. And I
think we spend a lot of time, and industry is asked to spend a
lot of time and money trying to comply with something that is
not efficacious any longer.
I thank the chair.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman from Virginia for his
questions and his comments.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the panel being out today for an extended
witness time, but we do appreciate all of you being here, as
well as staff.
Recently completing my first year in the House, it has
opened my eyes to the problems that we have specifically in the
cybersecurity arena. Also serving on the Department--or the
Committee on Homeland Security, as well as the co-chair of the
cloud caucus, has really sent me studying this issue and should
cause us all great concern.
Congress recently passed the cybersecurity legislation
designed to facilitate the efficient and effective sharing of
cyber threat data and indicators between the private and the
public sectors.
Ms. Schneck, the DHS has a big role to play in that
process. The question for you is how would the proposed Bureau
of Industry and Security rule, as drafted, impact that sharing?
Ms. Schneck. So, thank you for your question. I would defer
a lot of the legal around that to my colleagues from Commerce
and State, but I'll give you a technical explanation. So the
great legislation that you gave us enabled our operation
center, the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center, the NCCIC, to be the Center of Threat
Indicator Collections with all the best use of private and
civil liberties to get it right. But to get the cyber
indicators together so that we can create a good contextual
picture and push that information out to our, both public and
private partners, and enable them to use that information.
This is real time. This is machine to machine. And one of
the worries that we're hearing from private sector and others
is that this proposed rule would, in some cases, hamper the
real-time sharing of information.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Let me follow-up with you. If you need to
defer, that's fine. I don't know, is there a limit on defers
before you would have to buy somebody dinner, or drink? I don't
know. We'll see. How would the proposed rule impact
cybersecurity generally for U.S. companies? Frequent questions
wrapped in one. What about critical infrastructure, government
agencies? Isn't the rule going to put them at risk at some
point?
Ms. Schneck. Is that for me?
Mr. Walker. Yes, it is, unless you need to defer.
Ms. Schneck. So our responsibility is to protect all of
that, the critical infrastructure, and then the Federal
civilian government, and the private industry to include
academia, State and local. We also share among 300--at least
300 other governments' cyber information.
As a scientist, I'll give you an operational discussion.
And that is that the best cybersecurity protection we can
provide is to understand the most quickly what's happening and
make sure that when a cyber actor, this is exactly what an
intrusion is, tries to execute their instruction on a machine
they don't own, that machine knows, A, not to execute it, or,
B, that it's happening so it can tell everybody else about it
and not sustain an injury.
Mr. Walker. Okay.
Ms. Schneck. The ability, or the thought that that would
get delayed in any of the ways mentioned today is detrimental
to our cybersecurity.
Mr. Walker. Thank you for the----
Mr. Wolf, did you want to add anything to that?
Mr. Wolf. No. But these are exactly points that--I guess,
yes. These are exactly the points that were raised in
overwhelmingly in the comments, which is why we're here and why
we are continuing through the interagency process to try to
come up with a solution to address that very concern.
Mr. Walker. That's fair.
Ms. Goodwin, I believe that technology is a tool I think
most of us would agree, tool is a--technology is a tool that
could be used for good or bad. In other words, it's not
inherently one direction or the other. I think that's a pretty
simple concept, but the behavior is.
I'm intrigued by the idea that under Wassenaar, we are
choosing to focus on the exporters of software tools instead of
looking at the actual users of those tools and how those tools
are utilized.
Question for you: Do you think that, perhaps, we should be
looking at a cybersecurity regulatory regime that focused on
the users?
Ms. Goodwin. We certainly need to be exploring the
questions in a public-private partnership. The challenge of how
do you deter criminal behavior? How you deter the bad effects
of using surveillance software against those that we're trying
to protect here? How do you stop a criminal from committing a
criminal act? That's a challenge. But the reality is that 80--
81 percent of the security companies in the world are here in
the United States.
So regardless of the effect that it's maybe having outside
of the United States, it's going to have a larger effect inside
the United States. So we have to think about where the right
place to regulate is, the use of the software, the intent of
the criminal.
Mr. Walker. Right. And if it is 80 percent, the technology
is kind of interfused where it's hard to even separate from one
country doing business with the other. And I hope--and I'll
yield back with the rest of my time--the international
community can influence or encourage this positive, and
hopefully beneficial behavior.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin my
questions, if I could, I would like to submit my original
comments to Department of Commerce, the rule and the concerns
that I have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Without objection.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to, again, thank you, Secretary Wolf,
at the Department of Commerce and BIS for bending over
backwards to listen to concerns that have been raised here, and
in other areas with respect to this rule. You've been very
helpful and responsive to those concerns.
Ms. Ganzer and Secretary Van Diepen, I hope it's very clear
that you've hit a wall with respect to the way this was
negotiated, what was negotiated, and there's pretty broad
opposition going forward. So we are hoping that you are going
to take that message and go back and get this right, probably
by having to renegotiate.
So is that a fair statement? You understand that we have
broad opposition here?
Mr. Van Diepen. I certainly understand your statement,
Congressman. Again, I think our responsibility is to work hard
and find the best solution that both gives us some ability to
address the security concerns we're trying to address while
avoiding these unintended consequences.
Mr. Langevin. So with respect to criteria for the selection
of dual-use items, dual-use goods and technologies to be
controlled are those which are major or are key elements for
the indigenous development, reduction, use, or enhancement of
military capabilities. For selection purposes, the dual-use
items should also be evaluated against the following criteria:
Bond availability outside participating states; next, ability
to control effectively with the export of the goods; next, the
ability to make a clear and objective specification of the
item; and, last, control by another regime.
So to Ms. Ganzer and Secretary Van Diepen, with respect to
clear and objective specification of the items, given the
diversity of implementation we've seen in participating States,
is the definition clear at the moment?
Furthermore, the director of DARPA has stated that, and I
quote, ``From a technology perspective, defense and offenses
are indistinguishable,'' of you echoed by the State
Department's own defense trade advisory group. Doesn't this
preclude objective specification?
Mr. Van Diepen. I don't believe so, Congressman. Everything
on the Wassenaar dual-use list, as well as most of the things
in category 2, the missile technology and control regime annex,
the entire nuclear suppliers' group dual-use list, and the
entire Australia group's chemical biological list are dual-use
items. These are things that, again, can inherently be used,
both for good purposes and bad purposes.
And these have always included not only physical items, but
software of various types. So there's a long, experienced, and
multilateral export controls of being able to properly specify
and properly control dual-use things, including dual-use
software. And so, I--again, I think that, you know, our
responsibility is to do our best to see if we can appropriately
apply that expertise in this instance.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. I would have some concerns with that
answer, but let me go next.
With respect to foreign availability, do you believe that
intrusion software tools are not available and could not be
developed in non-Wassenaar participating states like Singapore
or China, which are home to four of the top 20 engineering and
technology universities in the world according to QS rankings?
Mr. Van Diepen. Congressman, I think the genesis of your
statement comes from the factors for consideration that
Wassenaar uses in judging items. And these are factors for
consideration. It's not a checklist that every item must
absolutely fulfill each and every one of the things. But we
have to look at each of those things and decide whether the
benefits or the control outweigh the--the costs or the
difficulties of the control.
So, for example, in the Australia group, we're controlling
biological pathogens, many of which you can dig out of your own
backyard. So there's ubiquitous foreign availability, but it's
believed, and we've got a very solid track record, that it's
been very advantageous to U.S. security to be able to maintain
export controls on those items multilaterally with our
partners.
Mr. Langevin. And with respect to ability to effectively
control export, do you believe that our regime has the
capability to stop transfer of the goods or associated
technology given that software can be sent across the globe
without passing through a port of entry or other border
checkpoint?
Mr. Van Diepen. And, again, for over 25 years, we've
controlled, multilaterally, a whole host of different types of
software. And even recognizing the inherent challenges of
software export controls, it has been felt that we've been able
to craft controls where the benefits outweigh the costs. And,
again, I would also point to the biological case, where, again,
you're talking about individual cells. If you have two of them,
they can self-replicate, so it's not all that different from
cyber export controls, and yet, again, it has been felt that it
has been advantageous for us to have those types of export
controls.
Mr. Langevin. Mr. Secretary, my time has expired, but I
have to say, I respectfully disagree with each one of your
answers. This is a checklist against which we should be--we
should be evaluating on the states' value, and I think you've
drawn the wrong conclusions. But my time has expired, and I'll
yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. I appreciate y'all coming. I am just going to
make one comment, and then I will yield to Congressman Hurd, if
that's okay.
First of all, when I looked at the participating countries,
I don't see a lot of Asian competitors there. And I know what I
would think if I was in private business, y'all. So you were
not talking about the obvious. But I had a lot of competition
coming from my--from Asia and India, and we can't be playing a
different game than them, or we will lose.
So I understand the need to protect the homeland, but
there's something obviously wrong with this list if you're
going to--if you were trying to influence me to join up, and I
saw that list, after my technology had already been stolen a
half dozen times, it would be a tough, tough, sell.
Number two, with my facilities around the world, which we
have, which I had, customers--you know, customers and
facilities all on these lists, the foreign corrupt practice
laws and everything, I don't even know how to do this. I
wouldn't know how to implement it. It just feels, like, it hits
me like a freight train here.
And so--and, look, I spent a lot of time doing this. So,
you know, there's got to be--you would have to put it in terms.
I spent, you know, yesterday and today trying to think about
these things and think to myself and my own business model, how
would I do this? And I never really got there. How can I
compete, take care of my customers, take care of my
competitors, and my suppliers across all these different
borders, and not break the law and keep my country safe? So if
y'all are going to do that to sitting CEOs, I recommend that
you simplify it so we can understand how we get to do all those
things at the same time, because I spent a whole life doing it,
and I ain't getting there just yet.
I yield back to Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. I thank my colleague from Florida.
This is a lightening round, y'all. We have a lot more
questions to get through, and we have to get to votes.
Number one, I always like to start these off by saying
something positive. Mr. Wolf, you and the Department of
Commerce, great job in recognizing the problems and pulling
back the rule. And as you've alluded to, that doesn't happen
that often, and that should be commended. And I'm hearing you
right, is the technical advisory committees open to--for people
to join?
Mr. Wolf. Absolutely. We're always looking for new
volunteers.
Mr. Hurd. Do you have one on cybersecurity?
Mr. Wolf. We do. We did then, and we have more now.
Mr. Hurd. Okay.
Mr. Garfield, are you willing to help populate the
committee?
Mr. Garfield. Absolutely.
Mr. Hurd. Are there other folks on this the panel willing
to send someone to that committee?
Voice. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Wolf, are you willing to take their input
into thinking about what the best next action is?
Mr. Wolf. Absolutely, whether it's as a tact member or just
a member of the public, both.
Mr. Hurd. What is the best next action? Are you going to
leave here, you are going to say, that was a really long
hearing, a lot of panelists, Congressman Ratcliffe was very
insightful with his questions, and then--and then what happens?
Mr. Wolf. Well, we'll continue discussing among the
agencies, bring in not just the usual export control people,
but those were expertise----
Mr. Hurd. What forum? When is a decision going to be made
about whether another proposed rule is going to be done, or you
go back to Wassenaar?
Mr. Wolf. Well, anything--everything is on the table,
whether to go back to Wassenaar, another proposed rule with
edits and clarifications or interpretations or carve out or
exceptions.
Mr. Hurd. Who makes that decision?
Mr. Wolf. Well, ultimately, it depends upon the consensus
of the agencies involved in the process, Commerce, State, and
Defense. And then as the one responsible for the rule, I have
the final say in terms of signing the rule out. And so the
goal, over however many weeks or months we have to work on
this, is to see if we can address all of the very legitimate
concerns that have been raised today, and then the comments
that you all have raised to come up with something that----
Mr. Hurd. Copied. Thank you.
Mr. Van Diepen, why do you care more about what the other
31 countries are implementing than the people on this panel and
the members of Mr. Garfield's organizations?
Mr. Van Diepen. Respectively, sir, that does not correctly
characterize my views. I care very much. I am a United States
Government employee. I care about what the United States----
Mr. Hurd. What do you think you are going to learn from the
other 31 countries that have already implemented this rule?
Mr. Van Diepen. The kinds of issues that have been raised
here are generic. They don't uniquely affect the United States.
And so to find out how other countries----
Mr. Hurd. So how many of those countries that have
implemented that rule have the same cybercrime laws that the
U.S. has?
Mr. Van Diepen. Unclear, and it's not clear----
Mr. Hurd. How many of those countries have the same robust
ecology of companies that focus on cybersecurity and
practitioners of cybersecurity? I know the answer to this one,
by the way, but I want to see if you know.
Mr. Van Diepen. Well, I think, irrespective of the answer
to that, all those countries are customers of these people, and
information would have to go through----
Mr. Hurd. The answer is zero.
Mr. Van Diepen. --and they would have to be licensed----
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Van Diepen, the answer is zero. You have a
wealth of experience and capabilities here, and they are going
to be the ones that tell you how this is going to ultimately
be--should be--it's going to be impacted by this industry.
Mr. Van Diepen. Which is exactly why we are consulting with
them.
Mr. Hurd. We are the ones that are protecting the rest of--
the rest of--we have to protect ourselves, and we are
protecting the rest of the world's.
Ms. Ganzer, you are in the chair.
Ms. Ganzer. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. If you were in the chair again in 2013, how would
you--how would this have gone differently?
Ms. Ganzer. If I had the information I had today, clearly,
we would have probably renegotiated this differently. But given
the information I had then, I would have made the same
decisions.
Mr. Hurd. When is the next time you are sitting in the
chair? February?
Ms. Ganzer. The Wassenaar Arrangement works on an annual
cycle where final decisions are not made until December, but
proposals are due in--in March and are debated throughout the
year.
Mr. Hurd. Have you done an industry guidance on this
forensics rule that has been brought up? Is there not a rule on
forensics?
Ms. Ganzer. We don't have one under discussion right now.
I'm not aware of one. If we agree to one that we are working to
implement, I would have to--I would have to take that question
back. I don't know, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Wolf?
Mr. Wolf. Well, the topic is of general discussion, but
there isn't anything specific on the table to be able to
respond to, no.
Mr. Hurd. So the general topic of forensics, forensics
tools, for use on understanding a person's network is going to
be up for general discussion at Wassenaar at the next
conversation?
Mr. Wolf. Perhaps. I don't know what some other country
might bring up, but it's not something that we have right now
under discussion.
Mr. Hurd. If this does come up, I would suggest you reach
out to industry first and before you have to figure out what
your left and right bound is for negotiation.
I yield back the time that I do not have.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes my friend and colleague from Texas,
Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. We have a vote on
the floor of the House, but I indicated that this was so
important and provocative, I'm going to try to be as quickly as
I can. And be as successful as the on-site kick was last
evening.
But let me try to get to the government. Mr. Wolf and our
two distinguished State Department representatives, you have
had a series of questions by members. Can I get a yes-or-no
answer that you are going back to the drawing board. We know
that there is an agreement that's going to be coming forward,
suggestions and ideas, to give us an opportunity to go back to
this issue again, Ms. Ganzer. But am I sensing that you
understand that there needs to be a regulatory revisit on these
issues?
Mr. Wolf, yes or no, please?
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Ganzer?
Ms. Ganzer. Absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Van Diepen?
Mr. Van Diepen. On the rule, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Let me--and we have
opportunities for the agreement itself coming--going forward.
But let me--let me try to pointedly get back to our experts
here and say, this reminds me of the DMCA, which Congress did
pass, but negatively impacted encryption research. And
interestingly enough, all of us are talking about encryption
now.
So I want to get to the point of saying where we are in
terms of impacting you and the new partnerships. The President
just had meetings with those in Silicon Valley. We know that we
are intertwined together.
May I start with Mr. Garfield to find out from you how much
this will impact negatively research, and getting to the
solutions of what we are interested in as you represent your
vast number of participants?
Mr. Garfield?
Mr. Garfield. I'll be brief. It will impact significantly.
And part of the frustration with the current course of the
discussions is rather than recognizing that the issue at play
here is not just the regulation of software, but the need for
real-time reaction in response to cybersecurity, we're thinking
about this as simply something we have faced before.
That's why we need to think beyond the box of export
control and really start over.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, and I don't necessarily like it for
starting over, but I like it for the forthright way that you're
saying that we have an issue that needs serious attention.
Let me just go quickly to Ms. Goodwin and Mr. Mulholland.
And, Mr. Mulholland, I think it was you that said, all options
are on the table. I have introduced H.R. 85, Terrorism
Prevention and Critical Infrastructure and Protection Act,
which deals with identifying threats, isolating damaging
activities, but really, wants to work with industry on these
elements. But if I can just get you to answer the question. As
I said, I'm speaking fast only because my colleagues are here
and we are voting. But to get to the point of what the impact
would be if we do not fix it. And Mr. Mulholland as well, and I
think we have Ms. McGuire there as well. And let me thank Dr.
Schneck very much for the work she's done with us in Homeland
Security.
Ms. Goodwin.
Ms. Goodwin. Ms. Jackson Lee, we get over 1,000
vulnerability reports that come into Microsoft every year, and
those need to be triaged. We need to work them with the finders
from around the world and with our teams internally, and those
internal teams sit all around the world. So we can be looking
at 1,000 vulnerabilities times three, four, five export
licenses just to triage vulnerabilities. That's not talking
malware; that's not talking about new tools or new issues.
That's just to be able to do our daily work.
And so that would, from what we understand, eclipse the
total volume of licenses that the Department of Commerce
grants.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That would not work.
Mr. Mulholland.
Mr. Mulholland. So I will echo the points that Ms. Goodwin
made. We have a similar situation. But let me take a different
angle. Security research is not going to stop. There are--Siri
told me there are 206 countries in the world. There's 41 in
Wassenaar. My math tells me that's 165 countries that are not
in Wassenaar, perhaps two-thirds of software developers in the
world. Software security research will continue, but it will
happen in three different ways.
Mr. Mulholland. Either security researchers will finally
just give up, it's just too hard. That's not good for us. They
will publish the information on the Internet because there is a
carve-out, from my understanding, that if the information is
made public on the Internet, effectively open-sourced, then it
does not require a license. That doesn't help me because the
bad guys have just found out about the issue at the same time I
have. That's not good for us. It's not good for U.S. companies.
Or the third one, which, frankly, 20 years of working in this
industry and the cynicism that can develop with that, these
exploits will, frankly, end up on the black market. And there
will be cottage industries developing in some of the countries
that have been mentioned that will spring up. And these
oppressive regimes, the only impact that they will find is that
they will have to spend more money because they will be going
to the highest bidder----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I want to get Ms. McGuire. And
I'm going to let Dr. Schneck, Ms. Schneck, just finish, that
Homeland Security is committed to working, too. Ms. McGuire, in
this brief moment.
Ms. McGuire. I will just echo that the rule as proposed
here in the United States will not do anything to deter the
availability of these tools. And I will just finish by saying
at the end of the day, the underlying language in the Wassenaar
Arrangement on cybersecurity is flawed and must be
renegotiated.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Ms. Schneck, Homeland
Security----
Ms. Schneck. Bottom line, we have to, together as
interagency, with all of our industry partners and any input we
can possibly get absolutely revisit this proposed rule.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the chairman and Ms. Kelly so
very much for your kindness. And may I ask unanimous consent,
Mr. Chairman, thank the witnesses, to submit into the record
from the Internet Association a letter dated January 12, 2016.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the witnesses for their testimony. I
can pretty much assure you that at least some members will have
some additional questions for the witnesses. And we will ask
you to respond to those in writing. The hearing record will be
open for 10 days. Without objection, the subcommittees stand
adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
