- REVIEW OF OBAMACARE CONSUMER OPERATED AND ORIENTED PLANS (CO-OPS)

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF OBAMACARE CONSUMER OPERATED AND ORIENTED PLANS (CO-OPS)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH CARE,
BENEFITS AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 25, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-175

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-377 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
Sean Hayes, Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative
Rules Staff Director
William Marx, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative Rules

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee              Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming               Columbia
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina, Vice  BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chair                            JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
JODY B, HICE, Georgia                Vacancy
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 25, 2016................................     1

WITNESSES

Dr. Mandy Cohen, MD, MPH, Chief Operating Officer and Chief of
Staff, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...............................................     2
Written Statement............................................     5
Mr. Al Redmer, Jr., Commissioner, Maryland Insurance
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16

APPENDIX

Letter for the Record from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, submitted by Mr. Cartwright.....................    46

REVIEW OF OBAMACARE CONSUMER OPERATED AND ORIENTED PLANS (CO-OPS)

----------

Thursday, February 25, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits, and
Administrative Rules,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:01 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mick Mulvaney
presiding.
Present: Representatives Jordan, Walberg, DesJarlais,
Meadows, Mulvaney, Walker, Hice, Carter, Cartwright, and
DeSaulnier.
Mr. Mulvaney. [Audio malfunction in hearing room] things a
little bit differently this morning. First, we are going to
turn on the microphones.
There is a little bit of disarray in our schedule, as you
may have found out in the last couple of minutes. We expect a
vote on the Floor any minute now. So the proposed way to
proceed is that I will give an opening statement. I will try to
allow Dr. Cohen to give her opening statement, Mr. Redmer,
yours. And if we can get that far, that is great. We will then
recess and we will go over and vote. If votes are called in the
middle of that, we will have to recess earlier, and then we
will pick up where we left off.
It is slightly unusual to begin the committee hearing
without a Democrat present, but we have cleared it with the
staff. Mr. Cartwright knows that we are starting without him,
and he has asked for the ability to give his opening statement
immediately upon our return.
So with that being said, I will get us started.
I think it is fairly obvious why we are here today. It
shouldn't be a surprise to anybody as to why you are in front
of this committee. Twelve of these 12 CO-OPs have failed. I
think it has cost taxpayers so far about $2.4 billion,
including in my State, where we have had a CO-OP fail.
Based on the track record, we are here today to try and
find out what the future holds for the remaining CO-OPs and
what the future holds for the people who are counting on those
CO-OPs to provide them with health insurance. Consumers have
lost $1.2 billion in the failed CO-OPs, and I don't think it is
fair to anyone that we just sit around and not have hearings
like this.
Perhaps just as discouragingly, there is a subtext here
today. In addition to dealing with the merits of why the
previous CO-OPs have failed and the condition of the current
CO-OPs is our inability to get information out of your
organizations. It is our job to do oversight into the CO-OPs.
Is it our job to ask difficult questions. It is our job to ask
you to come here today and provide us with information. It is
also our job to ask you for documents that might help us in our
oversight function, and we are going to have some hopefully
straightforward conversations today about why those documents
have not been provided to Congress.
I reject the notion the administration is able to hide
information from us, especially since Congress created these
things, Congress is involved in the oversight, and for the
executive branch to deny Congress of its ability to do its job,
I think, is something that merits a very close look. It makes
it look like the administration is simply trying to prevent us
from doing our job. Again, we will get into our inability to
get documents as we go through there.
It is even stranger that CMS is worried about the public
having information about these when we know ones have already
failed, and there is concern, public concern about other ones
failing. You would think that the public--Mr. DesJarlais,
myself, I am on the exchanges. My staff is on the exchanges.
Don't we have the right to know when we go on the exchanges
what the financial condition is of the CO-OPs that we might
choose to sign up with?
You all have a tough job here today. I fully recognize
that. I am sorry that you are the ones that have to do this,
but you are the ones that the administration sent over. But you
have got two jobs. You have to convince the public that they
shouldn't know everything about the CO-OPs that they might want
to sign up with, and you have to convince us that you are not
obstructing our ability to oversee the programs. So I don't
envy you those positions, but we will try to make it as
congenial as we possibly can.
Mr. Mulvaney. So with that, I will recognize Dr. Cohen from
CMS for 5 minutes for her opening statement.
Hold on a second. See, we don't swear them in, Financial
Services, so--all right. I am pleased to welcome Dr. Mandy
Cohen, Chief Operating Officer and Chief of Staff for the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services; and Mr. Al Redmer,
Jr., Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance Administration. We
welcome you both.
Pursuant to our rules, we do swear all witnesses in this
committee before you testify. So if you please rise and raise
your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you. Please be seated. Let the record
reflect that both witnesses answered in the affirmative.
So with that, Dr. Cohen, and I think you have done this
before so you know about the 5-minute rule. We are not going to
strictly enforce it, so if you need a few extra minutes, please
take that time and go ahead and begin now.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF MANDY COHEN

Dr. Cohen. Well, thank you very much. Thank you, Vice Chair
Mulvaney. I will thank Ranking Member Cartwright when he
returns. And members of the rest of the subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Consumer Operated and
Oriented Plan program. CMS takes its commitment both to CO-OP
consumers and taxpayers seriously.
As you know, CO-OPs were created to stimulate new
competition in an industry that has a long history of being
very difficult for small companies to enter with some entering
markets that hadn't seen new competitors in decades.
CMS's principal role is to award and oversee loans and then
to maximize the likelihood that Federal taxpayer funds are
returns. We are in close context with the State Departments of
Insurance as they, of course, have authority over all the
issuers of their State and oversee the rules that the CO-OPs
operate under.
As with any new set of business ventures, some CO-OPs have
succeeded while others have encountered challenges. Successful
CO-OPs have provided consumers in their State an additional
choice of health insurance and have improved competition. But
there have also been CO-OPs that, for a number of reasons, have
faced technical, operational, and financial difficulties.
In addition, Congress has made a number of substantial
rescissions to the initial $6 billion in funding for the CO-OP
program, impacting program operations and available funding. In
the face of multiple pressures, it is not surprising that some
new entrants have struggled to succeed.
Protecting consumers affected by CO-OP closures is a top
priority. In each case, when a CO-OP is no longer offering
coverage on the marketplace, we work closely with the CO-OP and
the State regulators to facilitate a smooth transition for
consumers to retain access to coverage. Each of the consumers
in the CO-OPs that close at the end of last year maintain
coverage until the end of the year. And after dozens of
communications with CO-OP consumers, three-quarters of those
CO-OP marketplace consumers have continued their coverage in a
new plan.
CMS plays a dual role as the loan-holder for the CO-OP
program providing both oversight and support of these nascent
small businesses. In our oversight capacity, CMS, along with
the State Departments of Insurance, which serves as the primary
regulator of insurance in the States, work aggressively to
ensure that CO-OPs are well run and financially sound. Every
CO-OP is subject to standardized ongoing program oversight
activities. In 2015 we conducted over two dozen financial and
operational reviews, numerous in-person visits, and had many
formal communications, not to mention hundreds of phone calls.
When concerns are identified, CMS, in coordination with
State Departments of Insurance, place CO-OPs on enhanced
oversight or corrective action plans. These tools are commonly
used by State Departments of Insurance to identify and fix
correctible problems to ensure the viability of insurance
products they oversee in their State.
In CMS's role to support to the CO-OPs to maximize the
likelihood that Federal taxpayer dollars are returned, CMS is
working to make it easier for CO-OPs to attract outside capital
or merger partner if the board chooses. We've released
clarifying guidance and are exploring further steps to ease
that path to outside funding for CO-OPs and investors, while
still preserving the fundamentally member-driven nature of the
CO-OP program.
Even with the oversight and support provided by CMS and the
Departments of Insurance, the single biggest factor for the
future success of the CO-OPs will come from the action of the
companies themselves. As new small businesses, they need to
rapidly mature the fundamentals of their financial systems,
tighten their operating disciplines, and hold their vendors
accountable. Through--though the challenges that they CO-OPs
have faced, they have every opportunity to be successful and be
long-term market participants.
CMS appreciates and understands this committee's oversight
responsibilities, and has provided--and has worked to provide
you with the information needed to fulfill these
responsibilities. I understand why the subcommittee is
interested in the experiences of these private businesses, our
lessons learned, and our expectations for the future. CMS has
made a concerted effort to answer the committee's questions and
provide relevant and responsive information, including
providing thousands of pages of documents, as well as briefing
by a key executive from the CO-OP management staff.
Because some of the materials you've requested contain
market-sensitive information, we have made a limited number of
the CO-OP documents responsive to your investigation available
through confidential review.
As part of our fiduciary duty as the lender and stewards of
taxpayer money, CMS has worked hard to accommodate the
committee's request for information while responsibly
protecting the competitiveness of the loan recipients and
safeguarding the CO-OPs' ability to repay Federal loans.
Since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, CMS has
worked to increase access to quality, affordable coverage
through the marketplaces while being responsible stewards of
taxpayer dollars. CMS will continue to work closely with the
subcommittee, with CO-OPs and State Departments of Insurance to
provide the best outcome for consumers and taxpayers. We
appreciate the subcommittee's interest and happy to answer any
questions.
[Prepared statement of Dr. Cohen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Dr. Cohen.
Before you begin, Mr. Redmer, we have had a little change
in logistics, not unusual around here. It looks like we won't
be voting until three o'clock. So we should have a chance to
get through at least the first round of questions.
Mr. Redmer, after your opening statement, we are going to
allow Mr. Cartwright to have his, and then we will move into
the questions. So, Mr. Redmer, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AL REDMER, JR.

Mr. Redmer. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. It's ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Redmer, if you would hit the button in
front of you, turn the microphone on.
Mr. Redmer. Sorry. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee,
I appreciate the invitation to be here today. My name is Al
Redmer. I'm the insurance commissioner in the State of
Maryland, and I'm here today to offer my views on the risk
adjustment program based on section 1343 of the Affordable Care
Act and its impact on a CO-OP incorporated in Maryland but just
as importantly as well as other CO-OPs and small insurance
carriers around the country.
Evergreen Health Cooperative is a Maryland-based CO-OP
created under the Affordable Care Act. It's been in business
since 2014, and if you look at the Affordable Care Act and the
reason that these organizations were created, Evergreen is a
compelling story. If you look at the objective of increasing
competition focusing on medical outcomes, improving the health
outcomes of patients, medical management, disease management,
it is a success story.
For example, Evergreen offers a value-based product for
diabetic patients that removes virtually all financial barriers
for the patient--no copays, no coinsurance, no deductibles--to
help folks be treated to prevent the onset and the increased
problems with the disease.
Any small carrier in--any company, any new company in any
industry has a challenge. They have to reach a certain size to
pay for the infrastructure to run that business, and Evergreen
and these CO-OPs are no different. They need to reach scale.
Evergreen's enrollment as of January of this year is 36,000
compared to just under 20,000 in July of 2015.
Additionally, they have diversified their portfolio.
They're not just on the exchange. They do business throughout
the individual market. They're in the small group market. They
are also in the large group market. And their medical loss
ratio is favorable. It's been running between 80 and 85
percent. Based on current enrollment trends, Evergreen is on
track to reach their 2016 enrollment goals and turn a profit by
the end of this year.
Over the past few years, around the country we've seen
new--excuse me--innovative health insurance plans that have
been created that are providing enhanced competition and
patient care. And it's working. For example, at the end of 2004
our largest individual carrier in Maryland had a 91 percent
market share. Today, it's down to 57 percent due in part to a
more competitive marketplace. These new carriers have the
ability to continue, but their ability is severely jeopardized
by the adverse and potentially fatal effect--financial effect
caused by the technical shortcomings of the current risk
adjustment and risk corridor programs. The failure of these
plans would be disruptive to the marketplace, and State
insurance regulators believe that a competitive marketplace
benefits and protects policyholders.
The risk adjustment formula is specifically of concern
because it's proven that newer carriers have a distinct
advantage. And I point out new carriers whether they're a CO-OP
or not CO-OP. For example, the risk adjustment formula
quantifies an enrollee's health status based on their age, sex,
and diagnoses recorded during the course of the year. New
carriers have limited ability to get that information on the
health status and previous claims history for the applicants.
So you can imagine a new small carrier. They don't have the
infrastructure, they don't have the staff, they don't have the
technology that these large carriers that have doing--been
doing business for decades possess. Therefore, the carrier's
population may appear to be healthier than it actually is if
some diagnoses are not captured, which may result in improper
risk adjustment payments.
And let's contrast that with the risk corridor. So the risk
corridor last year resulted in our CO-OP receiving 12 cents on
the dollar. So the plans established, we booked this amount of
money, but they received 12 cents on the dollar. Now, with the
risk adjustment formula, they're going to have to write a check
at 100 cents on the dollar. Any business that's going to
collect 12 cents on the dollar and pay 100 cents on the dollar,
that math does not work. And when you take that math and you
add it to the Affordable Care Act that mandates a certain
medical loss ratio, they can't raise their rates and collect it
with premium because if they do, they'll bump below the medical
loss ration and they'll have to pay that excess money back to
the customers that they serve.
The NAIC has urged CMS to review the formula and work with
carriers and State regulators to make adjustments for 2015 and
2016 to ensure that it's providing appropriate protection for
all carriers, but we really can't wait for 2017 or 2018 to
enact those reforms. There are several immediate solutions that
would provide financial relief while technical corrections are
developed. Among these are exempting new and fast-growing plans
from the risk adjustment for, say, the first 3 to 5 years or
limiting the amount a carrier pays for risk adjustment to
perhaps 2 percent of their annual premiums collected in the
year.
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I appreciate the
invitation to speak. I encourage you to consider immediate
solutions which would provide stability in the individual and
small group market and allow these companies to provide overall
benefits to the marketplace, again, across the country. And
with that, I'll look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Redmer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Redmer.
We will now recognize Mr. Cartwright for his opening
statement for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
holding today's hearing. I would also like to welcome our
witnesses, Dr. Cohen and Commissioner Redmer. I thank you for
being here and appreciate your testimony.
The CO-OP program was established, of course, to bring
competition to the health insurance market by encouraging the
development of nonprofit consumer-focused insurance companies.
Many CO-OPs have done just that, providing quality care to more
than 1 million consumers at competitive prices, and
accordingly, driving down premiums in those places.
Of course, like any other startup, CO-OPs face challenges.
In addition to competing against larger, well-established, some
might say entrenched insurance companies that have dominated
the market for years, CO-OPs lack the claims experience and the
detailed textural knowledge of the markets that insurance--
insurers have to rely on accurately to predict their products.
Coops are also prohibited by law--this interesting--from
using loan funding to market their plans. So it is like their
ability to speak has been cut, and it is hard to attract new
customers when you can't advertise with all of your resources.
But CO-OPs have also long been the target of Affordable
Care Act opponents who view this program as one more
opportunity to attack the law. And this is getting tiresome, of
course. The ACA authorized $6 billion for the CO-OP program.
The following year Congress cut $2.6 billion of that $6 billion
authorized. And then the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012
further cut the program's remaining $3.4 billion by 90 percent
and put what little was left into a contingency fund,
effectively preventing the creation of any new CO-OPs.
So if you are scoring along at home, it adds up like this:
Congress has gutted about $4 billion of the $6 billion that was
originally appropriated for the program, and now we are here to
criticize how they did after we cut their legs off at the
knees. I hope we are not really here to do that.
On top of these cuts, Congres voted last year to gut the
risk corridors, one of the ACA's risk mitigation programs. As a
result, insurers will receive only 12.6 percent of the expected
payments for 2014, roughly 13 cents on the dollar for every
dollar they expected to receive.
Republicans in Congress have always focused more on tearing
down the ACA than making it work, and I think that is what we
are up to here today. They have taken more than 60 votes to
repeal or undermine the ACA, never voting on any kind of
replacement of their own. We are hearing today about CO-OPs
that are operating under corrective action plans or enhanced
oversight plans, but it is important to understand the
challenges facing these CO-OPs so that we can learn from this
going forward.
Being under a CAP or an EOP does not mean that an insurance
company is in imminent danger of failing. In fact, our
committee staff, both Democratic and Republican, spoke with the
Insurance Departments of States in which CO-OPs currently
operate under a CAP or an EOP, and they have all approved these
CO-OPs to offer coverage this year. They have also importantly
informed us that there are many other insurance companies, for-
profit insurance companies that are not CO-OPs that have also
been put under corrective action plans, consent orders, or
similar remedial actions at the State level for some of the
same issues facing the CO-OPs.
So I understand the argument that consumers have a right to
know about their plans, but we shouldn't game the market by
selectively targeting only CO-OPs when the larger picture is
that they are struggling across the board. If we want consumers
to know about their insurance plans, let's look at all of them,
not just the ones you want to call ObamaCare.
Now, I will say I don't believe we should release any of
the confidential regulatory information that we have obtained
about the remaining CO-OPs in a way that would mislead
consumers about the insurance companies in their States or
prejudice the ability of CO-OPs to operate going forward. But
going forward, I would commit to working with the chairman on a
broader comprehensive review of these programs in a way that
actually helps consumers make informed decisions.
And I hope we can use today's hearing to learn from our
expert witnesses about what is going well in the CO-OP program,
what needs to be improved, and how we can work together to make
this program succeed.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman from Pennsylvania. I
would now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Dr.
DesJarlais, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for being here today.
As I continue to listen to the rhetoric from the other side
of the aisle, we can pretend that ObamaCare is popular, but it
is not. People didn't want ObamaCare; they didn't want
socialized medicine when it was crammed down their throat
several years ago. So to sit there and demagogue Republicans
for just trying to make this into something it isn't is
disingenuous. And today's hearing is a great example of one of
the reasons this is failing.
Dr. Cohen, what qualified CMS to set up and provide
oversight for these CO-OPs in the first place?
Dr. Cohen. The Affordable Care Act provided the statute and
the funding for the CO-OP program.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. Did CMS have any qualifications or
experience in setting up these type of programs and overseeing
them?
Dr. Cohen. Well, we do--CMS also obviously runs Medicare,
the largest insurer in the country. But in terms of how we
decided on the CO-OP programs themselves, obviously they are
private businesses. We had a panel of experts both externally
and internally, whether it's insurance expert and actuaries and
others, who reviewed CO-OP business plans before making
decisions about who would be awarded the loans.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. And I guess at the beginning it was
accepted that probably only about 60 percent of these loans at
best were going to be paid back, so I question why weren't they
just called grants or at least a majority of the money.
Dr. Cohen. So they are very much loans, and we do very much
expect to get taxpayer dollars back for those loans, and that's
what we intend to do.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. How many CO-OPs were initiated?
Dr. Cohen. Twenty-four.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. How many of them are still in
existence?
Dr. Cohen. Eleven.
Mr. DesJarlais. Eleven, so more than half have failed?
Dr. Cohen. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. DesJarlais. And they went ----
Dr. Cohen. There is only 11 currently operating.
Mr. DesJarlais. And so that little money we are probably
not going to recoup, right?
Dr. Cohen. So we are in the process of recouping that the
money right now. We ----
Mr. DesJarlais. How much money are we talking?
Dr. Cohen. So we've just started that process as most of
these CO-OPs have just shut their doors about 6 weeks ago. So
we'll go through an extensive process of making sure they
continue--first, their claims run out, and then we'll look at
their--you know, the excess revenue and then use all the tools
available to us through their loan agreements and State and
Federal law to pull back Federal tax dollars.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. Tennessee had Community Health
Alliance, or CHA. By the end of 2014, they'd only had about
2,300 members out of a projected 25,000, resulting in a loss of
$22 million for the year. In 2015 they actually lowered the
premiums to try to entice membership, and boy, did it work. It
jumped up to 35,000 by May of 2015, but it grew so fast during
the open enrollment period that CHA had to suspend enrollment
plans. They proposed an increase in premiums because obviously
it, you know, was too affordable--kind of a bait-and-switch if
you will--of 32 percent, but the regulators asked to increase
it to 44 percent. So for these poor people that decided to take
a chance on this CO-OP, they came in at a certain rate, had
their rates almost double, and then it was determined by the
end of the year that it was no longer sustainable and they shut
down. So a CAP was imposed on Community Health Alliance on
September 29, and then just 2 weeks later, it closed its doors.
How can you say that these corrective measures are useful when
50 percent of the CO-OPs subject to CAPs have failed?
Dr. Cohen. So the--we use the corrective action plans when
we identify something that we believe is correctable. In the
case of Tennessee, obviously, we were identifying problems, and
then we saw additional new information that came to light about
their finances, about what happened in Q2 of their claims
experience. As you were mentioning, they were highly enrolled
so they had a lot more--their consumer base was extremely high
to their premiums that were coming in. And so we, along with
the Departments of Insurance, need to make some tough decisions
about one thing to make sure that consumers had continuous
coverage and didn't want them to enter the next open enrollment
period if they couldn't make it through the whole next year.
And so we, along with the Departments of Insurance, said that
they were no longer going to be operating.
Mr. DesJarlais. And this is not just Tennessee. This has
happened in a lot of States, correct?
Dr. Cohen. We have shut down 11 CO-OPs, that's right.
Mr. DesJarlais. Eleven CO-OPs. So what do you tell a person
that is going to look for insurance? Why would you recommend
anyone looking for insurance or their family to go to a CO-OP?
Dr. Cohen. Well, that's why we did the tough work at the
end of last year before the open enrollment period started. We,
along with the State Departments of Insurance, took a seriously
hard look at these CO-OPs to make sure the ones that would
continue forward we had the confidence would make it through
2016 for their consumers.
Mr. DesJarlais. But you say that this CAP program is the
solution to fixing these problems. How many programs were under
CAPs that have failed?
Dr. Cohen. So I don't think the CAP is the only solution. I
think the CO-OPs themselves are really the ones who are going
to be the ones to determine whether or not they ultimately will
be successful. They have a lot of work to do to rapidly mature
their entities, their small businesses, as you know, and
they're still getting their foothold on this business. So I
think CAPs are one way for us to identify correctable problems,
but certainly, the State Departments of Insurance are doing
their own work as well.
Mr. DesJarlais. Yes, but bottom line, the CMS was given in
excess of $2 billion to help oversee these, and over half of
them have failed, but yet you are asking us to have the
confidence to continue to support organizations that are
obviously failing. And it is awful difficult, I would think, to
attract people. It is a big inconvenience for these people to
go sign up for insurance, have their rates jacked, and then
told that they are canceled. So, I mean, I think we have got a
lot bigger problems here.
I see my time is expired, but maybe we will get to a second
round of questioning.
Dr. Cohen. Okay.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman and now recognize Mr.
Cartwright from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes, give or take.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, now, Dr. Cohen, thanks for being here again. And I
said some things in my opening, and I want to confirm them with
you. One of them is this idea of establishing the CO-OPs. The
idea is that we are going to provide competition. And we are
all good capitalists in this room, and we know that the more
competition there is, the lower prices will be for consumers.
Is that a fair statement?
Dr. Cohen. That was the idea for the CO-OP program to not
only provide an additional choice for consumer but one that was
consumer-run.
Mr. Cartwright. So a central capitalist principle underlies
the whole idea for CO-OPs, right?
Dr. Cohen. That's right, private businesses.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. And the other idea was we were
going to help fund the CO-OPs to get on their feet and get
going. And how much did the Affordable Care Act appropriate for
the CO-OP program in the first--for ----
Dr. Cohen. Originally, it was $6 billion.
Mr. Cartwright. Six billion dollars. And I understand
Congress on several occasions has cut the CO-OPs' funding. Am I
correct in that?
Dr. Cohen. That is correct.
Mr. Cartwright. Is that four times?
Dr. Cohen. I believe that's right.
Mr. Cartwright. Four times they have cut. And the year
after ACA was passed, Congress voted to cut a total of $2.6
billion from the program, right?
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright. And then in 2012 Congress rescinded 90
percent of the remaining $3.4 billion on the program, right?
Dr. Cohen. That's correct.
Mr. Cartwright. And then finally, sequestration cut an
additional $13 million in funds from the CO-OP program, right?
Dr. Cohen. You can see why they had some challenges.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. Well, now, Dr. DesJarlais brought up
the fact that some of these CO-OPs have failed. You don't need
to be a rocket scientist to say that cutting and cutting and
cutting the funding is going to be a big part of why some of
these CO-OPs failed. Would that be a fair statement?
Dr. Cohen. That would be a fair statement.
Mr. DesJarlais. Would the gentleman yield just for a quick
question?
Mr. Cartwright. Certainly.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. You had pointed out the funding at $6
million. Originally, they were supposed to ----
Mr. Cartwright. Six billion.
Mr. DesJarlais. Six billion. There were originally supposed
to be CO-OPs in all 50 States. There are only 23 or 24, so
obviously, we did save the taxpayer a fair bit of money by
cutting that amount.
Mr. Cartwright. Reclaiming my time, actually, in terms of
saving the taxpayers money, this is the loan money, isn't it,
Dr. Cohen? And it is coming from CMS. The lender is CMS, your
agency, and your plan is to get the money back for the
taxpayers, right?
Dr. Cohen. That's right. The money is from the Treasury.
Mr. Cartwright. But if we kill the CO-OP, it is not going
to pay us back, is it?
Dr. Cohen. That's why we want--we are trying to support the
CO-OPs for them to succeed. They succeed, we succeed.
Mr. Cartwright. Right. Thank you. Now, unfortunately, cuts
made by the program last year resulted in insurers receiving
only about 13 cents on the dollar of payments they were
expecting. Commissioner Redmer, I want to direct this to your
attention. In your opinion, how have changes to the risk
corridors program affected CO-OPs and other small insurance
companies?
Mr. Redmer. Well, they've affected them a lot. And let me
go back and point out that all of the CO-OPs are not failing.
Again, in Maryland we have a successful, compelling story. And
I would like to add that this risk adjustment formula that I've
chatted about previously is not just affecting CO-OPs; it's
going to affect all of these smaller companies around the
country, some of which--a lot of them have no taxpayer money at
all. These are all private organizations.
But as I mentioned previously, if you are collecting money
under the risk corridor and you're paying money out under the
risk adjustment formula, any business, if you are going to
collect 12 or 13 cents on the dollar and you're going to pay
out 100 cents on the dollar, the math just does not work. And
that has already proven to be fatal on the corridor's side to
some of the CO-OPs, and I'm concerned that if we do impose that
100 cents on the dollar risk adjustment formula, that it may
prove to be fatal to other organizations around the country.
Mr. Cartwright. I appreciate your comments. And,
Commissioner Redmer, you have been appointed as insurance
commissioner by a Republican Governor, and you are a former
Republican State legislator yourself. Why do you think it is
important to help the remaining CO-OPs succeed?
Mr. Redmer. When I walked in, if I could have written the
ACA differently, I probably would have. If I could have written
the exchange law in Maryland, I probably would have. But I
walked in the office January the 21st of last year with a
business that was providing competition to the marketplace.
And if, again, you go back to the Affordable Care Act, and
I don't want to re-litigate that, but if you look at the
objectives of increased competition, improved medical outcomes
focusing on medical management and disease management, this
specific organization is a success story. They've got a
compelling story to tell. They're insuring 30,000 Maryland
citizens. We've seen improved competition, and my perspective
is that it's worth the investment of my time and effort to try
to help and save that organization.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, thank you, Commissioner Redmer. And
30,000 in Maryland, and, Dr. Cohen, how about nationwide? I
have said it is more than 1 million people who are enjoying the
fruits of having health insurance because of the CO-OP program.
Am I correct in that?
Dr. Cohen. It was 1 million people as of last year, yes.
Mr. Cartwright. As of last year, 1 million people?
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, thank you both, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman. You have an extra 24
seconds.
We now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Cohen, you are not here to suggest that if the CO-OPs
go away that those 1 million people would be uninsured, are
you?
Dr. Cohen. No. Luckily, they have other choices that the
Affordable Care Act ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Let's make that clear, Mr. Cartwright.
And so as we look at this, one of my concerns, I guess,
that I have, Mr. Redmer, is, as you have gone over this
business model, how much longer should the American taxpayer be
on the hook to make sure that these fledgling startups ----
Mr. Redmer. Sure.
Mr. Meadows.--make a profit?
Mr. Redmer. I can tell you ----
Mr. Meadows. And since they are nonprofits, I guess that is
not ----
Mr. Redmer. Sure.
Mr. Meadows.--the correct word but ----
Mr. Redmer. The ----
Mr. Meadows.--become financially solvent.
Mr. Redmer. The--Evergreen has been profitable on a monthly
basis in 2015, 4 months out of 12. Their loss in 2015 was
reasonable. They are projected to be profitable ----
Mr. Meadows. But without the risk corridor, will they be
profitable going forward?
Mr. Redmer. If we ----
Mr. Meadows. Because I think your testimony ----
Mr. Redmer. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--would suggest they were not.
Mr. Redmer. No, they would be profitable. If they are left
alone in 2016, they will be profitable for 2016. The problem is
the risk adjustment formula. If they have to stroke a check for
$1 million or $2 million or a number like that, that's not
going to be an issue.
Mr. Meadows. But wasn't that ----
Mr. Redmer. But ----
Mr. Meadows.--part of their business model when they went
in? I mean, didn't they--I mean, the ACA has been very clear so
----
Mr. Redmer. Of course.
Mr. Meadows.--I mean, that is not like you wake up and you
have a shock that this is going away.
Mr. Redmer. You're exactly right. However, also part of the
business model was the risk corridor payment, of which they
received 12 cents on the dollar. So if they would have ----
Mr. Meadows. But again, I would stress that is not new
news. This is not breaking news. I mean, we changed the models
and we started to look at this, but part of the ACA rollout has
been consistent from day one they would have these certain
subsidies in certain risk corridor someplace. They would
eventually go away once they are there. And I guess my question
still remains. How long should we keep everything subsidized in
hopes that we have competition?
Mr. Redmer. I don't know that we need to give them
subsidies. I think we need to leave them alone.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So let me ask you maybe a different
question. Since you have a very successful CO-OP, how much has
that CO-OP affected the premiums? Have premiums gone down on
health care overall in Maryland?
Mr. Redmer. The--I believe the premiums are more moderate
than they would otherwise be ----
Mr. Meadows. Have they gone down?
Mr. Redmer.--but no, I would ----
Mr. Meadows. Yes, they have not.
Mr. Redmer. I--there has not been any premiums going down.
Mr. Meadows. So what you are saying is they may have
affected them, the rate of growth?
Mr. Redmer. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. Co-ops may have affected the rate of growth?
Mr. Redmer. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. So how many people do you have insured in
Maryland?
Mr. Redmer. I don't have a number of the top of my head.
Mr. Meadows. What would you guess? Millions?
Mr. Redmer. I'm going to say--oh, yes, sure.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So how do you think the competition
of 30,000 people really affects the premiums of millions of
people?
Mr. Redmer. I'm not going to guess as to what it's going to
affect.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I am a business guy ----
Mr. Redmer. It's--sure.
Mr. Meadows. It has got very little impact. And I guess
here is what my concern is, Dr. ----
Mr. Redmer. Well, but if I could say that we're talking
about 30,000 ----
Mr. Meadows. If you want to talk business, I am ready all
day long ----
Mr. Redmer. Sure.
Mr. Meadows.--to jump ----
Mr. Redmer. We're ----
Mr. Meadows.--right in the depths of this.
Mr. Redmer. Sure. We're ----
Mr. Meadows. I would ----
Mr. Redmer. We ----
Mr. Meadows.--encourage you to probably not go there but --
--
Mr. Redmer. I'm ----
Mr. Meadows.--go ahead.
Mr. Redmer. I'm trying to answer your question. The 30,000
lives have been there, have grown in the last couple of years
compared to insurance companies that have been doing business
for decades. So naturally, the--even if you are lower and
you're moderating prices, the acceleration of growth is not
going to be as significant as if they were all the same size
and the same age.
Mr. Meadows. Well ----
Mr. Redmer. But you're right, they're not reducing ----
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Mr. Redmer.--rates.
Mr. Meadows. So, Dr. Cohen, let me come to you because what
has been alleged, and certainly you know that I am no fan of
ACA, but let's look at the CO-OP as a separate entity at this
particular point. You have 11 CO-OPs remaining, is that
correct?
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Meadows. And so out of those 11 how many of them would
have a corrective action plan in place or some kind of enhanced
oversight right now out of the 11 remaining?
Dr. Cohen. More than half.
Mr. Meadows. But how many?
Dr. Cohen. Seven.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So we have four CO-OPs out of all the
CO-OPs that have been--so we have got one example in Maryland,
so, surprise, surprise, we happen to have the one good example.
But four out of most of them, that is not really a successful
business model, wouldn't you think, Dr. Cohen?
Dr. Cohen. So when we think about corrective action plans
is us trying to identify a correctable problem. So we are
working very hard with these CO-OPs, and I know they're working
individually to remedy the issues that we've identified.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So out of those seven, how many of
those do you think will be doing business in 2017? Because you
were real careful in your response. You said they were going to
be able to provide coverage for the rest of this year.
Dr. Cohen. You're right. It's ----
Mr. Meadows. Let me tell you why I am asking you ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--is because I don't think CO-OPs necessarily
are affecting the market because they're such a small ----
Dr. Cohen. Well ----
Mr. Meadows.--part of it, and the other is, is I have got
huge health care providers that are hemorrhaging money under
this program because they are trying to figure out the risk and
all of that. And as a guy who has started 12 small businesses,
this is not one where I would try to wade in and try to compete
with the big boys. And I guess what I would ask you to do is to
make a realistic assumption, and I will actually agree with Mr.
Cartwright that I will not use it to bludgeon the ACA, but I
would ask you to get back to this committee on really should we
continue the program or not? And with that, I appreciate the
indulgence of the chair.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman and now recognize the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, fortunately, Georgia has not been impacted by the
collapse of the CO-OPs, but several of our neighboring States
have, South Carolina. Some 67,000 from South Carolina are now
trying to seek new insurance; Tennessee, somewhere in the
ballpark of 27,000. And as I understand it, predictions are
close to three-quarters of a million have already lost their
health insurance with little to no notice that this was coming.
And, you know, I am troubled. As you just shared, we have
got at least seven more that are in danger. I am troubled with
the reality that this same fate is probably going to continue
to many more Americans who likewise are probably not going to
be notified.
You know, and here we are dealing with people who were
forced to get insurance and to go this route, and now all of a
sudden it is evaporating and they have no notice whatsoever.
They find themselves scrambling around trying to find
insurance.
And let me just ask you personally in light of all of this,
if you were one of these people, would you want to know, would
you want to be notified that your insurance was about to be
taken away?
Dr. Cohen. So a couple of things. One is we certainly share
your concerns about the small businesses, and that's why we're
doing the aggressive work that we are on the oversight side.
What I would say is what we are trying to do on the oversight
side is a tool that is used by Departments of Insurance all the
time to identify correctable problems. And we believe that they
are--again, we learn--we get additional data and make different
decisions as the years go by. Our primary goal is to make sure
that consumers have--can have continuous coverage, which is why
at the end of last year we ----
Mr. Hice. Well, my question was would you want to be
notified if you were about ----
Dr. Cohen. So I know that the Department of Insurance is--
has the voice of the consumer when they're thinking about when
to notify consumers about issues related to CO-OPs ----
Mr. Hice. So would you want to be notified?
Dr. Cohen. At the appropriate time. I know that the
Departments of Insurance are thinking about the ----
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, you just mentioned that there are
seven that are in danger. At what point is an appropriate time
to notify these people? Which of the seven is most likely to
fail next?
Dr. Cohen. So, first I should pause, and my team corrected
me that eight are on CAPs. So the number is eight. So the
appropriate time is when the Department of Insurance that
regulates this process of communication tells us that that's
the right time. Again, we're the loan-holders here. The State
Departments of Insurance are the primary regulators, and so
they sort of govern this space about notification. We don't
want to have consumer ----
Mr. Hice. All right. Well, apparently, the insurance site
is not getting the job done either because we have got three-
quarters of a million Americans with little to no notice
whatsoever lost this, and you are jumping all over the place
when it comes to facing any responsibility that Americans ought
to be notified of this.
Which of the eight is most likely next to collapse?
Dr. Cohen. So it's--we are at a very early point in the
year. We did some tough work at the end of last year to make
sure the consumers could have confidence in the CO-OPs that
were continuing for 2016. We are just learning about what the
CO-OPs did in terms of enrollment during the open enrollment
period ----
Mr. Hice. Again, that is not my question. Do you know which
one is in the greatest danger?
Dr. Cohen. I can't say at this point. I don't have that
information ----
Mr. Hice. All right. We have got billions of dollars on the
line, American taxpayers on the hook for this. Don't the
taxpayers deserve to know--you know, if you are making a
business decision, is this a business venture you would want to
be a part of? I know we have got--from info that I have got, we
have got one of the CO-OPs now projecting a $70 million loss as
opposed to what was supposed to be a $4 million gain. I mean,
this is a horrible, horrible venture.
How many of the remaining CO-OPs are actually profitable?
Three? Is that what we are looking at?
Dr. Cohen. So we know that small businesses always struggle
to turn a profit in the first few years. It's a matter of in
this entrenched business I think as the Congressman mentioned
before. These are tough markets to break into. There's a
certain amount of loan funding that we can offer from the
Federal Government, but what we're trying to do now is
encourage these CO-OPs to look for outside capital, additional
resources to bring in, thinking about selling in the small
group market in addition to the individual market, maybe even
the large group market, and again, thinking about how they're
going to sustain themselves and be viable over the long term.
Mr. Hice. All right. Last thing, and my time is about up,
let's walk through the process of what happens when a CO-OP
closes. Do they continue to draw money from the Federal loan?
Dr. Cohen. So the--when we--when the CO-OP closes, it's a
decision between CMS and the Department of Insurance. When that
wind-down starts, that doesn't mean the CO-OP is closed. So we
started wind-down processes in the September/October time
frame, but consumers are able to continue coverage until the
end of that year.
Mr. Hice. So they continue drawing Federal loan money?
Dr. Cohen. So the loan money had already been awarded.
There's no new dollars that go out the door. All of that loan
money ----
Mr. Hice. So even when they close, loan money continues
going out the door?
Dr. Cohen. So--no, there's no--when they close their doors,
there's no additional loan money so--because that was already
awarded to them. There's obligations of money that they need
that they have been--they're on a payment cycle if you will,
but that money had already been awarded.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Chairman, thank you as well for your
indulgence.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman and now recognize the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Walker, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
Mr. Cartwright from Pennsylvania for being present today.
Defending the various components of the ACA I know is
difficult, but I would hope that my friends on the other side
of the aisle would be concerned about the constituents and the
losses here of some of these CO-OPs.
Mr. Redmer, I believe about 10 or 15 minutes ago, if I
remember correctly, you said all of the CO-OPs are not failing.
Can you tell me what percentage of failing CO-OPs need to take
place before you feel like there is a problem?
Mr. Redmer. I didn't say there was not a problem. I said
that not all CO-OPs have failed, and we have one in Maryland
that is performing reasonably well. And that's the extent of my
knowledge and interest is the Maryland CO-OP.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Well, speaking of Maryland, last
November, just as the open enrollment period was starting, the
CEO of the Maryland CO-OP testified before the Energy and
Commerce Committee. He did acknowledge that the CMS has placed
the Maryland CO-OP under an enhanced oversight plan. Does CMS
have any evidence that the Maryland CO-OP was adversely
impacted as a result of that public disclosure? And Mr. Redmer
or Dr. Cohen, whoever feels more comfortable in answering the
question.
Mr. Redmer. I can't answer whether there was any effects of
that being disclosed or not.
Mr. Walker. Dr. Cohen?
Dr. Cohen. So I'm not aware of that situation.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Well, as a matter of fact, 3 days after
his testimony the CO-OP CEO was projecting increased
enrollment. That is interesting. Is there anything that is
being hid here from the public? I mean, do you have any
information regarding what was going on there, Dr. Cohen?
Dr. Cohen. So regarding the Maryland CO-OP? I'm sorry. I'm
not following the question.
Mr. Walker. Okay.
Dr. Cohen. I apologize.
Mr. Walker. Let me ask it again. Three days after his
testimony, the Maryland CO-OP CEO was in the press projecting
an increased enrollment. It seems like there is a continuance
to refuse to comply with the committee's duly authorized
subpoena. Any evidence of that?
Dr. Cohen. I didn't realize the Maryland CO-OP was under
subpoena by this committee.
Mr. Walker. Okay. All right. So let's go a different
direction since it sounds like that information did not get to
you guys, okay? I want to be fair with that. Let me go back to
a question earlier because I didn't know if I heard a
definitive answer. Of the taxpayers' money that the
administration was loaned out to the CO-OPs, do we have a
range, a number, speculation of how much will actually be paid
to the taxpayers?
Dr. Cohen. So we're working through that process right now.
As mentioned earlier, again, the CO-OPs that wound down at the
end of last year are now going through a process of doing their
claims round out, understanding what revenue that it has coming
in. Some of them are taking actions with their vendors. And
then we go through a process based on the loan agreements and
the State law to use all the tools at our disposal to get the
funding back.
Mr. Walker. Sure. You would understand why the word process
is probably overused in this town a good bit. Is there any way
that you can put any kind of numeric value to that?
Dr. Cohen. I can't at this time. It's a really case-by-case
process. It's led by the Department of Justice who leads these
as--because it's a Federal loan, and so it's a process we'll
work through and it's too early to speculate.
Mr. Walker. Is there a percentage of how much that we would
want the CO-OPs--if there is not an exact dollar amount, is
there a percentage goal, benchmark? Is there anything like that
that has been ----
Dr. Cohen. It certainly is ----
Mr. Walker.--determined in the process?
Dr. Cohen. It is certainly as much as we possibly can
within the confines of the loan agreement and the laws.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman and would now recognize
Mr. Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize for
being a little late to arrive, so I hope I am not asking some
questions that have been asked already.
But to Dr. Cohen, thank you for being here. Major insurers,
as we have been aware in the reports in the media, have
sustained significant losses on their exchange plans and have
been pessimistic about the profitability of their plans. In
2015 and 2016 the records show that United Health expects to
lose $1 billion on exchange plans. The company's CEO has even
stated that entering the exchange was ``for us a bad
decision.'' United might quit exchanges altogether in 2017.
Aetna has lost money on plans sold through the exchanges, and
its CEO said, ``We continue to have serious concerns about
sustainability of the public exchanges.'' Humana's losses might
drive it from the exchanges. Most major insurers seem unable to
make a profit on the exchange. If that is the case, if major
insurers can't make it on exchanges, why should we be
optimistic that CO-OPs will?
Dr. Cohen. Well, we are very confident about the fact that
the marketplace grew over the last open enrollment period with
12.7 million consumers in the marketplace now. And if you look
at Kaiser, Centene, Molina, others, they are seeing strength in
the marketplace and looking to expand. And so we think that
it's a growing market.
We share your concerns about the CO-OPs and their ability
to be successful in an entrenched market. They certainly have a
lot of barriers that they needed to overcome, and so that's why
we're doing as much work as we can on the oversight side to
make sure that they are making good decisions with taxpayer
dollars.
Mr. Walberg. Well, I guess that time will tell on that, but
we're talking of significant organizations that have seen that
it has been a bad investment, so hopefully, it will be a
turnaround.
The administration has requested more than $1.8 billion in
emergency funds to combat Zika; $828 million would go to the
CDC, $200 million would go to NIH and FDA. A separate committee
investigation into this administration's ObamaCare spending has
revealed that during the Ebola crisis HHS propped up ObamaCare
by taking money from CDC and NIH and giving it to CMS, over $14
million from CDC and over $75 million from NIH if the records
are correct. By HHS's accounting, over $1 billion in ObamaCare
funding has come from the systematic raiding of funds from
other programs utilizing the Secretary's transfer authority and
nonrecurring expense fund.
Based on that track record, Dr. Cohen, how can we be
confident that any Zika funds would be spent on their intended
purpose and not instead used to prop up CO-OPs or other pieces
of ObamaCare?
Dr. Cohen. So I can't speak to the Zika funding and how
that will be spent, but what I can say about the funding for
the marketplaces is that now that we are on stable footing with
the 12 million and more consumers, we are able to charge user
fees to the issuers through that, and that is what sustains the
marketplace in terms of its viability to cover the--its
operational costs.
Mr. Walberg. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Walberg. I would yield.
Mr. Meadows. What was the breakeven point? You say now that
we are 12 million consumers that you are self-sustaining ----
Dr. Cohen. No, I said that is the funding that we used to
----
Mr. Meadows. That is the ----
Dr. Cohen.--cover the marketplace operations ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, but ----
Dr. Cohen.--for ----
Mr. Meadows.--to the gentleman's point, he said are we
going to reprogram the money, and you said that now we are 12
million we don't need ----
Dr. Cohen. That's not what ----
Mr. Meadows. So maybe I misunderstood, but I am just trying
to get a clarification ----
Dr. Cohen. Well, what I said is ----
Mr. Meadows.--on the gentleman's point.
Dr. Cohen. I don't know about the funding for the Zika
program and who it's getting funded through. It's ----
Mr. Meadows. No, his point was is that other monies had
been reprogrammed and shifted to prop up ObamaCare. That is his
point. And what you are saying is because you--is your
testimony here today that there will be no shifting of funds to
prop up any part of ObamaCare from here on out?
Dr. Cohen. So I think what you were asking is would the
Zika funding be used to prop up the marketplace ----
Mr. Walberg. Well, that was an example of how Zika funding
has been used. It has been shifted and that is the question.
Dr. Cohen. Well ----
Mr. Walberg. If that is the pattern, we are concerned that
the dollars aren't there and we will be shifting it from other
funds.
Dr. Cohen. Understood. So--and that's why the user fee will
cover the marketplace operations. In addition, obviously, the
Secretary has at her discretion to move money within the
Department to cover whether it's Zika or Ebola or marketplace
whatever important action of the moment is needed across the
country.
Mr. Walberg. That is concerning. So anyway, I yield back.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Cohen, during your opening statements you said that one
of your jobs was to make these loans to the CO-OPs and to work
on getting them back. I understand there is $1.2 billion
outstanding on those--or is it a full $2.4 billion is
outstanding on the loans, isn't it?
Dr. Cohen. Well, they've been--they are making loan
payments, but it--that's in the right ballpark, yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Let's talk about these loans. What kind of
loans are they? Are they secured, are they priority? Tell me,
when you loan money to the Maryland--if we use Evergreen for an
example--what is the nature of that loan?
Dr. Cohen. I'm--I am not the loan expert, but I can be
happy to follow up and provide that.
Mr. Mulvaney. Is it secured by any of the assets of the
entity?
Dr. Cohen. So I don't know that I could answer that
question.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. Do you know the priority of repayment?
Dr. Cohen. Yes. So obviously for Federal loans there is--
there's an order of payment. I believe that we are at the very
top of all of the creditors when we are going back, but that
is, I will say, on a case-by-case basis. In different States
that is a--there is a different makeup of where the Federal
loans and Federal obligations fall in the order of who gets
paid back first, which is why it is a case-by-case process that
the Department of Justice runs.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. So is it your testimony then--because
we have had information that indicates that at least on some of
the CO-OPs you have allowed them to reclassify the loans as
what they call surplus on their balance sheet.
Dr. Cohen. Okay. Got you.
Mr. Mulvaney. Is it your testimony that that is because of
State law or have you made a decision to allow that to happen?
Dr. Cohen. So I think you're talking about the loan
conversions. So ----
Mr. Mulvaney. It sounds like it.
Dr. Cohen. Those are ones that are requested by the CO-OPs
themselves, and if we are going to make a determination to move
some of those and convert those loans, we do that in
coordination with the State Departments of Insurance. So we
don't okay any of those conversions without the State
Department of Insurance ----
Mr. Mulvaney. When you say conversions--I am sorry to cut
you off, but you are using a term that I am not familiar with--
what are you converting them to, from loans to what?
Dr. Cohen. So on their balance sheets, so whether it's--
whether they can see it as--I'm going to use the wrong terms
because I'm not the financial person, but to show--to be able
to show that they have risk-based capital. So it allows them to
show that they have more risk-based capital on their balance
sheet.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. All right. Now you have my attention.
Dr. Cohen. You might want to tell--ask my commissioner ----
Mr. Mulvaney. No, I will stay right here for a second.
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. You allow certain CO-OPs to use loans from
the Federal Government that used to be prioritized loans to
count those as capital on their balance sheet for purpose of
meeting their risk-based capital requirements?
Dr. Cohen. That's correct.
Mr. Mulvaney. And that doesn't scare the hell out of you?
Dr. Cohen. That's allowed by--under law, and it is
something that we do ----
Mr. Mulvaney. What law--okay. And you can ask somebody
behind you if you want to. Is there a specific section of the
law you want to cite on that one?
Dr. Cohen. I'd be happy to have one of the lawyers follow
up with ----
Mr. Mulvaney. All right.
Dr. Cohen.--our authority.
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you agree with me that it undermines the
whole purpose of having risk-based capital in the first place
by allowing them to count a government loan as capital? You
understand the--and ----
Dr. Cohen. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. Mulvaney.--a lot of people don't understand the
difference between loans ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney.--and capital so ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes. Understood. And we very much hear your
concerns in this space, which is why it's quite a rigorous
process from the time a CO-OP would request something like this
until we would be able to approve it, and it requires a full
review of their entire business process and their financials.
It involves coordination with the State Departments of
Insurance, and so we have turned a number of them down because
of that.
But we do want to be flexible, again, for these CO-OPs
when, as I've mentioned, if they are successful, we the--we get
those taxpayer dollars back, and so we are trying to use our
tools to be flexible and help those CO-OPs out.
Mr. Mulvaney. Let's talk about your efforts to get them
back. I have heard from some of the CO-OPs that the payments,
the reinsurance payments have slowed up. Are you withholding
reinsurance payments from any of the CO-OPs whether they are
ongoing, they are winding down, or they are closed in order to
offset the loss from the loans?
Dr. Cohen. So each of those are, again, on a case-by-case
basis ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. Does that mean ----
Dr. Cohen.--depending on ----
Mr. Mulvaney.--in some cases the answer is yes?
Dr. Cohen. So most of the time the decision has not yet
been made, so I think it's too early to say.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. Then, let's talk about when you say
most of the time the decision has not been made ----
Dr. Cohen. And they have not ----
Mr. Mulvaney.--let's talk about the times ----
Dr. Cohen. They have not been made.
Mr. Mulvaney. It ----
Dr. Cohen. They have not been made in the wind downs of the
CO-OPs.
Mr. Mulvaney. In any of them?
Dr. Cohen. No.
Mr. Mulvaney. So it is ----
Dr. Cohen. That is an ongoing process.
Mr. Mulvaney. It is your testimony here today that you are
not withholding any of those payments from any of the winding-
down CO-OPs?
Dr. Cohen. So at this time the Department of Justice runs
this process. I'm happy to have them come and answer questions
about how the process would work, but right now, we are not.
Mr. Mulvaney. When do you think you are going to make a
decision on that?
Dr. Cohen. I would have to consult with the Department of
Justice on the timing of those decisions.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. All right. I understand that Mr. Jordan
has joined us, so we are going to have one more questioning in
our first round. I will recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Jordan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chairman. And I am not exactly sure
where the hearing has gone thus far with the questioning, so
let me just jump in with some different things here maybe.
So this all started--it has been in existence for 2 years,
right? January 2014 is when the first CO-OP started operation,
is that right?
Dr. Cohen. That's correct.
Mr. Jordan. And you had over 100 applicants but you
approved 24?
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Jordan. And out of the 24, 12 have already failed?
Dr. Cohen. Twelve have closed, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Twelve have closed, closed, failed, whatever
word you want to use. Okay. And last year, I understand while
maybe 24 were still operating, you visited 16 of the CO-OPs, is
that accurate, site visits?
Dr. Cohen. That sounds right.
Mr. Jordan. Sixteen of the 24. Were there still 24 in
operation starting January 1 of 2015?
Dr. Cohen. No, there were 23. Vermont never ----
Mr. Jordan. Never got involved?
Dr. Cohen.--got their State license ----
Mr. Jordan. Okay. So the ones who ----
Dr. Cohen.--yes.
Mr. Jordan.--got approved and actually started insuring
American citizens, 23, you visited 16 of the 23 last year?
Dr. Cohen. That's correct.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. So of the seven you didn't visit, have
any of them closed?
Dr. Cohen. I don't have the list of who we visited and who
didn't, but I know we prioritized those that we had concerns
about.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Then let me ask you this way. The 16 you
did visit, were all 12 in that 16?
Dr. Cohen. I don't know, but I can follow up and let you
know.
Mr. Jordan. All right. Of the 12 who are still in
operation, how many do you anticipate are going to collapse
this year?
Dr. Cohen. Again, it's too early to know about what will
happen over the course of this year. We did a lot of work at
the end of last year with our colleagues at the State
Departments of Insurance to make sure that we felt that these
CO-OPs could operate ----
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask--maybe this has been asked by the
chairman or some of the members. Of the 12 still in existence,
how many are meeting enrollment projections?
Dr. Cohen. I can't speak to the specifics about any one of
the CO-OPs, but that's definitely a factor that we look at. And
we're only first getting in the data about how ----
Mr. Jordan. Is that one of the things that you look at when
you go out on these site visits?
Dr. Cohen. Absolutely.
Mr. Jordan. But you can't tell me?
Dr. Cohen. So I can't speak to that right now, but I'd be
happy to follow up ----
Mr. Jordan. Are ----
Dr. Cohen.--with details.
Mr. Jordan.--one of the 12 meeting enrollment projections?
Are five of the 12? Can you give me some numbers?
Dr. Cohen. I think some of them are over-enrolled, and
sometimes that's their concern, and sometimes they're under-
enrolled. So it depends on the particular circumstance.
Mr. Jordan. How many of the 12 still in operation are
currently profitable?
Dr. Cohen. I couldn't say how many are profitable. I think
that we know that small businesses are going to struggle to
turn a profit in the early years, and it's too early to know
what their balance sheet is going to look like for 2016.
Mr. Jordan. You don't know if these places that are still--
I mean, half of them have already collapsed, closed, your term,
costing the taxpayers over $1 billion. Of the 12 that are left,
you can't tell me which ones you have visited or haven't
visited, what the enrollment projections are and whether they
are meeting their enrollment projections, and whether they are
profitable or not? That is the kind of stuff we kind of wanted
to know in this hearing.
Dr. Cohen. Understood. And I'd be happy to follow up with
those details.
Mr. Jordan. I mean, there are only 12. It is one thing if
it was 100. There are 12 still operating. You have lost half of
them, and I am asking you about those 12 still in operation.
Who is making any money, right, who is meeting their enrollment
projections, and who did you visit?
Dr. Cohen. I can follow up ----
Mr. Jordan. And you can't tell me out of those 12 ----
Dr. Cohen. I don't have that information in front of me on
the top of my head, but I would want to--I would be very happy
to follow up and get you that.
Mr. Jordan. Well, we need that information. And that is
kind of, frankly, the information you should have had on the
top of your head and in front of you when you come to--it is
only 12. That is the kind of stuff we need to know. Now ----
Dr. Cohen. Sure.
Mr. Jordan.--I understand on the 20th of November and the
23rd of December, we sent you letters requesting documents, and
staff had told me earlier this week we had not received those
documents. Was the stuff we requested in the document dump you
gave us yesterday?
Dr. Cohen. I believe that we have been working with your
staff, prioritized ----
Mr. Jordan. That is not my question.
Dr. Cohen.--what ----
Mr. Jordan. I understand we got a bunch of documents last
night. I want to know if they specifically--specifically in
that dump of documents we got last night, is that what we
requested in the November 20 and December 23 letters to you?
Dr. Cohen. So I ----
Mr. Jordan. Because we want that information.
Dr. Cohen. Yes. So I--what were the specific documents that
you were referring to, and I can let you know if they were in
the document dump? Or at least I'll ----
Mr. Jordan. Well, there is a number of things we haven't
gotten, the corrective action plans for current operation for
some of the current CO-OPs, documents and communications
relating to CMS assessment and analysis of these site visits I
was trying to ask you about ----
Dr. Cohen. Got it.
Mr. Jordan.--so we don't have that information. We want
that information, and I want to know did we get it last night
or do you still need to get it to us?
Dr. Cohen. So I ----
Mr. Jordan. We have also subpoenaed that, by the way.
Dr. Cohen. Yes. So they're--some of those documents are in
the document dump that you got from us. Others we have offered
in a confidential review. I know that you ----
Mr. Jordan. And if I could, Mr. Chairman, that is what I
wanted to get to. So why an in camera viewing only?
Dr. Cohen. So we feel strongly that we--these documents are
market-sensitive, that we have a fiduciary responsibility to
the CO-OPs to allow them to operate on a level playing field
with their competitors. These are 12 that the State Department
of Insurance used with every insurer. If we were to release --
--
Mr. Jordan. But what about ----
Dr. Cohen.--the details of just the CO-OPs, that would put
them at a disadvantage and further--make it more unlikely that
we wouldn't return taxpayer dollars.
Mr. Jordan. But don't you also run the risk that it puts
the enrollees at some kind of disadvantage that they are now
maybe part of a CO-OP that is in financial trouble, and based
on history and experience and the fact that half of them have
already failed and many of these, I assume, of these other 12
are in big trouble, you don't think it is important for the
enrollees, the actual fellow citizens, to know what is going
on?
Dr. Cohen. So we share that information with the two
entities that are most important to making the corrections, the
CO-OPs themselves and the State Departments of Insurance, which
carry the voice of ----
Mr. Jordan. But we are the Congress of the United States.
We are an entity that it is kind of important to know about
this as well.
Dr. Cohen. And we want you to know that we are doing our
job, which is why we had your staff--and I know they spent
hours with those documents so that you know that we are doing
our job here and are being pretty tough on the CO-OPs.
Mr. Jordan. But our job is to stand up and represent the
citizens of the country who want to know that information, and
frankly, from a market standpoint and an evaluation standpoint,
need that information.
Dr. Cohen. And that's why you can have access to those
documents if you need more time to review them.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you for the time.
Mr. Mulvaney. I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
being here, both of you. I appreciate it.
Dr. Cohen, in 2011 the current administration projected
that the CO-OP programs would result in significant losses, and
that was something that they projected. And it would be losses
in taxpayers' dollars. Specifically, when this rule was
proposed to implement the CO-OP program they estimated that
only about 65 percent of the solvency loans and only about 60
percent of the startup loans would be repaid. You had to be
aware of this. Were you aware of that?
Dr. Cohen. So I think you're talking about the repayment
time, not the default rate, which is often called the default
rate. So it's really about will they pay back in the time
allotted, but we knew that the CO-OPs would likely need more
time and have it to be ----
Mr. Carter. All right. Well, you want to limit it to the
time. What about the time? How many of them have paid back now?
Dr. Cohen. So they're--as any loan, as you know, they're
paying back their loan. For those that have closed, we are
working through a process now to recover those funds.
Mr. Carter. You were aware of this. You said you were aware
of this because it was part of the proposed rule to implement
it. Did you set up any kind of criteria whereas you would
assess the financial viability of these CO-OPs?
Dr. Cohen. Absolutely. The terms of the loan agreement
themselves have quite an extensive amount of oversight process
laid out for it. In addition, we have gone over and beyond that
knowing that these ----
Mr. Carter. When did you do this? When did you ----
Dr. Cohen. Doing ----
Mr. Carter. When did you set up this criteria?
Dr. Cohen. The criteria--when the loans were let before
2014.
Mr. Carter. You set it up during that time?
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Carter. It was my understanding that it was developed
after the recommendation of the HHS IG.
Dr. Cohen. We certainly went beyond the terms of the loan
agreement to do further oversight, and yes, appreciated the OIG
work saying that--to do enhanced oversight, which we have. I
don't think anyone can fault us for--in terms of how many folks
are on corrective action plans or enhanced oversight. We're
visiting these folks. We're calling them. We're being pretty
hard on them frankly.
Mr. Carter. The inspector general of HHS, he found that all
but one, all but one of the CO-OPs had lost money in 2014. CMS
was aware of this, that almost all of the CO-OPs incurred
losses in 2014. If you were aware of that and some were already
shutting down, why did you continue to award the taxpayer
dollars in loans?
Dr. Cohen. So you need it to ----
Mr. Carter. I mean, if you know you are on a sinking ship,
you know, you have got to--when I first entered the Georgia
Legislature, one of the things they told us, when you are in a
hole, stop digging. And we are in a hole here. Why are we still
digging?
Dr. Cohen. Now, we share your concerns here. These programs
certainly have challenges, which is why we've been doing the
extensive and aggressive oversight that we have. What I would
say is that when we are looking at what the CO-OP is doing,
it's a totality. It's what is their business strategy ----
Mr. Carter. Well, but when you talk about ----
Dr. Cohen.--what is their ----
Mr. Carter.--totality, though, 12 of the 23 CO-OPs have
already closed, 12 of the ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Carter.--23. Anybody in business would pull the plug on
that immediately, but you continue it. Why is that?
Dr. Cohen. Well, we look at each individual situation, as
my colleague ----
Mr. Carter. And I hope you look at each individual, and I
don't mean to interrupt, but with 12 out of 23, come on.
Dr. Cohen. Right. And that's why we're working hard to make
sure the other ones are as strong as they can be, but they are
small businesses. As you know, small businesses struggle at the
beginning, particularly ----
Mr. Carter. I know small businesses--trust me. I own a
small business. I struggled at the beginning.
Dr. Cohen. Yes, it's tough.
Mr. Carter. But I didn't fail. I continued on.
Dr. Cohen. And that's what we're trying to do with the CO-
OPs that are ----
Mr. Carter. Yes, but I ----
Dr. Cohen.--currently in business ----
Mr. Carter.--met my obligations. I didn't close. I mean, if
you have got 12 out of 23 closing, it would appear to me that
you have got to say, hey, wait a minute, something is going on
here. This just isn't working.
And we are talking about taxpayers' dollars, again, that we
in Congress, we are responsible for this. We are the ones who
----
Dr. Cohen. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter.--have to answer for this. So I am asking you if
you have got 12 out of 23 that are closing, why are we
continuing this?
Dr. Cohen. And the original reason for the CO-OP program
was to provide an additional choice and competition, so where
it is working, where they are viable, we want to support them
----
Mr. Carter. Where are they working?
Dr. Cohen. In the 11 places where they're existing.
Mr. Carter. That is not--are they working in those 11
places?
Dr. Cohen. Well ----
Mr. Carter. Just because they haven't gone out of business
doesn't necessarily mean they are working.
Dr. Cohen. We agree with you there. They certainly have
some challenges, and so we need to stay on top of them, and
that's what we're doing.
Mr. Carter. What about the $1.2 billion in loans ----
Dr. Cohen. That's what ----
Mr. Carter.--that were awarded to the 12 closed CO-OPs?
Dr. Cohen. Yes, that's the process we're working through
right now ----
Mr. Carter. What about it? Where is the $1.2 billion?
Dr. Cohen. Well, some of that obviously went to pay for
actual medical care for the consumers that were enrolled in
those ----
Mr. Carter. Are we going to get it back?
Dr. Cohen. We are working to get every penny we can.
Mr. Carter. Are we going to get the $1.2 billion back?
Dr. Cohen. We're going to use every tool at our disposal --
--
Mr. Carter. Are we, yes or no? Are we ----
Dr. Cohen. So obviously some of that money was spent on
actual medical care for consumers, so ----
Mr. Carter. We are not going to get it back, are we?
Dr. Cohen. We're going to try to get every dollar we ----
Mr. Carter. And do you think we will get half of it back?
Do you think we will get ----
Dr. Cohen. I ----
Mr. Carter.--a quarter of it back?
Dr. Cohen. I can't say ----
Mr. Carter. Do you have any idea how much of it we will get
back?
Dr. Cohen. I can't say at this point.
Mr. Carter. Twelve out of 23.
Dr. Cohen. Understood. That's right.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Dr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Mulvaney. I recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Cartwright, for an additional 5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Chairman, the last thing I want to do is hold
myself out as the adult in the room, but we have ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Certainly not. Can we put it to a vote?
Mr. Cartwright. We are not going to put that to a vote, Mr.
Chairman. That is right.
But we have had a discussion about the release of
confidential information, and I am concerned about that. I
would like to reiterate my concern that the committee not
release any confidential regulatory information that we have
obtained about the remaining CO-OPs in a way that could mislead
consumers about the insurance companies in their States. I
think empowering consumers through transparency is a good
thing, and you don't hear many voices louder than mine on the
issue of transparency.
But that is not what we would be accomplishing by releasing
this information. In reality, it would be misleading
selectively to release information about currently operating
CO-OPs that have been placed under corrective actions plans or
enhanced oversight plans by CMS.
Mr. Redmer, I see you nodding your head. And isn't it true
that State regulators like yourself frequently do enter into
consent orders with health insurance companies to address
issues raised by consumer complaints like billing or claims
practices, right?
Mr. Redmer. Absolutely, we do, yes.
Mr. Cartwright. But it is also my understanding that this
type of regulatory action is typically kept confidential until
a resolution has been reached?
Mr. Redmer. Correct.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. And in fact, yesterday, the committee
received a letter from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners. You remember that, I take it, Commissioner?
Mr. Redmer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. And here is what the NAIC had to say, and I
would like to ask unanimous consent to enter that letter into
the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mulvaney. Without objection,
Mr. Cartwright. They said this: ``For the sake of the 11
CO-OPs that continue to operate in our States, we encourage all
congressional members and their staff to heed the confidential
nature of some of the financial information that may come to
your attention. Divulging information on State actions or the
financial status of any plan that is not public could threaten
the long-term success of these plans.''
Now, Commissioner Redmer, as a State insurance
commissioner, do you think it would be harmful to release
information about any CAP or EOP for the remaining CO-OPs?
Mr. Redmer. I do. It's easy for a competitor to take a
nugget of information and throw it out there out of context and
create an unfavorable, adverse effect for that organization.
Mr. Cartwright. And not to put too fine a point on it, I
really don't think I am the only adult in the room, and I look
forward to working with the folks across the aisle to be
responsible with that information.
And I also want to follow up on the question of recouping
funds. Dr. Cohen, roughly $2.4 billion had been loaned to all
the CO-OPs, is that correct?
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright. But only half of that amount has gone to
CO-OPs that have wound down. Am I correct in that?
Dr. Cohen. That's right. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. And then the remainder of the loan
funding, money that had been lent to the CO-OPs that are still
in operation, is still being serviced, right?
Dr. Cohen. Sorry, repeat that?
Mr. Cartwright. They are making payments on the ----
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright.--loans?
Dr. Cohen. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright. And, Dr. Cohen, what is CMS doing to recoup
loan funds from the CO-OPs that have in fact wound down?
Dr. Cohen. To recoup the funding for the CO-OPs that have
wound down, we're going through a process right now. We know
about our obligations to the taxpayer. The recoupment process
is dictated by the terms of the loan agreement, as well as
State and Federal law. The Department of Justice leads that
process on our behalf.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. Now, a fellow named John Morrison,
who was a former president of the National Alliance of State
Health CO-Ops, testified before Congress on this issue in
November, and you are aware of that, I take it?
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. Now, he suggested that consumers in States
with CO-OPs have already saved more money through lower
premiums than the total cost of the entire CO-OP program
itself. He also noted that these savings are passed along to
the Federal Government, the taxpayers, in the form of lower
subsidy costs. Now, Dr. Cohen, what do you make of that
statement?
Dr. Cohen. So I don't know the data, but again, we agree
with the concept.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. And, Commissioner Redmer, what is
your perspective on the capacity of CO-OPs to save consumers
and the Federal Government money?
Mr. Redmer. I believe that competition is a good thing,
and, again, to go back to my earlier statement, the broader
conversation is not just about CO-OPs. We've got small, new,
emerging, privately owned carriers all around the country that
could be adversely affected specifically because of the risk
adjustment formula that aren't using any taxpayer dollars at
all.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I thank both of you for your
testimony here today.
Dr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Mulvaney. And I am sorry to cut the gentleman ----
Mr. Cartwright. I yield back.
Mr. Mulvaney.--off, but we have to go vote on the
Cartwright of Pennsylvania amendment, whatever that is. We now
recognize the chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Jordan, for 5
minutes for the final questions.
Mr. Jordan. And we don't want to miss an opportunity to
vote against that wonderful amendment, I am sure. I am kidding
you.
So, Dr. Cohen, of the 12 left ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Jordan.--how many of those are under corrective action
plan, enhanced oversight?
Dr. Cohen. Eight.
Mr. Jordan. Eight. So your position is that certain
information can't get out because it could somehow jeopardize
the ability of CO-OPs to survive. I just fail to see that.
Twenty-three started, 12 have already collapsed. Of the 12
remaining, eight are under some corrective action plan, and
somehow, if we get information about enrollment projections and
profitability, that is going to ruin their reputation? I mean
really?
Dr. Cohen. Well, again, I'm happy to share that information
with you, Chairman ----
Mr. Jordan. Well, no, let me ask ----
Dr. Cohen.--out of a public setting.
Mr. Jordan.--somehow if consumers get that information,
that is somehow going to hurt them?
Dr. Cohen. Well ----
Mr. Jordan. It seems to me that is the kind of information
they would need to know so they will say, look, this thing is
going down. I need to run as far away from this--I need to get
insured somewhere else.
Dr. Cohen. And that's really the job of the State
Department of Insurance to be the ones to certify whether or
not the insurer has the ability to sell a product on the ----
Mr. Jordan. What are these CAPs? What is in this corrective
action plan? What is that? Is that a letter to them saying,
hey, things don't look so good, you got to change some things?
What is that?
Dr. Cohen. Yes, it's a pretty detailed plan saying we've
identified these particular ----
Mr. Jordan. Detailed in what area? Give me some examples of
things you require these CO-OPs to do to change ----
Dr. Cohen. Sure.
Mr. Jordan.--to correct the ----
Dr. Cohen. We identify operational issues that they had
whether it's in their management team, how they're doing vendor
oversight, what they're doing with their provider networks, how
they're pricing their product, their business strategy. It
could be a range of issues.
Mr. Jordan. So it is our understanding that the very things
you just outlined that you put in this corrective action plan
for the eight of the 12 who are still out there, the 12 who
collapsed had the exact same plan sent to them.
Dr. Cohen. No, that's--they were all tailored individually
to their situation. Some of them, we couldn't--we realized that
we didn't--couldn't identify a correctible issue and that,
frankly, we went straight to a wind-down process with some of
them.
Mr. Jordan. Is it your opinion that--and then I am going to
yield to the chairman for the remainder of my time. Is it your
opinion that the three who are currently still operating and
not--or, excuse me, it would be the four that are still
operating who are not under a corrective action plan, are they
going to be around at the end of the year?
Dr. Cohen. So again, too early to tell in the year. We're
just looking at their Q4 data from the end of last year ----
Mr. Jordan. Can you guarantee us that those four who aren't
under a corrective action plan, so of the 12 surviving, the --
--
Dr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Jordan.--four who aren't under a CAP or enhanced
oversight, can you guarantee us that they are going to be
around?
Dr. Cohen. So we will continue to do our oversight of them
in a very strict way, and as new information comes up, if we
need to, we will put more folks on corrective action plans ----
Mr. Jordan. So it is likely that those four may go on a
corrective action plan, too?
Dr. Cohen. It's too early for me to know. I think that's
the work ahead of us.
Mr. Jordan. I yield to the chairman.
Mr. Mulvaney. Dr. Cohen, are you making any contingency
plans for any of the currently operating CO-OPs to shut down
during 2016?
Dr. Cohen. I think a lot of our oversight work is in and of
itself the planning that we're doing, trying to identify issues
with them ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Are you taking any specific actions to
prepare for the possible shutdown of any of the currently
operating CO-OPs?
Dr. Cohen. I don't know exactly what you're referring to,
but I think the work that we're doing on the oversight work is
that contingency planning.
Mr. Mulvaney. Does it bother you that I think several--I
think it is at least four, maybe as many as seven of the CO-OPs
that have already gone out of business or are winding down
never went on a CAP to begin with?
Dr. Cohen. Again, if we identify something we think is
correctible, reversible, addressable, we put them on a CAP.
Others, we recognize that that wouldn't ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Have you ever corrected, reversed, or fixed
anything under any of the CAPs?
Dr. Cohen. So these are things that are structural to the
program. As I was mentioning, some of the things, whether it's
----
Mr. Mulvaney. I understand what they are. I am asking you
if you have fixed them.
Dr. Cohen. So it--they don't fix overnight. These are
things that take many months ----
Mr. Mulvaney. And you have had many months ----
Dr. Cohen.--to see those corrected ----
Mr. Mulvaney.--you have had some of them under CAPs for
many months. Have you made any improvements that we ----
Dr. Cohen. Yes, I think some of them have certainly made
some improvements in their vendor management and their--in the
way that they're looking at their operations and the way that
they're looking at their provider networks, yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Several times today you have mentioned that
you take a seriously hard look at the CO-OPs, that you
aggressively work on oversight, you have strict oversight. Do
you believe that you are entitled to see anything from the CO-
OPs that this committee and this Congress is not entitled to
see?
Dr. Cohen. Again, we are happy to share with you any of the
information ----
Mr. Mulvaney. I understand that, and I appreciate that. Do
you believe that you are entitled to see anything that we are
not?
Dr. Cohen. I--no, again, we're happy to share with you the
information that we can ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Redmer, the last question.
Mr. Redmer. Sure.
Mr. Mulvaney. I understand the concern about going public
with the information. Evergreen chose to go public in November
of 2015 to a committee of this Congress that it was under a
CAP, didn't it?
Mr. Redmer. They went to go public--I'm sorry, say again.
Mr. Mulvaney. They made public statements in Congress to
one of the committee--of this body that they were under a CAP?
Mr. Redmer. I don't know whether they did or not but ----
Mr. Mulvaney. I can assure they did.
Mr. Redmer. But I can tell you discussing the CAP is not a
concern for me as a regulator. What's of concern to me is
disclosing confidential proprietary information that could be
used against them in the marketplace by just passing out
nuggets that might be out of context.
Mr. Mulvaney. Fair enough. I thank both of you very much.
Mr. Redmer. Thank you.
Mr. Mulvaney. And I am sorry to wrap this up very quickly,
but as you can see, we have got 7 minutes to run across the
street. We are going to hold the record open for 5 days for any
member who wants to submit a written statement. We thank the
witnesses.
There being no further business and without objection, we
will stand adjourned. Thank you very much.
Mr. Redmer. Thank you.
Dr. Cohen. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
