- SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM: THE PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY COUNCIL'S PATH FORWARD

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM: THE PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY COUNCIL'S
PATH FORWARD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 25, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-105

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-404 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
------

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Jack Thorlin, Counsel
William Marx, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 25, 2016................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Beth Cobert, Acting Direcor, U.S. Office of Personnel
Management
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15
Mr. Tony Scott, Deputy Director for Management, U.S. Office of
Management and Budget
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20
Mr. William Evanina, Director of National Counterintelligence and
Security Center, Office of the Director of National
Intelligence
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26

APPENDIX

Chairman Chaffetz Opening Statement..............................    60
Press Release from Senator David Vitter, submitted by Ranking
Member Elijah E. Cummings......................................    65
Responses to questions for the record from Terry Halvorsen, Chief
Information Officer at the U.S. Department of Defense,
submitted by Chairman Chaffetz.................................    66
Responses to questions for the record and relevant attachments
(#1-4) from Beth Cobert, Acting Director, U.S. Office of
Personnel Manaement, submitted by Chairman Chaffetz............    73
Responses to questions for the record from William Evanina,
Director of National Counterintelligence and Security Center,
Office of the Director of National Intelligence, submitted by
Chairman Chaffetz..............................................    89
Responses to questions for the record from Tony Scott, U.S. Chief
Information Officer, U.S. Office of Management and Budget,
submitted by Chairman Chaffetz.................................    97

SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM:
THE PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY COUNCIL'S PATH FORWARD

----------

Thursday, February 25, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:59 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Duncan, Jordan,
Walberg, Amash, DesJarlais, Massie, Meadows, Buck, Walker,
Blum, Hice, Russell, Carter, Hurd, Palmer, Cummings, Maloney,
Norton, Lynch, Connolly, Duckworth, Lawrence, Lieu, Plaskett,
DeSaulnier, and Welch.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, the chair is
authorized to declare a recess at any time.
I appreciate you all being here for this hearing,
``Security Clearance Reform: The Performance Accountability
Council's Path Forward.''
At last count, the Director of National Intelligence
reported 4.5 million people held security clearances, 4.5
million, and the queue for clearances continues to grow. At the
end of fiscal year 2015, there were more than 388,000 new
background investigations, and 117,000 periodic
reinvestigations backlogged at the Office of Personnel
Management. That is a lot of folks with access or requesting
access to our most sensitive national security information.
And we have learned last year that most if not all the
personal information collected during background investigations
was exfiltrated in one of our country's biggest cyber attacks.
We have to be careful not to ever, ever allow that to happen
again. We have to fix the process, and we have to protect the
information we collect.
And as part of my opening statement, I would actually like
to yield some time to the gentleman from Oklahoma, who has been
very keenly involved in this, Mr. Russell.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I do appreciate the panel also being here today.
Following the June 2015 OPM data breach, I began working
with my good friend and colleague Congressman Ted Lieu on a
path forward that would protect not just the personal and
private information of those who hold security clearances but
what amounts to crown jewels for any foreign intelligence
service.
My concern deepened as we learned the full extent of the
breach. All told, 18 million records were stolen in the breach,
including data on military and intelligence personnel, placing
Americans at great risk that has not abated.
I also received a letter from my time in the service being
a former top secret SCI clearance holder in the military
stating that my data had been compromised. For me and my friend
Congressman Ted Lieu, who also received a letter, this is not
some academic issue.
It should also be noted that the DOD never lost security of
such data when it was under their care. It was through
pressure, largely from Congress, to save money, make an effort
to eliminate a large backlog. Well, we eliminated the backlog
by eliminating security. Whatever savings we had has surely
been forfeited in that result.
Today, we will examine the reform efforts advanced by the
90-day sustainability and security review by the Performance
Accountability Council, or PAC. One of the main points of
emphasis I made along with Mr. Lieu was the need for the
Department of Defense to own the data for our service members
and Department civilians. And I am encouraged that the PAC
review will result in this being accomplished.
Under the reforms recommended by the PAC, the Department of
Defense will be responsible for not just building the
infrastructure that will house this critically important data;
they will also be responsible for defending it.
The questions remain, however, that while the DOD has been
given the responsibility, will they be given the authority
while being placed under a bureau that is placed under a
department? This has to be answered.
I remain concerned regarding the creation of the new
National Background Investigations Bureau, or NBIB. NBIB will
ultimately absorb the Federal Investigative Service, which
currently is tasked with conducting background investigations
for the vast majority of our government. And while I believe we
all recognize the pressing importance and urgency of
modernizing and updating the security clearance process, I
remain unconvinced that allowing an OPM entity, whether its
name be FIS or NBIB, is the correct path in the long term.
After all, the OPM allowed the worst breach of secure data in
our nation's history.
I hope that today's hearing will show by NBIB will be a new
way forward rather than just a rebranding of FIS. I appreciate
the willingness of Acting Director Cobert and other members of
the PAC that they have shown in working with me and Congressman
Lieu on this issue and your willingness to give us complete
access and answer our questions.
My aim in this hearing, as I hope we will hear today with
the chairman's indulgence, is to ensure that the process
forward for NBIB is the right path and that we are not just
putting a fresh coat of paint on a house with a bad foundation,
a house that our enemies have broken into and stolen everything
in it, I might add.
I look forward to hearing from our panel of witnesses as we
seek to understand the difference between NBIB and its
predecessor, as well as the role of the Department of Defense
in protecting this vital information.
And, Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
In the essence of time, I will submit the remainder of my
opening statement into the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the ranking member, the
distinguished gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I want
to thank you for holding today's hearing. I commend both
Congressman Lieu and Russell for their work on this issue and
for requesting today's hearing.
I would like to yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from
California, Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Ranking Member Cummings, for giving me
the opportunity to speak. And I want to thank the chair and the
ranking member for holding this hearing, as well as last year's
hearings, that exposed fundamental weaknesses in our nation's
cybersecurity, particularly as applied to OPM.
And last year's OPM data breach was the most significant
government cybersecurity breach we have ever uncovered and
serves as a poignant reminder that U.S. Government needs to
change the culture of cybersecurity.
It also revealed that there was an irrational system where
we had a human resources agency protecting these critical
national security assets or security clearance records, and as
Representative Russell mentioned, not only did we both get
notices that our information was compromised, I think our
spouses did as well.
In October 7 of last year, Congressman Russell and I wrote
a letter to the administration. It was to the Performance
Accountability Council requesting that you transfer the
security clearance data, the protection and design of it, to a
Department of Defense agency. The letter was dated October 7,
and, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter it into the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lieu. I am pleased that the administration and the PAC
board has in fact now put forward a plan that will transfer the
design and protection of this information to a DOD agency.
I do share the same concerns that Congressman Russell has
regarding the NBIB. I would like to know why it is we need the
creation of a new bureau, how it would be different from the
Federal Information Service, and whether the lines of authority
are clear, and if there is going to be accountability.
And I agree with Congressman Russell that we need to hear
about how these reforms are not just going to be window
dressing on a broken home but a comprehensive renovation.
And let me again thank the witnesses here today for your
public service, for your hard work on this issue, and look
forward to working with you to make our nation's cybersecurity
stronger.
I yield back.
Mr. Cummings. Again, I want to thank Representative Lieu
and Representative Russell for their leadership on this issue.
And, Mr. Chairman, this is precisely the type of hearing
our committee should be having, looking across agencies at new
proposals to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
government.
Mr. Chairman, in 2013, a very disturbed Navy contractor
with a security clearance shot and killed 12 people and injured
four others here in Washington, D.C. Our committee conducted an
investigation of that terrible shooting, and we found that a
contractor USIS conducted the shooter's background check. We
found that USIS failed to include information on his previous
arrest for shooting out the tires of his neighbor's car. As a
result, he was given a secret-level security clearance.
We also found that USIS committed fraud against the
American taxpayers on a much wider scale by submitting
incomplete background investigations. USIS ultimately agreed to
the demands of the Justice Department to forego $30 million as
a result of its actions, and it no longer conducts background
checks on behalf of the Federal Government.
I ask unanimous consent that the report I issued on this
topic be entered into the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Then, last year, cyber attackers successfully breached
OPM's data systems. Again, our committee investigated, and
again, we found a weak link in the chain: a contractor. We
heard testimony explaining that these cyber attackers were able
to gain access to Federal systems by using KeyPoint's
privileged access to OPM's networks. As a result, the personal
information of millions of Federal employees with security
clearances was compromised.
These cyber attacks on OPM were not isolated incidents.
Other Federal contractors, including Anthem and Premera, were
also attacked. Experts believe these were all part of a
sophisticated, coordinated cyber espionage campaign. They all
occurred at about the same time, they all targeted sensitive
information about Federal employees, and they all were carried
out using similar malware.
The proposal we are discussing today is a significant and
substantive response to these events, and it is more than just
the new National Background Investigations Bureau. The
administration's proposal leverages the expertise of key parts
of the government like the Department of Defense to provide
critical IT and cybersecurity capabilities.
I believe this is a serious effort to combat sophisticated
cyber attackers who are targeting our government, and it
deserves serious consideration by this Congress.
Today, I want to hear more about how this proposal will
address the significant problems we have had with these
contractors. The government's reliance on contractors helps
supplement their workforce and increase our capabilities, but
as we have seen, it also carries major risks. I want to know
how the administration's proposal will increase oversight and
accountability over contractors charged with safeguarding some
of our nation's most sensitive information.
Let me address two final points. First, earlier this week,
Donna Seymour, OPM's chief information officer, retired after
more than 35 years of service to our great country.
Unfortunately, some have inaccurately--inaccurately--blamed Ms.
Seymour for preexisting vulnerabilities she inherited. Now, I
was one of the most vocal critics of the CIO's office at our
last hearing because the inspector general raised concerns
about obtaining access to information from that office. And I
continue to believe those concerns were valid.
However, our investigation has now found that the cyber
attacks against OPM were already underway when Ms. Seymour took
office in December of 2013. In addition, experts in and out of
the agency informed us that she helped uncover the attack, she
led an aggressive response, and she elevated cybersecurity to a
top priority when previously it had language.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I want you to know that I believe
that these recent political attacks against Ms. Seymour are
both unfair and inaccurate. They also set a terrible precedent
that would discourage qualified experts from taking on the
challenges our nation faces in the future.
Finally, on that same note, as we sit here today, certain
Republicans in the Senate are holding up the nomination of a
great public servant, Beth Cobert as OPM Director, for
political reasons that have nothing, absolutely nothing to do
with her qualifications for the position. As we all know,
Republicans are threatening to block anyone the President
nominates to the Supreme Court for political reasons in the
same way they are stalling Ms. Cobert's nomination, despite the
fact that she has been widely praised for turning things around
at the agency.
I have said it before and I will say it again: We must not
only reach common ground, we must reach higher ground. And that
is what the American people are demanding of us, and that is
why they are so frustrated. Just this morning, Senator David
Vitter issued a press release proclaiming that he is ``blocking
Beth Cobert to be Director of the Office of Personnel
Management'' as if he is bragging about it. He is doing this
because of his political opposition to the Affordable Care Act
and not for anything relating to the actions of Ms. Cobert.
I have a copy of the press release here, and I ask
unanimous consent that it be entered into the record, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Cummings. As I close, this is simply outrageous. The
inspector general has praised her efforts, and even some of her
critics in Congress have praised her leadership. There is
absolutely no reason to continue playing politics, and I hope
that every member of our committee will join me today in asking
the Senate to confirm President Obama's nomination for this
position as soon as possible.
Mr. Chairman, again, I want to thank you for your
indulgence. I want to thank you for calling this very important
hearing, and I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
member who would like to submit a written statement.
As we introduce this first panel of witnesses, I want to
particularly thank Ms. Cobert, who has been nominated by the
President to be the new Director of the Office of Personnel
Management. I find her to be a very competent person who is a
breath of fresh air who actually has the background to run this
agency.
Part of the reason we got into this mess, since you brought
it up, to the ranking member, is that there was a political
appointee that was put in there who had no business running the
Office of Personnel Management. She was terribly under-
qualified to do this, and I am glad that the agency has taken
action to get rid of what I consider to be one of the worst
problems, which was their CIO because there were undoubtedly
problems, but that was in my personal opinion not part of the
solution.
Now, that has been taken care of, and we can further debate
that. That is not the subject of the hearing today. What I
appreciate is the communication from Ms. Cobert. I think she
has, as I said, the right background. We do still need some
responsiveness relating to a subpoena, but I do believe that
the Office of Personnel Management is making an effort to get
that information to us.
I want to be one that is counted as supporting her
nomination, and I think the country will be better off, the
government will be better off confirming her presence and
allowing her to be the Director, fully confirmed, as soon as
possible.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, would you yield for just ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Mr. Cummings.--30 seconds?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Would you join me in a letter today to send
to Senator Vitter saying what you just said?
Chairman Chaffetz. I will send one to the majority leader
----
Mr. Cummings. All right.
Chairman Chaffetz.--but ----
Mr. Cummings. That will do.
Chairman Chaffetz.--I don't want to send one to a specific
----
Mr. Cummings. Fine.
Chairman Chaffetz. But ----
Mr. Cummings. I would appreciate that.
Chairman Chaffetz.--I am saying it publicly. I will put it
in writing. I believe Ms. Cobert has the right qualifications.
I think the country and the office will be better off with her
confirmation.
Mr. Cummings. I just wanted to make sure we did it together
if we can.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. And so that is quite the introduction to
joining us here today. We do appreciate your presence and your
expertise and look forward to hearing how we move forward, but
again, I am glad that there have been changes in the CIO's
office. That is part of the solution and gets rid of the
problem.
Mr. Terry Halvorsen, who is the chief information officer
at the United States Department of Defense, welcome here, sir.
Thank you.
Mr. Tony Scott, Deputy Director for Management at the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, we appreciate your presence as
well; and Mr. William Evanina, did I pronounce that--yes, I
hope so. Thank you. The Director of National
Counterintelligence and Security Center at the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence. We appreciate your presence
as well.
All of these panel members have very important, critical
roles to the safety and security of our nation. We thank you
for participating.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify, so if you will all please rise and raise
your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. The witnesses may be seated.
Let the record reflect that all of them answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for robust discussion and
questioning by members, we would appreciate it if you would
limit your verbal comments to 5 minutes. Your entire written
statement will be submitted into the record.
Ms. Cobert, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF BETH COBERT

Ms. Cobert. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry, microphone there. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Cobert. Get that right. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you today.
This year, the administration announced significant changes
to how the Federal Government performs background
investigations. As a result, OPM will stand up the National
Backgrounds Investigations Bureau, NBIB. The NBIB will absorb
the operations of OPM's Federal Investigative Services and will
be housed within OPM. The NBIB will be a new government-wide
service provider for background investigations. OPM has and
will work closely with their interagency partners on this
effort that is so critical to the integrity of the Federal
workforce and our national security.
The NBIB presents significant change for the Federal
Government in a number of important and positive ways. DOD will
design, build, and operate the NBIB's investigative IT systems
in coordination with the NBIB. This strengthens the Federal
Government's security clearance and background investigation
processes by leveraging DOD's significant IT, national
security, and cybersecurity expertise.
NBIB will also have elevated standing and prominence within
the national security leadership across the government. The
head of NBIB will be a Presidential appointee and a full member
of the Suitability and Security Clearance Performance
Accountability Council, the PAC. Additionally, NBIB will have
its own dedicated structures in vital areas of operations
tailored to NBIB's core mission.
Finally, we will institutionalize NBIB's ability to tap
into the rich expertise and knowledge that exist across the
Federal Government through locating the leadership team in
Washington, D.C., and utilizing programs such as rotating
details and joint-duty assignments.
OPM plays an important role in conducting background
investigations for the vast majority of the Federal Government.
Currently, OPM's Federal Investigative Services conducts
investigations for over 100 Federal agencies, approximately 95
percent of the total background investigations government-wide,
including more than 600,000 national security investigations
and 400,000 investigations related to suitability, fitness, or
credentialing each year.
The NBIB will assume the investigative functions of OPM's
Federal Investigative Services and add important new
capabilities. The NBIB will concentrate solely on its mission
to provide effective, efficient, and secure background
investigations for the Federal Government. The NBIB will
receive dedicated support in key areas, including acquisition
and privacy, and will focus on bringing in additional talent
with national security expertise as we do so.
To begin the implementation phase of these reforms, we are
establishing a transition team. This team, comprised of
personnel from the PAC member agencies, will be established by
mid-March. Supporting the implementation of the NBIB and aiding
its success will be a core focus for the PAC. The NBIB will
leverage existing expertise, resources, and processes for
providing government-wide services as it is launched.
The NBIB will work closely with OPM's Federal Investigative
Services leadership to minimize disruption for agencies that
rely on us to perform background investigations. We are working
along with DOD to establish an initial transition schedule to
sunset the OPM IT systems currently supporting background
investigations.
Throughout these efforts, we will provide continuity of
service to our customer agencies by providing quality
background investigation services. Our goal is to have the
NBIB's initial operating capability officially established with
a new organizational design and a leader in place by October
2016.
The establishment of the NBIB continues this
administration's work to protect American citizens and some of
our nation's most sensitive information and facilities. On
behalf of OPM, I am proud to be part of this most recent effort
by the administration. I look forward to working with my
colleagues on this panel, with our customer and partner
agencies across the Federal Government, and with this Congress
in a bipartisan, collaborative fashion for the benefit of the
American people. I'm happy to answer any questions you may
have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Cobert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Halvorsen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY HALVORSEN

Mr. Halvorsen. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, ranking member,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify before the committee today on DOD's
information technology and cybersecurity support to the
National Background Investigation Bureau.
In duly capacity, I look forward to expanding this role
with the opportunity to oversee IT systems for the National
Background Investigation Bureau. This is an opportunity for the
Federal Government to truly capitalize on established DOD
technology, commercial expertise, other government expertise to
improve the security of the IT infrastructure for the vital
Federal background investigation system process.
DOD has substantial experience in the development of
systems with strong cybersecurity and has worked to integrate
commercial- and government-developed cyber defense and
detection tools into the DOD networks. This gives the
Department unique cyber defense capabilities.
The DOD is driving cultural, business, and technical
innovation into DOD by better integrating our IT
infrastructure, supporting agile and innovative IT. We will do
the same here.
The Department's cybersecurity workforce is well trained to
protect against and respond to cyber intrusions. Our
cybersecurity operations and procedures are mature and
reinforced by policy and regulations across the Department.
We will bring together the Department's full range of
resources and expertise. The Defense Information Systems Agency
will oversee the organization's effort to provide the IT
services and security with continual oversight by my office in
my role as the CIO.
The Department's objective, of course, is to replace the
current background investigation information systems with a
new, more reliable, flexible, and secure system in support of
the NBIB while we ensure continuous operations for the vital
background investigations system and ensure that we are making
as much security improvements to the current systems while we
are in the process of replacing them.
I echo Beth's comments. We have been working closely
together with OPM and other parts of the government since this
incident was discovered. We will continue to do so.
DOD will cooperatively conduct a full cybersecurity
assessment of the current background investigations
infrastructure. This joint assessment will determine the near-
term steps that the Department will take to assist OPM with the
operation of the current system, as well as to develop the
steps that OPM itself can take to better defend the current
systems as we are designing and putting in of the new
investigation systems IT infrastructure.
I will stress again we will do this in cooperation with
everyone, but in the end, DOD has the technical responsibility
and the technical expertise to oversight what we are doing in
this new IT investigation system.
Thank you, and stand by for your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Halvorsen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Scott, I incorrectly identified your title. You are
actually the U.S. chief information officer. My apologies for
that. But you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TONY SCOTT

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz. I was grateful for
the promotion, but my boss would probably be angry about that.
So, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak about
the administration's recently announced changes to modernize
and strengthen how the Federal Government performs and
safeguards background investigations for its employees and
contractors.
As you know, the Federal Government issues, handles, and
stores important and sensitive data, and we use this data to
conduct critical government functions, one of which is the
subject of today's hearing, the Federal Government's background
investigations process.
As we all know, as technology evolves and our economy
becomes more digitally connected, the Federal Government's
tools, systems, and processes for managing sensitive data and
for conducting background investigations must also evolve. And
to protect the personal data of our employees and citizens, we
must keep pace with the technology advancements that occur in
order to anticipate, detect, and counter external and internal
attempts to breach government systems.
In my role as Federal chief information officer, I'm
particularly concerned with confronting the unyielding
cybersecurity threats posed to the information technology
systems used across the Federal Government. My team is
responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of
Federal IT policy through a variety of responsibilities. Today,
I'll focus on the Administration's response to increasing
cybersecurity threats and actions we are taking to improve the
government's background investigation process through the
establishment of the new National Background Investigations
Bureau, or NBIB.
In 2008, the interagency sustainability--or Suitability and
Security Clearance Performance Accountability Council, or the
PAC as we call it, was established through an Executive order.
The PAC is convened and chaired by the Office of Management and
Budget and consists of the Director of National Intelligence,
the Director of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, and
the Departments of Defense, Treasury, Homeland Security, State,
Justice, and Energy, and the FBI, among other agencies.
The PAC oversees reforms to the process--or to the
processes on which Federal agencies and the public rely to
ensure that Federal employees, contractors, and members of the
armed forces are suitable for employment and can be trusted
with access to facilities and sensitive information.
As Beth mentioned, the administration will establish a new
Federal entity, the National Background Investigations Bureau,
to modernize and strengthen the government's background
investigation processes. That will include organizational
redesign led by a political appointee, who will be a full
member of the PAC.
It will include reengineering efforts to look at underlying
business processes. DOD will design, build, secure, and operate
NBIB's IT. This will leverage DOD's expertise in IT and
cybersecurity while better protecting sensitive information and
will deploy the fullest security resources against increasingly
sophisticated and evolving threats.
To support this work, the President's fiscal year 2017
budget includes $95 million within DOD's top line that will be
dedicated to the development of these IT capabilities.
The PAC will establish an interagency cybersecurity
advisory group to provide advice and counsel on system
development and threat mitigation, and these efforts are
consistent with OMB's direction to all Federal agencies to
modernize their IT systems to adequately secure mission
functions, systems, and information. And a dedicated privacy
official will be appointed to advance privacy by design as new
processes and systems are developed.
More broadly, enhanced cybersecurity across all Federal
agencies will be strengthened by the implementation of the
Cybersecurity National Action Plan, or CNAP, which builds on
the security measures and initiatives that have been
implemented in response to the 2015 cyber incidents. The CNAP
takes near-term actions and puts in place a long-term strategy
to enhance cybersecurity awareness and protections and begin
the long-overdue replacement of legacy systems while ensuring
privacy and maintaining public safety and economic and national
security.
We look forward to working with Congress to create a more
secure, efficient, and effective Federal backgrounds
investigations infrastructure. I thank the committee for
holding this hearing and pleased to answer any questions you
may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Evanina, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM EVANINA

Mr. Evanina. Thank you, sir. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Cummings, members of the committee, first, thanks for
having the opportunity to have me representing the intelligence
community be here with you as part of this panel and to take
part in the formation of the National Background Investigations
Bureau and provide an update on substantive reforms and
security clearance processes that we have done so far in this
effort.
As the national counterintelligence executive and the
Director of the National Counterintelligence and Security
Center, I have the privilege of working with some of the best
and brightest security minds in the United States Government. I
am honored to share with you the progress we have made with
respect to security clearance reforms and raising awareness
throughout the United States Government on the potential
security threats resulting from multiple breaches and the theft
of personally identifiable information known as PII.
The Director of National Intelligence is a principal member
of the PAC, and I act on his behalf in this role. On behalf of
the intelligence community, the ODNI strongly endorses this
plan to create the National Background Investigations Bureau
and leverage the Department of Defense's--all their skills,
abilities, tools, and techniques to protect the associated
systems and data. I am committed to this partnership with the
NBIB and will continue our holistic and collective approach
towards successfully implementing new security clearance
processes.
In accordance with the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Protection Act and Executive Order 13467, the security
executive agent is responsible for directing the oversight of
investigations and determinations of eligibility for access to
classified information or to hold sensitive positions rendered
by any executive branch department or agency.
These authorities also give the DNI responsibilities to
develop uniform and consistent policies and procedures and to
ensure the effective, efficient, and timely completion of
investigations and adjudications.
We've been working diligently to establish a policy
framework and infrastructure for robust engagement on national
security processes across the U.S. Government. I have included
examples of governance, policy, and standards in my statement
for the record. However, I'd like to highlight just a few here
today.
In October 2013, the DNI issued executive correspondence
directing agencies to review and validate whether employees or
contractors actually require eligibility for access to
classified information. This effort resulted in a reduction of
clearance-holders by approximately 18 percent across the United
States Government. This effort continues today.
In June of 2015, the DNI issued correspondence on
implementation of continuous evaluation, providing executive
branch agencies direction in reevaluating clearance-holders on
a more frequent and automated basis. And in June of 2015, OPM
and ODNI issued their first joint regulation on designating
national security positions, which standardized this process
across the entire government.
In my role as the national counterintelligence executive
and the Director of NCSC, I have been emphasizing the benefits
of merging counterintelligence and security because we know
they are stronger together. This partnership provides the
enhanced ability to both identify threats posed by foreign
adversaries and at the same time enact security measures to
mitigate those threats.
NCSC is actively reviewing and assessing all threats posed
by foreign adversaries, including those related to cyber
breaches and theft of PII. Specific to the theft of PII over
the past few years NCSC initiated a comprehensive national
counterintelligence and awareness campaign to educate those
impacted, like members here in this panel, by the breach that
happened last year, including former government employees and
former contractors and their families.
This past September, my office began releasing educational
awareness videos and materials for a Web site NCSC.gov and
actively engaging with all departments and agencies on such
topics as spear-phishing, social media deception, and human
targeting. We are in the process of releasing a fourth video on
travel awareness.
To date, the campaign has reached over 330 organizations to
include over 100 U.S. Government departments and agencies,
private sector groups, and cleared industry. I or my staff have
participated in over 15 briefings and hearings to multiple
committees to address CI and security implications of all
breaches that have occurred in the last few years.
Additionally, NCSC has provided briefings to well over 150
Senate, House staff--and Senate staff to provide tools to
mitigate such threat--threats for themselves, their families,
their members, and constituents.
We continue to explore every possible avenue to maximize
distribution of the campaign materials. We are currently
partnering with the--with DHS and the White House using social
media and private sector engagements. NCSC, leading the entire
intelligent community, continues to provide enhanced awareness
to individuals victimized by the recent breaches and provide
mitigation strategies to thwart potential foreign adversaries.
In conclusion, NCSC values our robust partnership with OPM,
OMB, and DOD and other PAC stakeholders in this committed
endeavor. Together, we will continue to take our necessary
steps to enhance government-wide policies and procedures in
securing our systems and our data.
And once again, I would like to thank the committee for the
opportunity to provide an update on security clearance reforms,
formation of the NBIB, and NCSC's efforts to mitigate the
impact of all the breaches, and specifically with respect to
PII. We look forward to working with your committee and the
rest of the Congress, and I'm happy to answer any questions you
may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Evanina follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Ms. Cobert, we have some outstanding document requests.
When will we get those?
Ms. Cobert. We're continuing ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Microphone, please.
Ms. Cobert. I will get this right. I apologize.
We are continuing to work through those. I know we made a
delivery of a significant number of documents by the date of
the subpoena, and we are working with your office to prioritize
those. We are working to get them to you as fast as we can.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I would hope that the ranking member
would also join us in those document requests.
Mr. Cummings. I will.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I want to talk about social
media. Ms. Cobert, will all agencies look at social media for
those applying for security clearances?
Ms. Cobert. Thank you, Congressman. Let me start and I
think ----
Chairman Chaffetz. We don't have much time.
Ms. Cobert. We are in the process working with the DNI ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Why wouldn't you look at social media?
Ms. Cobert. In looking at social media, we want to make
sure that we are looking at it in a way that is effective, that
brings insight to the process, that reflects what's in that
information and it's done in an appropriate and systematic way.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will ----
Ms. Cobert. And that's the new policies that we are working
to put in place.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will you require that each person
applying for a security clearance provide their online
identities to you?
Ms. Cobert. The specifics of the social media policy are
ones we are working through with the DNI. As the security
executive agent, they set the policies that we follow.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Mr. Evanina, why the hesitation on
providing social media information?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, there is no hesitation. We've been
working robustly the last few years with the Department of
Defense to enact I think what we believe to be a robust policy
on selecting ----
Chairman Chaffetz. So what is the policy in short?
Mr. Evanina. Well, the policy in short is utilization of
social media to enact investigations and adjudications of
individuals who request a security clearance. And that's in the
process as we speak.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you require anybody seeking a
security clearance to provide their online identities?
Mr. Evanina. Well, not at this point right now, but through
the pilots we have issued throughout the government and DOD, we
----
Chairman Chaffetz. See, this is my frustration. You have
been working on this for years, and you haven't yet implemented
a policy that requires them to identify their online
identities. How hard is that? It is a one-sentence question.
Mr. Evanina. Well, I think the difficulty begins when you
have the mixture of executive branch organizations, and
currently right now the issues are multifaceted. It involves
the utilization of privacy issues for the ----
Chairman Chaffetz. What privacy issue do you have? By its
very definition, social media means you are not being private.
Mr. Evanina. I concur, sir, but the issue is getting past
the password and having authority granted or waiver to get
through the password to get to the information which is in the
social media.
Chairman Chaffetz. So we are going to grant them a security
clearance to access the information of the United States of
America, information that can't be shared to the public, and
they won't share their information with you?
Mr. Evanina. I hope not.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, when are you going to have this
policy done?
Mr. Evanina. Well, the policy is currently out of the ODNI,
and it is in coordination with the executive brach of the
government.
Chairman Chaffetz. When is it going to be done? Who is in
charge of this?
Mr. Evanina. Currently ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Who do we call to this committee to
explain this to us?
Mr. Evanina. It's currently with the Office of Management
and Budget for coordination.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Mr. Scott, where are we at with
this?
Mr. Scott. I don't know, but I will find out and get back
to you.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you are the--I need to get it
right--chief information officer for the--so--I am sorry. The
chief information officer for the United States of America.
Mr. Scott. I just don't know today where we're at on that
particular policy ----
Chairman Chaffetz. This is the cluster ----
Mr. Scott.--but I will find out and get back to you.
Chairman Chaffetz. This is the cluster that is the Federal
Government. This should be such a simple question. It should be
on your form, show us all your online identities. And then as
we are doing a background investigation, how can you not go
look at their Facebook page or their Twitter posts or their
Instagram or Snapchat or any of the other ones? We don't do
that? How moronic are we? I mean, come on. My 14-year-old could
figure this out. What is the hesitation?
Yes, this is the problem. It is just silent. I was planning
to take 20 seconds on this question and we should probably do
an entire hearing on how we don't look at the social media of
people we--we give top security clearance, we are showing
people--we are putting people's lives in danger, their very--
and we can't go online and look at their social media? All
right. I have got to keep going but this is--go hire a bunch of
teenagers. They would do it better than we are doing it. I
mean, they know how to do this stuff but we don't as a
government--ISIS has figured it out. They know how to do it,
but we don't seem to do it.
All right. With the National Background Investigation
Bureau, which inspector general has jurisdiction, Mr.
Halvorsen?
Mr. Halvorsen. I don't think a single inspector general
will have jurisdiction. I can assure you that certainly the DOD
IG, as we build the IT systems, will look at this. I ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Will you provide access? Will there be
any limitations on access for the inspector general for OPM to
look at this?
Mr. Halvorsen. No, sir. We couldn't do that legally. They
have access legally to look at all that, as does the General
Accounting Office, and I am sure there will be many committees
and offices that will want to have access to this. Legally,
they'll be entitled to that, and we will give it to them.
Chairman Chaffetz. I appreciate it.
As the DOD's CIO, are you ultimately going to be
responsible for the IT system at the NBIB?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. And will you report to the Director of
the NBIB or will you be able to make IT decisions and overrule
the NBIB? Who is in charge?
Mr. Halvorsen. In the end, DOD is in charge of the
technical decisions, but I will stress we have worked well
together with all of the members of this panel. We will
continue to coordinate with all of the customers. We will
continue to do this in a cooperative way. But in the end, I
report to the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of Defense is
the biggest customer of the NBIB, and I assure you, I don't
expect any problems to come up. If they do, I'll take them
directly to the Secretary of Defense.
Chairman Chaffetz. But you are in charge, correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am the accountable official for building
this IT system the right way.
Chairman Chaffetz. I appreciate it. My time is expired. I
will now recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
James Clapper, Director Cobert, the Director of National
Intelligence, recently told an audience at the Naval Academy
that the number one threat facing our country is cyber attacks.
He said, ``The cyber threat is here. It is upon us now and we
need the people here today to help us defend our systems and
our nation.''
I do appreciate the collaborative interagency approach you
all are taking with regard to this proposal. I would like to
know what you are doing to enhance oversight of government
contractors because our investigations have shown that
contractors have repeatedly been the weak link in Federal
cybersecurity. In the OPM data breach, for instance, cyber
attackers first breached KeyPoint and then disguised themselves
as KeyPoint employees to gain access to OPM's background
investigation system.
Director, what steps are you taking to require KeyPoint and
other contractors to shore up their IT security?
Ms. Cobert. Thank you, Congressman. Improving our ability
to work with our contractors on cybersecurity is a key priority
for us at OPM, and I know it is across the executive branch. We
have been reviewing the clauses in our contracts and working to
ensure that we can make--that those have the provisions that we
need going forward.
There's an effort underway with NIST, with the Office of
Federal Procurement Policy to develop standards. One specific
example, we are re-competing the field investigation contract
this year, the contract under which CACI and KeyPoint do that
work today. That contract will be re-competed.
As we're preparing to re-compete that contract, we have
been working actively to include those clauses. We've in fact
already been working with the Department of Defense to look at
the kind of clauses we're going to put in place in that
contract to make sure that we can leverage their expertise here
as well. So we take this seriously. We're reviewing the
contracts, and that's just one example of how we're moving that
forward.
Mr. Cummings. I am going to come back to those clauses in a
minute. But, Mr. Scott, what measures is the administration
taking to prevent the misuse of Federal contract IT systems to
penetrate government IT systems?
Mr. Scott. Part of our updated guidance that's coming out,
Ranking Member Cummings, includes standardized contract
language that we expect will be adopted in all the contracts
that agencies use for IT. And that's a way of getting
consistency and then also being able to measure performance
against that.
Mr. Cummings. Well, as you know, another OPM contractor,
Anthem, was also breached, and the personnel information of
nearly 80 million Americans was compromised, including names of
Federal employees. Experts believe these were all part of a
sophisticated, coordinated cyber espionage campaign. They all
occurred at about the same time, they all targeted sensitive
information about Federal employees, and they all were carried
out using similar malware.
Mr. Halvorsen, does it worry you that our adversaries can
target private corporations with relationship to the Federal
Government to obtain sensitive information about Federal
employees? And how does the administration's proposal improve
cybersecurity at Anthem or other government contractors?
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, it certainly worries me that
organizations can and governments can target U.S. companies. I
think what the administration has done here, by allowing DOD to
be part of this, we have in DOD already some existing clauses
and regulations that require our contracts to highlight
cybersecurity.
I think everybody at this table, Mr. Scott has certainly
been leading an effort to improve Federal cybersecurity
everywhere, taking those clauses. We partner a lot. Ms. Cobert,
as the acting OPM Director, has been doing the same thing. So I
think we're handling the threat and moving forward in all the
right directions to put in the right clauses, the right rules,
the right things.
We're also at DOD working with Mr. Scott expanding the
communications we have with private contractors so that they
can do better security on their own and feeding them better
intelligence about what the threat is.
Mr. Cummings. After the attack, Anthem did not ask the
incident response team at US-CERT to investigate. You would
think that Anthem as a government contractor would be
required--and this goes back to these clauses, Director
Cobert--would be required to allow a government forensics team
in to investigate the theft of government employees' personal
information.
Director Cobert, why wasn't Anthem under any contractual
requirement to report breaches involving government data to US-
CERT? Why is that?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, Anthem was under requirement to
report breaches to OPM to our situation room, and we can then
work with them on how to respond. I was not there at the time
so I don't know the specifics of that. I know we are having an
ongoing set of discussion with Anthem and our other health
insurance partners about how to strengthen cybersecurity and
how we're going to work with them going forward ----
Mr. Cummings. So that is a ----
Ms. Cobert.--including that possibility.
Mr. Cummings. That is a part of the contract now, though?
In other words, the contracts--I take it was in the contract
before. They didn't do it. Is that what you are trying to tell
me?
Ms. Cobert. No. To the best of my understanding, the
obligation in the contract is to report to OPM.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Ms. Cobert. That they did do.
Mr. Cummings. Okay. Now, what about US-CERT?
Ms. Cobert. I don't believe that the contract requires them
to report to US-CERT, but as we're looking at the new contracts
and as we're working with all of our health insurance partners,
that is one of the options we are exploring.
Mr. Cummings. Would you get back to us on that because, as
I said before, this is a, you know, weak link that I think we
don't want to miss, particularly when you all are putting
things together and trying to tighten up any kind of loopholes.
That is something that I would hope that you all would take a
look at and get back to us on.
I yield back.
Ms. Cobert. I will do that.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma. I appreciate
his leadership on this issue, along with Mr. Lieu. But I will
now recognize Mr. Russell of Oklahoma for 5 minutes.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I do thank the
panel for being here today and for making every attempt to
resolve this situation. However, we have got some problems
here.
Mr. Scott, who is currently funding the FIS?
Mr. Scott. I believe that's part of the revolving fund in
OPM. Beth could probably answer that ----
Mr. Russell. Okay. And I am getting a nod from Ms. Cobert
there. So it currently comes out of OPM, and yet, as I heard it
stated by you that this will come--this $95 million to stand up
the Bureau will now come from top line of Department of
Defense. Why is it that Department of Defense has to pay for
it?
Mr. Scott. This would be added to the DOD budget and give
them the funds needed to develop the systems.
Mr. Russell. Will it come out of OPM's budget.
Mr. Scott. I don't ----
Mr. Russell. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Since the ----
Mr. Russell. Therein lies the problem.
Mr. Scott. Since the fiscal year 2017 budget isn't the
reality yet, I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Russell. Well, I think we know in principle that if FIS
was funded by, you know, OPM, then it just makes good sense
that the monies would be transferred.
Ms. Cobert, would you like to answer that?
Ms. Cobert. The Federal Investigative Service operates with
a revolving fund. It--the agencies that use those services pay
fees for those services. That is the core of FIS's funding is
through the fees that agencies that require background
investigations pay for those services. So the funds come from
agencies through interagency agreements into OPM. It's a
revolving fund, not appropriated funds.
Mr. Russell. Okay. Well, and that helps somewhat, but here
is the problem. And while I agree that DOD is the biggest user,
herein lies the overarching problem. We have allowed, out of a
necessity of cost saving, of elimination of backlogs that we
got into this situation where 18 million records have been
breached. Whatever it was we hoped to gain has absolutely
materially aided our enemies for probably two or more
generations. They will be able to mine incredible data. It does
not take a genius to figure that out. And so now, as we are
getting ready to set up potentially another house, we want to
make sure it is not a house of cards.
I have real concerns that this money is coming out of
Department of Defense specifically, and here is why. For $95
million you could have 60,600 soldiers being paid, and we are
talking about additional cuts. And so now because we have had a
breach and now we are going to try to make a bureau, we are
going to cut 30,000 soldiers from the Army and further diminish
the Marine Corps. I mean, this is the problem. We are weakening
our country. We are weakening the Department of Defense. We are
weakening whoever might have a security clearance.
I don't think that the solution is take it out of top line
of Department of Defense, and I will take real issue with that.
I also sit on the House Armed Services Committee, and with
my background, I am given a little bit of respect and wide
berth on those issues. So I am not satisfied with those
answers.
Here is another one: responsibility. Okay. And I
appreciate, Mr. Halvorsen, all that you do. I do understand it.
And you were careful to accurately describe the authority
pieces. You said that DOD would be technically in charge, that
DOD will be allowed to be a part of this. And I think that is
accurate language, but therein again lies the problem. When you
are in conflict with your recommendations, will you have the
final authority to push that through for national security?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, I believe that I will, and I ----
Mr. Russell. Believe?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, sir. And I'll stress again ----
Mr. Russell. But the wiring diagram could conflict with
that, does it not, because now Department of Defense is going
to have to go through, you know, the Bureau, who goes through
OPM, and then we will talk about it on the PAC. You may not
have that authority, is that correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, I don't think that is correct, and I
would say this. The wiring diagram isn't finished. But I will
tell you this. Again, I report to the Secretary of Defense.
Secretary of Defense has made it very clear to me ----
Mr. Russell. Oh, I am sure he has.
Mr. Halvorsen.--number one customer. I ----
Mr. Russell. But if OPM disagrees with the Secretary of
Defense, then we have got a problem, do we not?
Mr. Halvorsen. If we had that problem, I think we might
have a short problem. I don't think in the end OPM is going to
tell the Secretary of Defense ----
Mr. Russell. But the wiring diagram ----
Mr. Halvorsen.--not to build it.
Mr. Russell.--is set up potentially for that type of flaw,
and this is a problem. One thing I did learn as a soldier--
maybe it doesn't happen here in Congress but it certainly did
on a battlefield--you have to have unity of effort, and not
just unity of effort. You have got to have somebody clearly in
charge.
And here is my big beef. If the Department of Defense is
going to clearly have the greatest level of responsibility to
protect these documents, then they by golly better have the
authority to make it good, and we ought not to be weakening and
diminishing our land forces to pay for some data breach. Those
monies, we have got to figure out a different way.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I have exceeded my time. Thank
you for your indulgence.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I will recognize
the gentlewoman from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Director Cobert, the breach that has occurred into Federal
employee data is deep indeed. In fact, I would guess that if
you worked for a private corporation, much of that data would
not be even in the hands of your employer, for example, your
spouse's data, your children's data, the kind of data that is
appropriate for a government agency, and yet minimally in the
beginning only 18 months and $1 million was allowed in
protection. I am grateful to the appropriators it is going up
to 10 years and $5 million. I have a bill for lifetime
protection.
Isn't it true that much of this information, information
not only regarding the employee but the employee's family,
spouses, children, is unchangeable, cannot be somehow mitigated
by making changes in the particular data that the hackers have?
Ms. Cobert. Yes, that is correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. Norton. To your knowledge, has any use been made of
this data to this point?
Ms. Cobert. Congresswoman, we are in continual dialogue
with our partners in law enforcement and the intelligence
community, and we have not seen misuse of this data.
Ms. Norton. This is what is so worrisome, that the
hackers--I don't know if they are simply mischievous or if they
are holding the data until it is useful. But I want to say
again that I don't see how OPM can do anything but recommend to
the President that there be lifetime protection.
Look, this protection may never be used. That is to say it
may never cost the government much. It is like an insurance
policy. So I must say that the very least we owe Federal
employees, given this breach, it would seem to me is lifetime
protection for data that cannot be changed.
I appreciate--and do you have any real way to monitor
whether or not any use is being made of this data?
Ms. Cobert. Congresswoman, there's--we are, as I said, in
dialogue with the FBI, with the NCSC, the DNI, and others ----
Ms. Norton. What obligation ----
Ms. Cobert.--to monitor those ----
Ms. Norton. What obligation would you be under to inform an
employee were you to find that use has been made? How would
that work?
Ms. Cobert. We would work with those bureaus to understand
the right way to inform them. We've also continued to remind --
--
Ms. Norton. There is no protocol yet for what to do?
Ms. Cobert. We haven't had--we continue to remind employees
about the opportunity to sign up for the monitoring services.
The levels of penetration of people signing up for those
services far exceeds what we've seen in the private sector
context. We'll continue ----
Ms. Norton. No, but see, that is not my question.
Ms. Cobert.--to work with them.
Ms. Norton. My question is you discover that some use has
been made. What do you then do?
Ms. Cobert. It will--we were--that's why we need to work
with law enforcement. We need to understand the nature of how
that data is being used ----
Ms. Norton. Ms. Cobert, I hope ----
Ms. Cobert.--to take the appropriate actions.
Ms. Norton.--during your--I don't have much time. I hope
during your time that an actual protocol is set up for
immediate notification in some way that the employee can be
further protected.
Look, I am interested in the fact that 60 percent of the
investigations are done by contractors. I understand perhaps
the reason why, but I noted that one of the contractors Anthem,
which is not discussed as much, had jurisdiction over health
insurance of Federal employees, and 80 million Americans'
information or 80 million Americans was breached.
And of course that is very, very personal information, but
they declined to let US-CERT investigate the breach. I can't
understand that. These people are acting in the place of the
government. Shouldn't the people who provide these services,
have the sensitive information, be required to institute
equivalent security measures, including having somewhat
equivalent to the government or the government come in to
investigate a breach?
Ms. Cobert. Congresswoman, we are working with our health
insurance partners like Anthem on how to enhance their
cybersecurity and our visibility into that. We are working on
that ----
Ms. Norton. Why wasn't US-CERT ----
Ms. Cobert.--with our inspector general.
Ms. Norton. I mean, these people work for the government.
Why wasn't US-CERT allowed to investigate a breach of Federal
employee data? Why isn't that routine?
Ms. Cobert. Congresswoman, those are the--well, the kinds
of clauses we were looking to implement going forward. The
Anthem incident and the Anthem contract predated my time at
OPM, but I know the health and insurance part of OPM, with our
senior cybersecurity advisor Clif Triplett is working and in
discussion with those insurers ----
Ms. Norton. So you believe ----
Ms. Cobert.--how to do ----
Ms. Norton. You believe that there should be an
investigation by the government or by an independent auditor
when there is a breach by one of these contractors. Is that the
case?
Ms. Cobert. I believe that we need to bring the best
resources we can to bear on these situations, and we need to
put in place clear processes that reflect the challenges that
we face today, and that's what we're working to do.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, I wish we could get an answer to
that question. I understand she's new, but if a contractor
cannot be investigated in the same way that, for example, the
IG will investigate a similar breach of a Federal agency, then
I think we have a problem. I think we ought to give her time,
but I think that question needs to be answered one way or the
other with respect to contractors.
Chairman Chaffetz. I concur. I think this--if they are
going to be allowed and are given access, whether they are a
contractor or employee, the IG ought to be able to investigate
it and not just create this fictitious firewall and say, oh,
you can't look over here. We saw this at the Department of
Education. They have 184 databases and yet nobody is looking at
them.
And so I would agree. And I think this is a good bipartisan
thing that we can push. We have brought this up previously with
Ms. Cobert, and you can see the frustration that we see. We
need an actual solution to this problem and challenge. I know
you are new, but we need that.
And I also want to follow up with Mr. Russell here. We as a
Federal Government have spent $525 billion plus over the last 7
years, and our IT doesn't work. And that is a tremendous
frustration to go have to grab money away from our troops to
clean up a problem that should have never been there in the
first place, again part of the frustration.
And I do hope in this similar vein we can work in a
bipartisan way to understand where the funding component comes
and that this be of the utmost priority. But to grab it out of
the troops' budget is probably the last place we should do
that. So I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that.
Sure.
Mr. Cummings. You know, as I am listening to you, Mr.
Chairman--and I guess this would be for you, Mr. Scott; I am
not sure--is it that the IT system is so huge that we can't get
it together? Do you follow what I am saying? Is it too big to
improve? Do you follow me?
Mr. Scott. Yes, well, let me talk about the case generally
across the Federal Government. And we've heard from every CIO
that getting the funding to go replace any of these large
systems has not been something they've been able to do in their
normal budgeting process. It's why we put together the ----
Chairman Chaffetz. But wait, wait, wait, wait ----
Mr. Scott.--Cyber National Action Plan.
Chairman Chaffetz.--wait a second. Wait a sec. Wait a sec.
You are getting more than $80 billion a year, and that isn't
enough?
Mr. Scott. No. There's a lot of money, but the easiest
money to get is money to sustain the old legacy systems that
get more expensive every year because of lack of skills on old
COBOL systems. The security that you put around those is more
costly. And the hardest money to get is money to go develop new
ones. It's why we've proposed the IT Modernization Fund that
would give agencies access to the capital they need to go
replace these things, and it's a core part of the CNAP plan
that we've put together.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, I have got to recognize the
gentleman from Florida, but I think that is hogwash. You asked
for about $3 billion, and yet you have had $525 billion over
the last 7 years. To suggest we are just $3 billion away from
actually solving this problem is ridiculous. And you spending
70 percent of the budget on the legacy systems, only 30 percent
investing in new systems, and even the procurement ----
Mr. Scott. It's worse than that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes. And there is a talent portion to
all that, but I don't think it has been a lack of funding, $80
billion a year. This is not a funding issue. One good trip to
Best Buy and you could do better than we are doing now. That is
the concern.
So let me recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mica --
--
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Chaffetz.--for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes?
Mr. Connolly. If the gentleman from Florida would just
withhold for one second, I share the chairman's concern, and I
would simply suggest to him that one of the things I think we
need to do--because the statistic gets bandied about we are
spending 70 or 80 percent maintaining legacy systems. I think
our committee ought to drill down on that, and I think one way
we do that--and Mr. Scott can help us here--let's actually get
an inventory agency by agency of what we are talking about so
we have a better handle on that. And it would allow us then in
some depth to work with agencies about, well, what would it
take to replace these things?
Chairman Chaffetz. And I ----
Mr. Connolly. Why are they costing so much money?
Chairman Chaffetz. And I would agree with that. One of the
reasons I called for the dismissal of Ms. Seymour is for years
the inspector general had been asking for an inventory. The
Office of Personnel Management went for years, didn't even know
how many laptops and how many ports. I mean, how can you solve
the problem if you don't even know what the inventory is?
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. And so I totally agree with the
gentleman from Virginia. This is part of the problem. This is
why you have--when you have years of an inspector general
saying it is better to unplug the system than to continue on,
we have to heed those.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend from Florida for his
courtesy and I thank the chair.
Chairman Chaffetz. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Mica. Thank you for your patience.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I had the opportunity--and I still don't like Newt Gingrich
for what he did to me, but made me chairman of the Subcommittee
on Civil Service for 4 years, and I thought we had problems
then. And actually, those were our glory days. I think we have
reached the absolute bottom of the pit. I wish you well, Ms.
Cobert. It is just unbelievable. I was just thinking of the
money we have spent. I worked with the gentleman from Virginia
on consolidation of IT systems. I think we did, Gerry, a
hearing. Are you all still doing your retirement processing for
Federal employees by hand?
Ms. Cobert. We are working to ----
Mr. Mica. Are you doing them by hand?
Ms. Cobert. Some more elements of it are digital ----
Mr. Mica. That was after spending ----
Ms. Cobert.--but much of it is manual still.
Mr. Mica. It is manual. Gerry, they spent a quarter of a
billion dollars setting that up, and then now they are still
doing it by hand. That is not what this hearing is about, but
you take it whether it is--this is about security clearance
reform. My God, they are putting in this system, which is at
the expense of DOD, and it is going to be in place when? Can
somebody tell me? You are doing the IT part of it? October?
When? Hello?
Mr. Halvorsen. The system will start being built in '17,
and hopefully, by the end ----
Mr. Mica. So it is not until '17?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mica. Okay. What is the backlog now? You have 388,000
new background investigations pending? Is that right, Ms.
Cobert? And I have 117 periodic reinvestigations backlogged,
half a million ----
Ms. Cobert. We are ----
Mr. Mica.--and the IT system is going to be in place in
'17?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, the ----
Mr. Mica. Well, is the backlog--I mean, that is what staff
is giving me. I am only told ----
Ms. Cobert. You know, the figures I have on the backlog, we
think about the backlog in terms of the timeliness for doing
those ----
Mr. Mica. It is a half ----
Ms. Cobert.--investigations ----
Mr. Mica. It is a half ----
Ms. Cobert.--so yes.
Mr. Mica. It is a half a million backlogs right now. We
don't have a system in place. I really even don't know where to
start. If I was doing something, I would probably look at
putting some--there are plenty of people that can conduct these
investigations. There are companies that do that. Can you
contract with some of those folks? Can we get this in bite-
size? You can only eat an elephant a bite at a time, I am told.
Ms. Cobert. So, Congressman, we have systems that support
background investigations today. We have made strides over the
last months ----
Mr. Mica. But you are going to ----
Ms. Cobert.--in making those more secure, and then we are
going to rebuild them ----
Mr. Mica. They are building ----
Ms. Cobert.--with security.
Mr. Mica.--you this system, and then you are going to run
it?
Ms. Cobert. No, DOD will operate the new systems.
Mr. Mica. But ----
Ms. Cobert. We are currently running the existing systems.
Mr. Mica. And who is going to conduct the investigations?
Ms. Cobert. The investigations will be ----
Mr. Mica. By this new agency?
Ms. Cobert. Will be conducted by the National Background
Investigations Bureau.
Mr. Mica. Oh, folks, hang on to your shorts on this one. By
the time you get the IT in place and the money you are going to
spend, and then by the time you get OPM up and running, I mean,
you can't even get the personnel to do the manual processing of
the retirement. I think we are headed for another disaster. God
bless you, but I am telling you, you have got to take this a
bite at a time. You need to get contracts out. You need to get
it out of OPM. Building this system, it is designed to fail. We
will be back here the next Congress in '17. I guaran-damn-tee
you--and put that in the record, it is a new word--that this
will continue to be a disaster the way it sounds like you are
putting it together.
I haven't even gotten into the issue of our personal
records being hacked. Where are we on that? I mean, I got a
notice that mine were hacked. Have you taken protections for
all of us? I don't know if I signed up for whatever you
offered, but we have millions of records hacked in OPM. What is
the status of that?
Ms. Cobert. We have, working with the DOD, been through a
process to notify individuals ----
Mr. Mica. I have been notified.
Ms. Cobert.--whose records ----
Mr. Mica. What is the remedy? I mean ----
Ms. Cobert. So there is services available ----
Mr. Mica. Yes, I just started getting--this week, I started
getting scam calls from different groups that I have never
gotten before at home. Member of Congress, what is the status
of protecting me? Okay. Let's not even do me, but we have got
hundreds of thousands of Federal employees out there.
Ms. Cobert. So we have provided these services. We have
notified individuals and repeated that they had the opportunity
to enroll ----
Mr. Mica. So we have to sign up. You have taken nothing
preemptive to help us.
Ms. Cobert. We--these services are in place for you to
receive ----
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Ms. Cobert.--the monitoring services. You have to provide
your personally identifiable information, and we cannot legally
----
Mr. Mica. I don't trust ----
Ms. Cobert.--do that on your behalf.
Mr. Mica.--giving you any more of my information. It has
already been hacked and people have it. I just want to know
what we are doing preemptively to help people who have been
hacked who have worked for the Federal Government or are
working for the Federal Government.
Ms. Cobert. We have provided them services. We have ----
Mr. Mica. That is ----
Ms. Cobert.--provided them information about how they can
protect themselves ----
Mr. Mica. Well, I think if you ----
Ms. Cobert.--and we are working with them to the extent
they have an issue ----
Mr. Mica. If you could come back ----
Ms. Cobert.--to help restore their identity ----
Mr. Mica. Come back with another plan ----
Ms. Cobert. Restore their identity.
Mr. Mica.--and look at what I suggested. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back, and I will be back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panelists for helping the committee with its work.
The standard form 86, very, very extensive and very
thorough, and it goes into a person's entire history, their
family, very, very in-depth investigation. That is what was
hacked in many cases with respect to the hacks against OPM. And
when Ms. Archuleta and Ms. Seymour were here last time, I asked
them point blank if any of that information was encrypted. And
the answer was no, we gathered all of this information at OPM,
put it in one repository, and then did not encrypt it. So we
basically invited people to come in and hack and basically get
all the information. There were no firewalls or anything like
that. So it was just colossally bad, bad management.
Now, I support the move to DOD because you have got at
least some record of protecting information. It is in the vital
interest of this country to do so. Are we going to be able to
move that information over and secure it? I know a lot of it
has already been hacked, but what is the next step on that, Mr.
Halvorsen?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, sir. We will move the information over.
We will use the proper levels of encryption on all the levels
of the data and have a leveled and layered defense of all of
that data, and it will be physically and virtually inside the
DOD boundaries.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. And so there are about 4 million Americans
that have to have security clearance. That is both Federal
employees and contractors. And there is about 600,000 a year
that we are issuing new clearances to. I would like to think
that the idea that by October of 2017--is that what we are
talking about when the system is going to be up and running or
is it '16?
Mr. Halvorsen. We will have the system begin running, yes,
October of '16. It will not be completed by October of '16, but
we will begin to execute new parts of that system in October of
'16. It will take the following year to complete that given the
complexity of the system.
Mr. Lynch. I just think that that is happy talk with all
due respect. With the problems we are having with pensions
and--you know, I used to chair the Subcommittee on Federal
Employees, and, you know, we have had longstanding problems
with that. I just think that is, like I say, happy talk. That
is just dream world stuff. We have had terrible, terrible
problems with just getting basic information up and running. We
are still doing stuff manually, as the gentleman from Florida
pointed out.
But interestingly enough, the only stuff that hasn't been
hacked is the stuff that we are doing by hand. And I am sure
that is not intentional, but that just demonstrates the
weakness of our system.
Let me ask you, is there any value, you know, because if
someone is going through this, you know, top secret clearance
process, that is an important role. And if they are looking for
that type of clearance, we have a concomitant duty, I think, to
make sure that person is thoroughly, thoroughly vetted. And I
agree with that.
But is it necessary to have all those folks online and to
have the ability of one person sit down and get access to all
of them? Or is there an opportunity to have some type of
firewall, Ms. Cobert?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, we have taken steps already to
move in the direction you are describing. We have put in place
more advanced firewalls. We have increased the segmentation of
the data. We have improved encryption. We are not finished, but
we are working towards that.
And as we think about the redesign of the system--I'm sure
Terry could talk more about it--the question you're posing
about who needs to have access to what elements of the data,
how do we store it effectively, how do we allow people what
they need from a business operation perspective to interact
with the data but have it in a much more segmented way is part
of the future design.
We've put in remedial measures on the current systems. We
have much better firewalls. We have much more stringent
criterias for access to that data, so we've done the things
that we need to do within the existing systems, but we
fundamentally need to build them with security by design built
in, and that is what our partners from DOD are going to help us
do.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. One last point. The recently passed
omnibus bill that the President signed says that ``in relevant
part the enhanced personnel security program of an agency shall
integrate social media.'' So shall means shall. And so all this
hedging is contrary to congressional intent.
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, we are actively working to do that
today on the SF-86. It requires folks to put their email
address and aliases. We are working closely with the DNI to put
that in place.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Ms. Cobert. The pilots that DOD has been running on
continuous evaluation, for example, do incorporate social media
----
Mr. Lynch. All right.
Ms. Cobert.--and we are learning from those pilots.
Mr. Lynch. This is not the general public, so there should
be no hedging. These people want top security clearance in many
cases. And that is fair enough, but we obviously have the
obligation to vet these people if they are getting this top
secret clearance. That is all I am saying.
Ms. Cobert. We share that commitment, Congressman, and I'm
sure the DNI shares that as well.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. And before the gentleman yields back,
maybe what we should do is take all the data and put it on an
Apple iPhone because evidently, that is encrypted. That would
be a heck of a lot cheaper than trying to recreate what Apple
is evidently able to do, so just an idea.
I will now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank each of you for
your testimony. Thank you for your work.
Mr. Halvorsen, let me come to you because, as I understand
it, you are the CIO and you report to whom?
Mr. Halvorsen. I report to the Secretary of Defense.
Mr. Meadows. And so as we go to implement this new process,
it is your responsibility, the funding--you make the decisions,
is that correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Then help me understand because OPM has
a relationship here, so how, now that it is your decision and
we are going to pay for it through OPM, how do the two of those
work together because it seems like the funding stream now is
going to be, I guess, separated so to speak.
Mr. Halvorsen. Very clear. The funding stream that we have
talked about, the $95 billion is for the build of the new
system. It is not the entire funding stream for the operation
of the NBIB.
Mr. Meadows. So Ms. Cobert has the funding for the
operation?
Ms. Cobert. The funding for the operation of the Federal
Investigative Service is a--it is a fee-for-service operation.
So DOD, when it requests a security clearance ----
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Cobert.--pays the Federal Investigative Service and
will pay the NBIB as that bureau is stood up to conduct the
investigations. So the funding for the investigations we do for
DOD actually comes from DOD. The fundings we do for other
Federal agencies come from them. It is a revolving fund model
as opposed to an appropriated model.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So how does that affect oversight
and really as we start to look at it? Because when it gets in
to be a fee for service, why would they contract with OPM? Is
that a contract they have to have with OPM or can they go to an
outside source? I mean, you see where I am going with this, the
potential conflict.
Ms. Cobert. Sure. The agreements we have in place, the way
we--it is--will be structured with the NBIB is that the NBIB
will conduct the background investigations for DOD and other
agencies, as we do today. We charge them a price for those ----
Mr. Meadows. Sure.
Ms. Cobert.--investigations ----
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Cobert.--and even today, we work closely with DOD as
our largest customer and with the other PAC agencies around
pricing. We want to make sure we are doing a quality job but we
are doing it in a way that is a smart use of taxpayer dollars.
Mr. Meadows. Well, and I see that. I guess, Ms. Cobert, one
of the concerns I have is when you have monies that are going
to OPM versus an outside contractor, whomever it may be, the
accountability, it is kind of like having a general contractor
that has subcontractors that are--who is ultimately--if the job
is not done correctly, who ultimately--who does that fall to?
Does it fall to Mr. Halvorsen or to you? And ----
Ms. Cobert. The operations--the investigative operations
will be housed in OPM. They will be--report to me. I will be
accountable.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So how do you anticipate--you know,
if it is a fee for service, how do you get the appropriations
to make sure you are properly staffed to be able to--you know,
because, again, it becomes a model that becomes extremely
tricky. It is operating like a private sector, but yet, you are
not.
Ms. Cobert. Again, the model that was put in place to have
a fee-for-service model is because the agencies, who are the
ultimate customers of background investigations, fund those.
They are in fact demanding customers. When we work with DOD
today, we have an ongoing dialogue about what are we doing with
their funds? How are we carrying that through?
We--agencies' demands for background investigations are
somewhat unpredictable. They give us expectations but their
level of demand for background investigation is a result of
their activity, and so they pay for those, and we use those
funds ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. But so why would we not just say, okay,
Ms. Cobert, you have all the authority? Why do we do this back-
and-forth fee aspect of it because it just seems like a shell
game where we are moving it from one area to the other, and why
wouldn't we just say you are responsible, you are accountable
from an oversight, appropriations, and everything else? This
back-and-forth becomes very problematic.
Ms. Cobert. We are responsible for the use of the revolving
funds in our congressional budget justification.
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Cobert. We talk about the amount of the revolving funds
that we anticipate using in fiscal year 2017. We work the
pricing through with our interagency partners, so we are
responsible for the spending of those funds. The amount that we
put to work in the revolving fund is part of our budget
submission.
Mr. Meadows. But do you see my point that if he comes back
and he says, well, I only had demand for X number of--it
creates a problem for you instead of--do you follow me?
Ms. Cobert. That is an exact issue ----
Mr. Meadows. It is ----
Ms. Cobert.--we have, and that is why we work with agencies
to understand what are their projections, what are they doing,
what do they need.
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Ms. Cobert. We do want agencies to actually, you know,
understand what it takes to do this, and that's--I think this
structure works well from that perspective. But part of
standing this entity up, we've done some excellent work with
the CAPE group at DOD about how to fund this, and we are going
to continue to look at that, and I'm happy to continue that
dialogue as we go forward.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. I am out of time. I want to remind all
of you that Mr. Connolly and I are going to be looking very
closely at FITARA, and while I have you here, I want to
emphasize it once again. I yield back.
Mr. Russell. [Presiding] The chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me take up
where my friend from North Carolina left off. We are going to
follow up on FITARA.
Ms. Cobert. Our FITARA plan has been approved by OMB.
Mr. Connolly. And conveniently, Ms. Cobert, we have OMB
right here. But I do think there is bipartisan consensus on a
lot of the IT aspects of Federal management, and that may not
last forever, but we are working hand-in-glove and seamlessly
on this committee and our two subcommittees with respect to
that. And I pray you take advantage of that because anything
can happen, you know.
Mr. Halvorsen, I think you had a personal loss in your
family, is that correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Connolly. I am so sorry.
Mr. Halvorsen. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. And you were supposed to be at an event with
us the other day, and all of us, everybody there wanted to
convey their sympathy to you and your family.
Mr. Halvorsen. I thank you, and I appreciate the scheduling
you've made to ----
Mr. Connolly. We understand perfectly of course, and I hope
your family is doing okay.
And, Ms. Cobert, congratulations on bringing us together.
Hopefully, it will have some effect in the other body. And I
commend the chairman and the ranking member. Especially if we
are as concerned as we say we are about the breach at OPM, the
last thing in the world we need is any cloud at all over the
legitimacy or status of the head of OPM, and so I would pray
our colleagues in the other body confirm you as swiftly as
possible. There is no substantive reason not to do that, and I
know you have been working very hard in your acting capacity to
try to deal with some very heavy baggage ----
Ms. Cobert. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly.--with respect to breaches. And I will say, I
know my friend from Florida was expressing some frustration,
but I also am one of the victims. And my experience with the
service provided so far has been very positive.
Ms. Cobert. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. They have caught things we didn't know about.
In fact, frankly, they are so strict they are--you know, my
wife can't always respond in my name to their concerns, so they
are pretty tight. So hopefully, that is the experience of
others as well. And as I have told you privately, we have, I
don't know, 20-something million victims through no fault of
their own, and priority number one of OPM and you as the
Director is to protect those victims and make them as whole as
we can. And I know you share that goal as well.
Mr. Halvorsen, I am looking at the Bureau's cyber
infrastructure and the new plans, and the Office of the
Secretary issued this statement, that the purpose of the new
design and build for that infrastructure is to ``avert or
eliminate the continuous and dynamic threat of identity theft,
financial espionage, other attacks on personal information
while providing a secure basis for background investigations
necessary for the Federal Government.''
Can you briefly describe the mission of the Defense
Information Systems Agency and why it was selected to design
and operate that new system to meet that goal?
Mr. Halvorsen. This is the DOD's contract acquisition and
design agency for major systems in an IT. In my review of the
capabilities, DISA was best positioned to be the oversight and
designer of this.
I will stress, however, when we say DISA is the designer of
this system, it will not be without lots of input, and in some
cases, commercial adaptation of technology.
Mr. Connolly. Will this new network or system deploy
EINSTEIN sensors for protection?
Mr. Halvorsen. It will deploy the right set of sensors. It
could be EINSTEIN. It could be EINSTEIN equivalence or things
that might be better than EINSTEIN as we're looking at the
future. As you well know, this is a field that changes rapidly.
There will not be a single system that does this, but an
integrated layer of systems that are better integrated to talk
and both stop attacks, but if they had happened, to identify
them and quarantine them quickly.
Mr. Connolly. All right.
Mr. Halvorsen. That takes a layered defense system.
Mr. Connolly. I am going to run out of time, and if the
chairman will allow them to respond, I will of course give up
my time.
But, Ms. Cobert and Mr. Halvorsen, when the breach
occurred, one of the things we were told was, well, OPM had
deployed EINSTEIN 1 and EINSTEIN 2 but not EINSTEIN 3. And had
it had EINSTEIN 3 in place, maybe the breach would have been
mitigated or eliminated. I would like both of you to comment on
that because I think there is a lot of confusion up here, which
I share, well, is EINSTEIN the answer or is there some other
answer? Are there things that DOD that are not yet available in
the civilian agencies that should be? Help us a little bit with
that--do we still stand by that analysis?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, what I can tell you is we continue
to be moving forward with deploying the EINSTEIN capabilities
as they become available. So we have been moving forward with
EINSTEIN 3 and EINSTEIN 3A. From my perspective at OPM as a
customer of the support that folks like DOD and DHS can
provide, I am happy to be an early adopter of the smart tools
as they make them available to us. And whichever are the best
tools, and folks like Mr. Halvorsen will help us figure out
what those are, those are the ones we will deploy.
Mr. Halvorsen. I think Beth got it right, sir, and I think
you know we will continually review this. We've had recent
reviews by--frankly done on behalf of what I've asked. NSA and
some commercial customers say these are the best-layered
defenses today. EINSTEIN technology will be part of that, but
it is not the singular answer to build the best defense system
forward.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Scott, just out of curiosity, will the President's
appointee to the NBIB be confirmed by the Senate?
Mr. Scott. As proposed, I don't believe so, sir.
Mr. Hice. Do you know how that process will be? Is it just
an appointment ----
Mr. Scott. That's correct.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Ms. Cobert, let me go back to you. As you
know, the PAC conducted the review after the Navy yard
shooting. That review led to 13 specific recommendations to
improve the clearance process. Has the intelligence community
fully complied and addressed those recommendations?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, the PAC collectively has been
working to implement the full set of recommendations from the
review following the Navy yard.
In my prior role at OMB when I was the chair of the PAC, in
my current role as acting Director of OPM, we've been working
closely with our colleagues in the DNI, for example, to put in
place pilots of continuous evaluation to implement new Federal
Investigative Standards, to improve access frankly ----
Mr. Hice. So are you saying ----
Ms. Cobert.--so we are working ----
Mr. Hice.--they have or have not been ----
Ms. Cobert. We are ----
Mr. Hice.--fully implemented?
Ms. Cobert. We are working through the process. The
timetable for full implementation is not--we're still in that
process but we are actively working that and actively managing
it through the PAC.
Mr. Hice. So it has not yet been fully implemented, and you
do not have a time frame ----
Ms. Cobert. There are ----
Mr. Hice.--we know it will be complete?
Ms. Cobert. There are different time frames for different
elements. So one of the elements was to actually have
continuous evaluation pilots in place. We have those in place.
DOD has done some that's covered hundreds of thousands of
people. The investigative standards and the quality ----
Mr. Hice. All right. Can you give us ----
Ms. Cobert.--of the standards ----
Mr. Hice.--a general time frame?
Ms. Cobert. Some of the elements are already due. Some last
until 2017. I can--I am happy to provide you. We report on
Performance.gov ----
Mr. Hice. Please provide that and let's carry on, but
please provide that information.
Ms. Cobert. And we would be happy to do that, sir.
Mr. Hice. All right. The Navy yard shooter had multiple
previous arrests and yet was still somehow able to obtain
clearance. How can this be?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, there are real challenges in
getting complete and comprehensive records from local law
enforcement. Some of those are due to the challenges that the
local law enforcement has in their own recordkeeping.
Mr. Hice. Okay. There has been recommendations ----
Ms. Cobert. Those systems aren't automated.
Mr. Hice.--to work and improve that process from State and
local criminal records. When is that process going to improve?
Ms. Cobert. That process has seen improvement. I can cite
examples from New York City, from--we track actually ----
Mr. Hice. I don't want examples. I want when are we going
to see that enormous gap closed?
Ms. Cobert. We are continuing to work with law enforcement.
The records are their records. Things like Congress gave us
with the NDAA that gives background investigators greater
access to records that was implemented last year will be one
step in helping us, but we have to work this through with local
law enforcement to make sure they've got ----
Mr. Hice. That is the whole point.
Ms. Cobert.--the systems.
Mr. Hice. That is the whole point. The local law
enforcement, when is that relationship going to be resolved so
that information can be readily made available so that we don't
have people like the Navy yard shooter gain access?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, we are working actively with local
law enforcement. In fact, we have--we had ----
Mr. Hice. Okay. Listen, that ----
Ms. Cobert.--a task force, and we are going to ----
Mr. Hice. That is ----
Ms. Cobert.--continue that.
Mr. Hice. That is a really cheap answer. We are working
actively. We are working actively, and yet--please provide that
for us. I want as much specifics as you can provide without
rambling ----
Ms. Cobert. I'm happy to provide you that.
Mr. Hice.--on this issue.
Mr. Hice. All right. Have the revised 2012 Federal
Investigative Standards been fully implemented?
Ms. Cobert. We have implemented those through Tier 3. The
rest of them are on schedule to be implemented over the next
year too, I believe--I don't have the specific timeline but had
----
Mr. Hice. Okay.
Ms. Cobert.--implemented the Tier 3, for example, this
fall.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Another recommendation involved the
detection of false information that was submitted by
applicants. As you may recall, Snowden, for example, said that
he had worked for the U.S. Government for 6 years,
investigators and all that, never contacted any coworkers, they
never got any further details. The Navy yard shooter has
serious mental health problems. What is being done to verify
applicants' information more complete and in a more effective
manner?
Ms. Cobert. So there is a number of steps that we've put in
place to increase the accuracy. I can go through the specifics
and probably get that back to you in terms of each of those
elements because that involves work with the different--I don't
have the details of that right here ----
Mr. Hice. All right. So you ----
Ms. Cobert.--but I can get that to you.
Mr. Hice. Doesn't it seem that that would be information
that you would have?
Ms. Cobert. I want to make sure that my response to you
in--is accurate in terms of exactly the specifics of the
progress we've made, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And we are talking about applicants putting
false information and no one checking it. That seems like that
would be information, if it is being corrected, that would be
right on the top of your head. I would appreciate you getting
that information to us ASAP.
My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the Congressman from California,
and I appreciate his efforts on this issue, Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The hearings last year in Oversight Committee exposed
fundamental weaknesses in our nation's IT infrastructure,
specifically as applied to OPM. And thank you, Mr. Scott, for
doing the 100-day cybersecurity sprint last year. The Director
of the OPM last year resigned to be replaced by Ms. Cobert, and
you have been doing a terrific job given the situation you have
been put in.
And last October, Representative Russell and I wrote a
letter to the administration to the PAC board saying you need
to move the security clearance IT system to the Department of
Defense. And I am very pleased to read in your testimony, Ms.
Cobert, that in fact the Department of Defense, with its unique
national security perspective, will design, build, secure, and
operate the security clearance IT system.
My question has to do more with the other aspect of your
plan, which is now the creation of a new bureau, the National
Background Investigations Bureau. And I share some of the
concerns raised by Congressman Russell. And my first question
has to do with the wiring diagram. My understanding is this
bureau will be headed by a Presidential appointee who then
reports to the Director of OPM. Still, Ms. Cobert, could you or
the new Director fire that person?
Ms. Cobert. I imagine I could, yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. What happens if you have a disagreement
with the Department of Defense over how to do the security
clearance IT system?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, as Mr. Halvorsen said, DOD has the
responsibility for the security of the IT systems. We have
given that responsibility in agreement with them because we
want to rely on their expertise. They have the national
security expertise, the cybersecurity expertise around these
issues. They are in that place because of that expertise, and
we would expect that their guidance on how those things should
operate is what we would follow.
Mr. Lieu. And if they want more money to do the IT system
upgrades and so on, where would that money come from?
Ms. Cobert. So let me distinguish between the budget
funding for the IT upgrades, as Mr. Halvorsen has described, as
well as the funding for the ongoing support for NBIB. The
funding for NBIB, because it is a fee-for-service model, are
fees paid for our customers. The largest customer of the
National Background Investigations Bureau will be the
Department of Defense. And so, in fact, DOD will be providing
those funds to the NBIB through the payments that they make for
background investigation services. So they are both the
customer paying the bill, as well as the individuals who will
be supporting the use of those funds on IT for the revolving
nature of the funds.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. In terms of personnel, my understanding is
the Federal Information Service will be folded or basically
replaced with this new bureau. Will there be less people, the
same, or more?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, I don't have the answer to that
question at the moment. We are working with NBIB to make it
purpose-built for this mission, for the scale of this mission,
for the new capabilities, and frankly, for the new operating
practices that are going to be part of it.
In addition to the IT redesign that DOD will be leading, a
key part of the transition team and the ongoing efforts is
business process reengineering. How do we take advantage of
these new technology tools to make this process be better, be
smarter, be more efficient? And so when we put together, we
can't tell you today what the scale of the individuals involved
will be.
Mr. Lieu. And taking a step back, what is the reason for
not continuing with the Federal Investigative Services? Why do
we need this new bureau?
Ms. Cobert. Beyond the changes in how we operate IT, which
are significant and particular given the IT intensity of this
activity, that is a very significant change. What we wanted to
do with the other change is to elevate the mission, elevate
this role by having a Presidential appointee lead it in
conjunction with the PAC as a peer of those leaders.
We want to make sure that it has more dedicated support
custom-tailored to this mission to make sure we can address the
privacy issues with a national security context to make sure
that it's got greater dedicated resources for the specific and
unique type of contracting activity that it does or the legal
issues it confronts or the other key elements of its operation.
So we wanted that dedicated support, and we wanted to make
sure we could institutionalize the interagency collaboration
that really works. We work closely through the PAC with the IC,
with the Department of Justice with the FBI, and that will be
embedded in how the NBIB operates.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Evanina, what sort of records do current continuous
evaluation pilot programs look at?
Mr. Evanina. Well, sir, I could speak for the intelligence
community and the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence. We're looking at about seven or eight major
databases that will be continuously evaluated to identify areas
of concern for clearance-holders that currently exist and on a
continuous basis.
So, for instance, right now, background investigations that
are reinvestigations occur either a 5-year or 10-year cycle.
We're looking to facilitate that on a continuous basis so, for
instance, if you have an incident tonight, a domestic dispute,
an arrest or financial issue like bankruptcy, we'll identify
that immediately and not have to wait for 5 years to do that.
But there'll be automated checks on a recurring basis.
Mr. Palmer. Would you be able to follow up on something
like with Mr. Alexis where he showed that he lived in Seattle
but worked in Manhattan? Would it pick up discrepancies like
that?
Mr. Evanina. Probably not specifically where he resides,
but the request for public information of residency would be
part of that documentation. However, what happened with the law
enforcement issue on the West Coast would not be a part of
that. There'd be financial records, travel records, and
publicly available records on the internet.
Mr. Palmer. The personnel that are looking at these
documents, does it not make sense to train them to look for
abnormities like that? I mean, to say that you live in Seattle
and you work in Manhattan should at least ask someone if they
are commuting.
Mr. Evanina. Absolutely, sir. And I'll--I'm confident that
it happens now when investigations are conducted on background
investigations and reinvestigations periodically with their 5-
and their 10-year period. Those investigators who conduct those
investigations are robust and thorough and they would ask that
question, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Halvorsen, what records does the DOD pilot
program look at?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, all of the same records plus we are
looking at financial, we're working with law enforcement to do
some criminal and sex offender. We look at social media, other
internet public records and internal DOD data sources.
Mr. Palmer. I want to go back to Mr. Evanina. Given that it
has been almost a decade, why is the continuous evaluation not
yet a standard practice across the intelligence agencies?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I'll proffer that a lot of agencies in
the intelligence community currently utilize continuous
evaluation.
Mr. Palmer. You said a lot of them, but why is it not
standard practice across all of them?
Mr. Evanina. I'll correct that. The majority if not all of
the organizations in the intelligence community currently use
continuous evaluation. We are working with partners here to
promulgate that across the executive brach of the government.
Mr. Palmer. I appreciate that it is a majority, but can we
get to all?
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir. I'll get you specifics as to which
agencies don't if there is such an agency that does not conduct
that now.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Palmer. I want to go back to Mr. Halvorsen. Is the
information looked at under the pilot program different from
what would be looked at under the periodic reinvestigations of
the current standard practice?
Mr. Halvorsen. The data is different, and that's part of
what we're trying to pilot. There are some additional data
sources in the pilots, and that's what we're evaluating now to
see if that makes more sense in a continual way in cooperation
with our intelligence counterparts.
Mr. Palmer. When will all of the DOD's cleared population
be covered by the continuous evaluation program?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, I think there are two questions there.
Right now, the DOD, we do use continuous monitoring. We are
still in the process of working with the intelligence community
on when that will become the standard for periodic
investigations.
Mr. Palmer. I want to shift gears a little bit here. Ms.
Cobert, at your Senate nomination hearing, you said that the
changing nature of cybersecurity means we all need to change
the way we interact, the way we use systems at work and at
home. You then explained that you yourself cannot access your
personal Gmail account from your OPM computer because that is
the way a lot of threats come in. Can you expand on how access
to private accounts like personal Web mail on agency computers
compromises the integrity of the Federal information systems?
Ms. Cobert. Certainly. The--by--there's--whether it's
phishing attempts or other things, there's a lot of ways things
come in. Those might not have the same screens and filters that
we have on our own government emails. And so the policy that
we've put in place at OPM is to restrict access to those
personal accounts. You don't want individuals being able to
click on those accounts and accidentally click on something as
a phishing attempt, for example.
We know about the security controls on our own systems. We
don't know about the security controls on individual's personal
emails. Therefore, we do not want them on OPM computers.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
DeSaulnier.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
all the panelists for the hard engaged work you are in the
process of. Certainly, I think we can all agree that this was a
very important issue, and the OPM data breach was alarming to
say the least. So my questions and comments are going to be
more directed to that understanding where responsibility lies,
sort of consistent with some of the comments by Mr. Meadows.
Understanding that this wasn't an isolated incident and it
was sophisticated and coordinated and those kind of things are
going to continue to happen in our new world. And so I have a
couple of slides if we can put the first one up, speaking of
technology.
[Slide.]
Mr. DeSaulnier. Our committee investigations found that
cyber attackers used a sophisticated kind of malware called
PlugX.
Slide 2, please.
[Slide.]
Mr. DeSaulnier. The cyber attackers targeted government
contractors with access to large amounts of personal
information about Federal employees. These contractors, as you
can see in the slide, were KeyPoint, which connected to OPM for
the background investigation work it does, Anthem and Premera,
which provide insurance to millions of Federal employees and
their families.
Slide 3, please.
[Slide.]
Mr. DeSaulnier. Once they hacked into KeyPoint, as we have
now learned, the attackers were able to disguise their
movements to appear to be authorized users inside OPM's
networks. Once they got in, they installed PlugX malware on
OPM's networks as well.
Slide 4, please. This is the last slide.
[Slide.]
Mr. DeSaulnier. Over a period of months in 2015 the
attackers made off with personal information they found using
this method. In all, again alarming, over 90 million people
could have been affected by this breach.
Mr. Scott, at the committee's first hearing--that is the
last slide, thank you--on the OPM data breach on June 16 of
last year, your written testimony stated, ``Both State and non-
State actors who were well-financed, highly motivated are
persistently attempting to breach both government and
nongovernment systems. And these attempts are not going away.
They will continue to accelerate on two dimensions. First, the
attacks will continue to become more sophisticated''--as we
have seen--``and secondly, as we remediate and strengthen our
own practices, our detection capabilities will improve so it is
a constant effort.''
On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate, given your
experience, the sophistication of the cyber attackers
responsible for the breaches of KeyPoint, Anthem, and OPM in
2015?
Mr. Scott. I think there's consensus among all of us who
looked at it this that it's in the upper ranges, I'd say 8 or
9, in that range.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. Director Cobert, our
understanding is that cyber attacks against OPM were underway
in 2013 and 2014, and they were only detected in 2015 when new
tools deployed by former CIO Donna Seymour came online, is that
correct?
Ms. Cobert. That is my understanding, yes, sir.
Mr. DeSaulnier. In your opinion, could OPM have prevented
these attacks with the tools it had in 2013?
Ms. Cobert. The tools we had in 2013 are very different--
were not adequate to prevent the breach. The breach occurred,
correct?
Mr. DeSaulnier. Right.
Ms. Cobert. Yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. So in the overall context, this is the
constantly trying, stay ahead of things, and that OPM was
trying to stay ahead, but the tools they had weren't
sophisticated enough to stop it so we slid behind.
Mr. Halvorsen, the committee's investigation revealed that
the adversary behind these attacks, again, were sophisticated
and persistent and will continue to be. As these breaches
illustrate, the adversary can be and will be present and at
work, laying low, and being invisible largely to us. Knowing
that we all have a lot of confidence in DOD and knowing it is
not misplaced, I think, in bipartisan level and knowing that
you can't explain everything in the sophistication that you
bring to this endeavor, the molding between you and OPM is
important.
So could you just briefly describe with obviously being
sensitive to the classified issues that you deal, what do you
bring in a nutshell to this effort that will give us a higher
level of confidence.
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, I think, first of all, DOD, we live
with a volume of attacks and I won't give the specific numbers.
You--I think you've seen them. They're very, very large every
day from everything ranging from the less talented to the most
extreme talented adversaries. Our integration across DOD and
how we deal with that both in preventing them but also--and I
want to stress--people keep attacking--I don't think we're at
all going to have a perfect system of prevention. Our ability
to quickly detect, isolate, quarantine, and take corrective
action and protect the forensics is something we will bring to
this table and probably the integration of all of that and
being able to produce a better full environment is what DOD
brings to the table.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I just want to thank you all. You are a
group of Federal employees that when you are doing your job
well, nobody hears from you, so congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
We do appreciate the panel and their efforts. I would like
to just make some closing comments. The fee-for-service, while
it is understood that you have users and the compensation
should come from those that use, but could you please explain,
whoever would like to address it, where you have $95 million
now that will come from Department of Defense, and yet
Department of Defense will still be required to do a fee for
service for their own users? So not only do they get to pay,
they get to pay again. They have complete responsibility but
they don't have the authority. Is that accurate?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, the $95 million requested in the
budget was to deal with the modernization and move to a new
model. That is a--someone will think of that as the--more the
one-time investment that we need to make on behalf of the
entire Federal Government, and because DOD will be doing that
work on behalf of the government, the funds were put into the
DOD budget.
On an ongoing basis, it is our responsibility working with
DOD to make the overall operations and systems work well. DOD,
as Terry has stated, will be the lead, will have authority for
the decisions around the systems. We will then at OPM, through
the NBIB and with our interagency partners, be deploying those
systems every day to conduct the work. So DOD will be building
and operating the system, securing the systems. At NBIB we will
be using those systems to conduct the investigations, and the
fees from agencies support that work so that we have the
funding to get it done.
Mr. Russell. Well ----
Ms. Cobert. It means you can scale that as the demand
changes.
Mr. Russell. And I understand that, and I appreciate that,
Director Cobert, but, I mean, doesn't it stand to reason that
if you are the one providing the service, you ought not to
charge yourself to perform it? Would you agree with that
statement? The Department of Defense will be conducting what
amounts to its own background usage, and yet now, you are also
requiring a fee for them to perform their own service. Is that
correct?
Ms. Cobert. The Department of Defense will be provisioning
the IT system. The individual investigators, the work that's
done in using those systems will be done by the NBIB. So
they're our IT provider. We are the users, and that's what the
fees cover.
Mr. Russell. Okay. But herein is the concern. You know,
while you have, you know, a great reputation and, you know, as
you have heard in the comments in committee today, you know,
good bipartisan, you know, commendation for your efforts, all
of that could change in a year.
The whole team that we see, although they are longstanding
public servants and we appreciate that service, if we don't set
this structure up correctly and, as we heard by admission from
Mr. Scott today, this funding is going to come from the top
line of Defense. Well, gee, you know, as I have already
illustrated, that amounts to about 60,000 soldiers' pay.
This is a problem because we are trying to set up a system
that will have competing interests that will go against
something that comes top line from defense, and then it appears
that the Department of Defense, which will have much of the
legwork and will provide much of the sweat equity so to speak,
they will also be asked to pay for their own labor.
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, I--I'm not sure I agree with the
competing interest point. DOD is our largest customer. We are
providing services to DOD. They as our customer--and I can
attest today they are a very demanding customer, want to make
sure that we do a quality job, that NBIB will do a quality job
and that NBIB does that in a quality way but in an efficient
way. We have dialogues with them today about pricing. This
activity does have to happen across the Federal Government. It
is an important activity. It has a cost, and we believe that
this structure of us working with DOD and our other customers
puts appropriate pressure on NBIB to do it right, to do it
efficiently, and that will continue. I actually view that more
as an alignment of interests ----
Mr. Russell. Well ----
Ms. Cobert.--than a competition.
Mr. Russell.--and I get that from a government function
point of view, but I think the real issue here is that this is
a national security issue. It has been breached. It will last,
in my estimation, at least two generations. There is a gold
mine of information whereby to track folks.
And so the big concern of mine is is that, you know, from
a--and I don't mean this in an unkind form but in a technical
form--from a bureaucratic view that, yes, there are government
functions, but since this is such a national security issue, it
stands to reason that many of the three-letter agencies did not
want to be slid under OPM when we did these reforms originally.
In fact, they stiff-armed it. They didn't get breached.
Department of Defense, largely through pressure of Congress
and through budgets, did. Now, we are turning back to them but
we are still going to keep it potentially in a convoluted
authority structure. This is a defense issue. This is a
national security issue. And it still begs the question of
whether or not DOD should be involved in its own personnel at
all under an OPM structure. And I think those questions have to
continue to be asked. I am very concerned about that.
And I would just be curious both from Mr. Evanina and also
Chief Halvorsen in that regard would we have better security
for our defense personnel in a standalone or do we need to have
this amalgam of agencies with a convoluted structure,
cooperation notwithstanding, that could make us vulnerable yet
again in the future. Chief Halvorsen?
Mr. Halvorsen. So I think what we've proposed is actually
the best security solution. We are, from DOD's standpoint, in a
sense acting as the contractor for their IT services. We will
provide those. We are responsible for those IT services.
And I want to make a couple points. The cost for the
current IT are baked into the current OPM pricing. The $95
million is to do the modernization. I actually believe when we
are done with the modernization, the IT cost will actually come
down. This is a more effective way to do IT than what we have
been doing today. The IT will be central. Everybody will use
standard--the IT system.
I think the same thing is true as we look at the business
systems. I don't think you want DOD, Department of State,
anybody else, doing different things with the investigations. I
think that A) makes it more efficient, but also creates seams
that could be exploited. I think we eliminate those seams.
I understand your issues about are we going to be able to
get the right authorities in place. I think we are, and I think
we will owe you continual updates on how we're doing it.
Mr. Russell. Mr. Evanina?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I will echo that and say that from the
intelligence perspective from the community, we believe this is
the most effective and efficient manner to attack this problem.
And I think it's important to bifurcate the issues here. The
first half of it is the investigations being done in the field
to include Federal employees and contractors and the
adjudications, which is inherently governmental by the folks at
the NBIB.
The second part of that is the systems and data that's
acquired to be securely stored by DOD we believe is the most
efficient way to handle this issue not only from a national
security perspective and housing the data and ensuring it's
secure through DOD but also maintain the current rhythm and
motive of doing the investigations we are currently doing now.
Mr. Russell. I would like to thank panel. We appreciate
both your time and your continued efforts in this. It is
appreciated. We all care about the same things. It is my
sincere hope that we will work together to resolve these issues
that have come up.
And seeing that there is no further business, this hearing
is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
