- DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ______,"COMMUNITY RECLAMATION PARTNER-SHIPS  ACT"

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. _____, ``COMMUNITY RECLAMATION PARTNERSHIPS
ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, May 24, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-554 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Chairman Emeritus                  Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Jim Costa, CA
Vice Chairman                      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug Lamborn, CO                         CNMI
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Niki Tsongas, MA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Stevan Pearce, NM                      Vice Ranking Member
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Norma J. Torres, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Ruben Gallego, AZ
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Colleen Hanabusa, HI
Jeff Denham, CA                      Nanette Diaz Barragan, CA
Paul Cook, CA                        Darren Soto, FL
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Jimmy Panetta, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    A. Donald McEachin, VA
Jody B. Hice, GA                     Anthony G. Brown, MD
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS    Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Darin LaHood, IL
Daniel Webster, FL
David Rouzer, NC
Jack Bergman, MI
Liz Cheney, WY
Mike Johnson, LA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PAUL A. GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, CA, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Anthony G. Brown, MD
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Niki Tsongas, MA
Stevan Pearce, NM                    Jared Huffman, CA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Darren Soto, FL
Paul Cook, CA                        Nanette Diaz Barragan, CA
Vice Chairman                      Vacancy
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Vacancy
Garret Graves, LA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Jody B. Hice, GA
Darin LaHood, IL
Liz Cheney, WY
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, May 24, 2017..........................     1

Statement of Members:
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Lowenthal, Hon. Alan S., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Kay, Thom, Senior Legislative Representative, Appalachian
Voices, Boone, North Carolina..............................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13

Stefanko, John, Deputy Secretary for the Office of Active and
Abandoned Mine Operations, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, on
behalf of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission and
National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs.......    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    24

Wood, Chris, President/Chief Executive Officer, Trout
Unlimited, Arlington, Virginia.............................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. _____, TO AMEND THE
SURFACE MINING CONTROL AND RECLAMATION ACT OF 1977 TO AUTHORIZE
PARTNERSHIPS BETWEEN STATES AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES FOR THE
PURPOSE OF RECLAIMING AND RESTORING LAND AND WATER RESOURCES ADVERSELY
AFFECTED BY COAL MINING ACTIVITIES BEFORE AUGUST 3, 1977, AND OTHER
PURPOSES, ``COMMUNITY RECLAMATION PARTNERSHIPS ACT''

----------

Wednesday, May 24, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:12 p.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Pearce, Thompson, Tipton,
Westerman, Hice, LaHood; Lowenthal, Beyer, and Barragan.
Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
will come to order. The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear
testimony on the discussion draft of the Community Reclamation
Partnerships Act.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chairman, the Ranking Minority
Member, and the Vice Chair. This will allow us to hear from our
witnesses sooner, and help Members keep to their schedules.
Therefore, I ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record, if they
are submitted to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5:00 p.m. today.
Without objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL A. GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Today the Subcommittee will consider our
discussion draft of the Community Reclamation Partnerships Act.
This bill would amend the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977, or SMCRA, to enable states to partner
with non-governmental entities to reclaim abandoned mine sites
and facilitate acid mine drainage cleanup across the country.
Currently, state reclamation activities are funded solely
by fees levied on the coal industry. These fees have resulted
in the reclamation of approximately $4 billion of abandoned
mine land, or AML, liabilities.
However, according to the Department of the Interior, over
6,650 AML sites remain, with an estimated remediation cost
exceeding $10.5 billion. These abandoned mines pose threats to
the surrounding communities, and prohibit opportunities for
further development.
Because these sites were abandoned before the era of modern
regulation and there are no current liable parties, the states
are responsible for reclaiming these sites and restoring the
environmental quality of the surrounding areas. The cost of
reclaiming these sites will continue to strain state resources
in the coming decades, and the condition of these sites will
only worsen over time.
Non-government entities have recognized the need for
reclamation in coal communities and are willing to contribute
their resources and expertise to address the problem.
Unfortunately, liability and regulatory concerns have
discouraged them from partnering with states on reclamation
projects. This legislation will enable NGO participation in
state reclamation programs by minimizing undeserved liability
and codifying proven practices established by the state
reclamation agencies.
This legislation would recognize non-governmental entities
who wish to conduct reclamation projects, including watershed
groups, conservation organizations, and industry partners, as
``Community Reclaimers.'' It will allow the state to extend
liability protection to these entities, much like they already
do for their approved reclamation contractors.
This legislation also addresses common problems that states
experience in addressing water pollution at AML sites. One of
the most challenging aspects of mine reclamation is the
treatment of acid mine drainage discharges. Currently, states
are required to fully comply with the Clean Water Act when
treating water at AML sites. While the water quality at AML
sites can be improved, it will never reach Clean Water Act
standards, even with the best water treatment systems in place.
As a result, states must choose between risking non-compliance
under the Clean Water Act, or foregoing acid mine drainage
abatement projects all together.
Some states have addressed this problem by establishing
their own guidelines for the treatment of water pollution at
AML sites. These state-specific strategies have resulted in
successful water treatment projects and a significant reduction
in acid mine drainage in several states.
However, these states risk subjecting their programs to
suit, due to the lack of any statutory authorization for their
water treatment programs. This legislation would statutorily
recognize the practice of crafting acid mine drainage treatment
strategies in each state.
These strategies must be laid out in the form of a
Memorandum of Understanding between the relevant state and
Federal agencies and approved by the EPA and Department of the
Interior. Community Reclaimers will be able to execute acid
mine drainage projects consistent with the approved MOUs in
each state.
I would like to note that this legislation does not allow
for re-mining in conjunction with Community Reclaimer projects.
SMCRA already allows for the regulation of re-mining
activities, and this legislation does not in any way amend the
existing requirements. Should mining companies choose to serve
as Community Reclaimers, they will not be able to conduct
mining activity in the course of completing a reclamation
project, and they must not have any outstanding SMCRA
violations.
Today, we will hear from Mr. Stefanko, Deputy Secretary for
the Office of Active and Abandoned Mine Operations at
Pennsylvania's Department of Environmental Protection. In his
role, Mr. Stefanko is responsible for overseeing the state's
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Program. He will discuss his
program's experience with allowing non-governmental entities to
reclaim AML sites, current challenges in cleaning up acid mine
drainage, and the need for Community Reclaimers in states like
Pennsylvania.
We will also hear from Mr. Chris Wood, President and CEO of
Trout Unlimited. Trout Unlimited is a national organization
dedicated to conservation and fisheries restoration that has
partnered with several states on abandoned mine land projects.
Mr. Wood will discuss the ability of non-governmental entities
like Trout Unlimited to serve as Community Reclaimers, and the
environmental benefits that these partnerships will yield for
communities nationwide.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Gosar follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Paul A. Gosar, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Energy and Mineral Resources

Today, the Subcommittee will consider a discussion draft of the
Community Reclamation Partnerships Act. This bill would amend the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA) to enable
states to partner with non-governmental entities to reclaim abandoned
mine sites and facilitate acid mine drainage cleanup across the
country.
Currently, state reclamation activities are funded solely by fees
levied on the coal industry. These fees have resulted in the
reclamation of approximately $4 billion of abandoned mine land, or AML,
liabilities. However, according to the Department of the Interior, over
6,650 AML sites remain with estimated remediation costs exceeding $10.5
billion. These abandoned mines pose threats to the surrounding
communities and prohibit opportunities for further development. Because
these sites were abandoned before the era of modern regulation and
there are no current liable parties, the states are responsible for
reclaiming these sites and restoring the environmental quality of the
surrounding areas. The cost of reclaiming these sites will continue to
strain state resources in the coming decades and the conditions of
these sites will only worsen over time.
Non-governmental entities have recognized the need for reclamation
in coal communities and are willing to contribute their resources and
expertise to address the problem. Unfortunately, liability and
regulatory concerns have discouraged them from partnering with the
states on reclamation projects. This legislation will enable NGO
participation in state reclamation programs by minimizing undeserved
liability and codifying proven practices established by the state
reclamation agencies.
This legislation would recognize non-governmental entities who wish
to conduct reclamation projects, including watershed groups,
conservation organizations and industry partners, as ``Community
Reclaimers.'' It will allow the state to extend liability protection to
these entities, much like they already do for their approved
reclamation contractors.
This legislation also addresses common problems that states
experience in addressing water pollution at AML sites. One of the most
challenging aspects of mine reclamation is the treatment of acid mine
drainage discharges. Currently, states are required to fully comply
with the Clean Water Act when treating water at AML sites. While the
water quality at AML sites can be improved, it will never reach Clean
Water Act standards, even with the best water treatment systems in
place. As a result, states must choose between risking noncompliance
under the Clean Water Act or foregoing acid mine drainage abatement
projects altogether.
Some states have addressed this problem by establishing their own
guidelines for the treatment of water pollution at AML sites. These
state-specific strategies have resulted in successful water treatment
projects and a significant reduction in acid mine drainage in several
states. However, these states risk subjecting their programs to suit
due to the lack of any statutory authorization for their water
treatment programs. This legislation would statutorily recognize the
practice of crafting acid mine drainage treatment strategies in each
state. These strategies must be laid out in the form of a Memorandum of
Understanding between the relevant state and Federal agencies and
approved by the EPA and Department of the Interior. Community
Reclaimers will be able to execute acid mine drainage projects
consistent with the approved MOUs in each state.
I would like to note that this legislation does not allow for re-
mining in conjunction with Community Reclaimer projects. SMCRA already
allows for the regulation of re-mining activities and this legislation
does not in any way amend the existing requirements. Should mining
companies choose to serve as Community Reclaimers, they will not be
able to conduct mining activity in the course of completing a
reclamation project, and they must not have any outstanding SMCRA
violations.
Today, we will hear from Mr. John Stefanko, Deputy Secretary for
the Office of Active and Abandoned Mine Operations at the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. In his role, Mr. Stefanko is
responsible for overseeing the States' Abandoned Mine Reclamation
Program. He will discuss his program's experience with allowing non-
governmental entities to reclaim AML sites, current challenges in
cleaning up acid mine drainage, and the need for Community Reclaimers
in states like Pennsylvania.
We will also hear from Mr. Chris Wood, President and CEO of Trout
Unlimited. Trout Unlimited is a national organization dedicated to
conservation and fisheries restoration that has partnered with several
states on abandoned mine land projects. Mr. Wood will discuss the
ability of non-governmental entities like Trout Unlimited to serve as
Community Reclaimers and the environmental benefits that these
partnerships will yield for communities nationwide.

______

Dr. Gosar. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Member
for any statement. The gentleman from California is recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The draft of the
bill before us today is an interesting and potentially
promising tool to help address one of the big questions that
confronts the issue of cleaning up abandoned mines. Namely, how
can we allow Good Samaritans--people who had nothing to do with
causing the pollution--how can we allow them to help with
cleaning up these sites?
There is no question that help is needed. Reclaiming all of
the remaining abandoned coal mines in this country would cost
an estimated $10 billion.
Reclaiming our abandoned hardrock mines would be even more
expensive, with an estimated cost of anywhere from $20 to $54
billion. The Gold King Mine incident was just the most visible
example of why this immense responsibility needs to be taken on
in a serious way, and it needs to be done soon.
Volunteers, whether we call them Good Samaritans, Community
Reclaimers, or anything else, will simply not be enough to
tackle this problem.
Coal companies, at least, chip in to the Abandoned Mine
Land Fund to help address the legacy of centuries of
unreclaimed coal mines. Unfortunately, hardrock mining
companies do not contribute to help cover the enormous cost of
cleaning up their own legacy of pollution, which are the over
half-million abandoned gold, silver, copper, and other mines
that each day poison rivers and streams throughout the country
with millions of gallons of toxic water containing lead,
arsenic, cadmium, and other metals.
The hardrock mining industry has also continually fought
efforts to hold them accountable for these sites. That needs to
change.
Last Congress, Ranking Member Grijalva and I introduced the
Hardrock Mining Reform and Reclamation Act, which, among other
things, would require the hardrock mining industry to pony up
and pitch in like the coal industry has done. Frankly, that is
the only way we are going to make a significant dent in this
problem.
Particularly, I raise this, since the Administration has
now decided that cleaning up abandoned hardrock mines is not a
priority. The President has proposed a cut of nearly $11
million for the Bureau of Land Management's Abandoned Mine
Lands Program, more than half--and I repeat that, more than
half--of the budget of that already underfunded program.
Mr. Chairman, I hope that this is an issue that we can look
at in more depth this Congress. As for the bill we are
discussing today, this is a novel approach to addressing the
Good Samaritan issue, and I thank Mr. LaHood for proposing it,
and you, the Chairman, for holding a hearing on it. Having
Community Reclaimers partner with states under their abandoned
mine land programs could potentially provide the liability
protections that these Good Samaritans need to undertake in a
number of helpful projects.
However, I don't believe it is entirely clear how this bill
would work. It appears that the bill would provide a broad
waiver for projects that do not meet Clean Water Act standards
if there is a Memorandum of Understanding between the state and
the Federal Government. Unfortunately, there is very little
detail in the bill about what these memoranda would contain.
The only requirement seems to be that the Secretary of the
Interior and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency find that a memorandum would help facilitate additional
work under the state's Abandoned Coal Mine Reclamation Plan.
But there are a lot of ways that we could do that. And it
is not clear if there are protections to keep coal companies
from using this as a way to re-mine old sites without having to
comply with the Clean Water Act.
I understand that is not the intent of this bill, so I hope
we can work together, guided by some of the comments of the
testimony provided by our witnesses today, to craft something
that is bipartisan and that can have a real and lasting
positive impact.
Thank you to the witnesses for being here, and I yield back
the balance of my time.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Lowenthal follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Alan S. Lowenthal, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The draft of the bill before us today is an interesting and
potentially promising tool to help address one of the big questions
that confronts the issue of cleaning up abandoned mines. Namely, how
can we allow Good Samaritans--people who had nothing to do with causing
the pollution--how can we allow them to help with cleaning up these
sites?
There is no question that help is needed. Reclaiming all of the
remaining abandoned coal mines in this country would cost an estimated
$10 billion.
Reclaiming our abandoned hardrock mines would be even more
expensive, with an estimated cost of anywhere from $20 to $54 billion.
The Gold King Mine incident was just the most visible example of why
this immense responsibility needs to be taken on in a serious way, and
it needs to be done soon.
Volunteers, whether we call them Good Samaritans, Community
Reclaimers, or anything else, will simply not be enough to tackle this
problem.
Coal companies, at least, chip in to the Abandoned Mine Land fund
to help address the legacy of centuries of unreclaimed coal mines.
Unfortunately, hardrock mining companies do not contribute to help
cover the enormous cost of cleaning up their own legacy of pollution,
which are the over half-million abandoned gold, silver, copper, and
other mines that each day poison rivers and streams throughout the
country with millions of gallons of toxic water containing lead,
arsenic, cadmium, and other metals.
The hardrock mining industry has also continually fought efforts to
hold them accountable for these sites. That needs to change.
Last Congress, Ranking Member Grijalva and I introduced the
Hardrock Mining Reform and Reclamation Act, which among other things
would require the hardrock mining industry to pony up and pitch in like
the coal industry has done. Frankly, that is the only way that we will
make a significant dent in this problem.
Particularly since the Administration has decided that cleaning up
abandoned hardrock mines isn't a priority. The President has proposed a
cut of nearly $11 million for the Bureau of Land Management's Abandoned
Mine Lands program, more than half of the budget of that already
underfunded program.
Mr. Chairman, I hope that this is an issue that we can look at in
more depth this Congress. As for the bill we are discussing today, this
is a novel approach to addressing the Good Samaritan issue, and I thank
Mr. LaHood for proposing it and the Chairman for holding a hearing on
it. Having Community Reclaimers partner with states under their
Abandoned Mine Land programs could potentially provide the liability
protections that these Good Samaritans need to undertake a number of
helpful projects.
However, I don't believe it is entirely clear how this bill would
work. It appears that the bill would provide a broad waiver for
projects that don't meet Clean Water Act standards if there is a
Memorandum of Understanding between the state and the Federal
Government. Unfortunately, there is very little detail in the bill
about what these memoranda would contain. The only requirement seems to
be that the Secretary of the Interior and the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency find that a memorandum would help
facilitate additional work under the State's Abandoned Coal Mine
Reclamation Plan.
But there are a lot of ways that you could do that. And it's not
clear if there are protections to keep coal companies from using this
as a way to re-mine old sites without having to comply with the Clean
Water Act.
I understand that isn't the intent of this bill, so I hope we can
work together, guided by some of the comments in the testimony provided
by our witnesses today, to craft something that is bipartisan and can
have a real and lasting positive impact.
Thank you to the witnesses for being here, and I yield back the
balance of my time.

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. Now I will introduce our
witnesses.
First, Mr. Chris Wood, President and Chief Executive
Officer for Trout Unlimited.
Mr. Thom Kay, Senior Legislative Representative for
Appalachian Voices.
And third, Mr. John Stefanko, Deputy Secretary for the
Office of Active and Abandoned Mine Operations, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
Let me remind the witnesses that, under our Committee
Rules, they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes. But
their entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
Our microphones are not automatic. You will need to press
the talk button when you begin your testimony. When you begin,
the light on the witness microphone will turn green, and after
4 minutes will turn yellow, subsequently followed by the red
light. Summarize your statements from there on, and hopefully
keep it to that aspect.
I would like to now recognize Mr. Wood for his testimony.
Good seeing you again, Chris.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS WOOD, PRESIDENT/CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
TROUT UNLIMITED, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA

Mr. Wood. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member
Lowenthal, and Subcommittee members. My testimony is on behalf
of Trout Unlimited and our 300,000 members and supporters
around the country. I want to thank you for inviting us to be
here today.
TU's mission is to conserve, protect, and restore trout and
salmon fisheries and the watersheds that they depend on. I have
often referred to TU as the patron saint of forgotten
environmental causes. And our work to clean up abandoned mines,
whether they are in the coal fields of Appalachia or hardrock
mining lands in the Rocky Mountains, is a testament of that.
[Slide]
Mr. Wood. As you can see from this map that is on the
screen here, abandoned coal mines are a pervasive problem all
across the country, not just in Appalachia.
Next slide, please.
[Slide]
Mr. Wood. The Gold King spill in Colorado several years ago
made national news. But the stream on the left is a typical
representation, and it is all too familiar from any landowners
across Appalachia and the rest of the country. These yellow
streams and red streams occur outside of the media's view, but
all around the country.
Cleaning up these mines is pretty straightforward. As the
picture on the upper right shows, you can run them through
these passive treatment systems and constructed wetlands, and
the result is that you can recover native species such as the
brook trout, down in the lower-right corner. We are quite proud
of the fact that in Pennsylvania, because of our work on a
watershed called Kettle Creek, we were able to recover over 6
miles of spawning and rearing habitat for brook trout that had
been lost for over a century to abandoned mine waste.
Next slide, please.
[Slide]
Mr. Wood. This map shows what is possible. Kettle Creek,
that I just mentioned, is a small part of the West Branch of
the Susquehanna watershed, which drains about 20 percent of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The line in red represents the
river from the 1980s. If you can't read the chart, essentially
the entire river was acidic to one degree or another.
Today, that is not the case. You can see the progress that
has been made over the past decades as a result of the
partnership between the state, dozens of watershed groups, and
organizations like Trout Unlimited.
Much, much more work remains to be done, in spite of the
success that we have had on the West Branch. In the West Branch
alone, we have over 1,000 miles of acidic streams that need to
be treated. These are particularly important for brook trout.
And we have over 5,000 miles in the rest of the Commonwealth
that are also in need of treatment.
Next slide, please.
[Slide]
Mr. Wood. This work not only cleans our water, it provides
thousands of high-paying, family wage jobs in rural areas. And,
of course, it makes the fishing better, which, in turn, drives
a significant recreation economy, which everyone benefits from.
We are very grateful, Representative LaHood and Chairman
Gosar, for your continued leadership on this issue, and we
appreciate the willingness of the authors to allow for some
discussion of this bill. These deliberations, we think, will
lead to strong bipartisan support for a very, very good draft.
This draft is a significant step in the right direction. It
must work well on the ground, of course, and we are looking
forward to having a little bit of time to give you more
detailed comments from our practitioners in the field. We will
offer some additional feedback in the coming days, but we are
quite confident that the finished, introduced bill will be
worthy of the Subcommittee's strong consideration and eventual
approval.
Just three points that we would like to highlight here for
the balance of my time.
Number one, we think the bill should consider some process
for grandfathering some of the 250 projects that are already
ongoing in the state of Pennsylvania through the MOU process.
Number two, we would like to ensure that there is strong
public involvement in the development of these MOUs. We think
that consent of the people in these areas is really important
to getting good, solid projects.
And then, finally, we would like to see qualifying private
landowners eligible to become Community Reclaimers in their own
right. It was unclear from the draft if that is intended.
Improving the Nation's water quality is a goal that every
American shares. We are pleased that the Subcommittee is
looking at one of the more vexing water quality problems in the
country right now, and we stand ready to work with you to
promote clean and fishable waters across the country.
Thank you for considering our views, and thank you for
working on these most important matters.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wood follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris Wood, President/CEO of Trout Unlimited,
Arlington, Virginia
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Lowenthal, and Subcommittee Members:
my name is Chris Wood. I am the President and CEO of Trout Unlimited.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on abandoned coal mine
cleanup legislation.
I offer the following testimony on behalf of Trout Unlimited and
its nearly 300,000 members and supporters nationwide. My testimony will
focus on the Discussion Draft (Draft Bill), cleanup of abandoned coal
mine lands and water, and specifically the need to facilitate abandoned
coal mine cleanups by Community Reclaimers (also often known as ``Good
Samaritans'')--those individuals or entities who have no legal
obligation to take on an abandoned mine cleanup, but who wish to do so
in order to improve water quality and watershed health.
We deeply appreciate the Subcommittee's focus on this issue, and we
urge the Subcommittee to continue to work with us, the states, the
Interior Department, the EPA, and other stakeholders on such a bill to
help provide an important tool to facilitate cleanups.
TU's mission is to conserve, protect and restore North America's
trout and salmon fisheries and the watersheds they depend on. In
pursuit of this mission, TU has worked to restore streams and rivers
damaged by pollution from abandoned mines from the Appalachian
coalfields in Pennsylvania to the hardrock mining areas of the Rocky
Mountain states, and my testimony is based upon these experiences. TU
stands ready to expand our work to clean up abandoned mine pollution,
and we need such legislation to make it happen.
We are grateful for the Draft Bill, and the leadership of its
authors, Representative LaHood and Chairman Gosar. It is a thoughtful
approach and a workable, new model. We appreciate the willingness of
the authors to allow for ample discussion of the draft. We hope that
the deliberations will lead to strong, bipartisan support for the bill.
There is room for improvement in some areas, but we regard the
draft as a significant step that is headed in the right direction. It
must work well on the ground, of course, and as our field practitioners
are studying the Draft Bill, we will offer additional feedback in the
coming days. We are confident that the finished, introduced bill will
be worthy of the Subcommittee's strong consideration and eventual
approval.
abandoned mine pollution is a widespread problem but much of it is
fixable
Americans want clean water. Trout Unlimited members give
substantial amounts of their time and treasures to protecting and
restoring trout watersheds. But even a cursory look at the damages to
our streams, rivers and groundwater caused by pollution from abandoned
coal and hardrock mines show that we have a long way to go to achieve
clean water for all. There is no better time than right now, as the new
Trump administration and the 115th Congress discuss including water
cleanup work as part of an infrastructure package, to address clean up
of pollution from abandoned coal mine.
Sadly, much of abandoned mine pollution is ``out of sight, out of
mind.'' But in August 2015, we received a vivid view of the mess. The
3-million gallons spill of polluted water from the Gold King mine near
Silverton, Colorado showed the world what TU members and staff who live
in mining country see every day: Orange, polluted water leaking out
from abandoned mines.
Cleaning up abandoned mines is challenging and expensive. That does
not make it any less imperative. The legacy of historical mining
practices--thousands of abandoned coal and hardrock mines with an
estimated cleanup cost in the billions of dollars--has persisted for
the better part of a century with insufficient progress toward a
solution.
Abandoned coal mines dot the Appalachian landscape. Pollution from
abandoned coal mines continues to damage thousands of miles of streams
and rivers--over 10,000 miles just within Pennsylvania and West
Virginia--and while much has been accomplished through the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act's (SMCRA) extremely valuable
Abandoned Mine Lands Fund (AML Fund), a great deal more remains to be
done. The cost of cleanup in Pennsylvania alone has been estimated as
high as $15 billion.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://pa.water.usgs.gov/projects/energy/amd/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A reclamation fee, paid by the mining companies, is collected for
each ton of coal produced to support the AML Fund. Since 1977, more
than $10.5 billion has been put to good use making safe and cleaning up
abandoned coal mines.
We have developed a number of model projects that can be easily
replicated. In Pennsylvania, aided by state-based Good Samaritan
policy, watershed groups, including Trout Unlimited, are working with
state agencies, communities, and other partners to conduct more than
250 abandoned coal mine pollution projects throughout the state. We can
do lot more if the problem is fixed.
our best environmental law, the clean water act, can be a barrier to
abandoned coal mine cleanup
There are many projects where water quality could be improved by
collecting run-off, or taking an existing discrete discharge, and
running the polluted water through a treatment system. However, for
would-be Community Reclaimers, Clean Water Act (CWA) compliance and
liability issues remain a barrier to such projects. Several courts have
held that discharges from systems that treat wastewater from abandoned
mines are point source discharges that require a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit under section 402 of the
CWA. Although EPA and some eastern states have not considered such
projects to be point sources requiring NPDES permits, the Fourth
Circuit's 2010 decision in West Virginia Highlands Conservancy, Inc. v.
Huffman creates some uncertainty around that approach.
Stakeholders in projects involving treatment of mine drainage have
been held back because of CWA liability for two reasons. First, NGOs,
including TU, are not well suited to apply for and hold permits for
such projects. TU does not have an adequate funding mechanism to
legally bind itself to pay for the perpetual costs associated with
operating a water-treatment facility and permit compliance.
Second, for many projects it may be impossible to obtain a permit,
because the treatment systems, even if they will improve conditions,
may not be able to treat abandoned mine wastewater to a level that
meets all applicable water quality standards or other applicable
criteria. It should be noted that while these treatment systems are
certainly capable of producing water that will support a healthy
fishery, the resulting water quality might not meet CWA standards for
some pollutants that are particularly difficult to remove from mine
waste (for example, passive wetland systems that effectively treat
highly polluted water often leave levels of manganese that do not
comply with CWA standards).
This is not to say that CWA standards should be weakened; just the
opposite, in fact. But there should be incentives for would-be
Community Reclaimers to make water cleaner even if still short of full
CWA standards. Put another way, Federal law should provide incentives
for would be Good Samaritans to make our water cleaner and communities
safer.
good projects could be expanded and replicated with effective good
samaritan policy for coal
In Pennsylvania, as we explain below, polluted water is being
successfully treated and streams and rivers are being brought back to
life because the Commonwealth has provided Good Samaritans with
dedicated funding. We believe that we can export the Pennsylvania model
across the rest of the country if liability concerns are eased.

Kettle Creek, Pennsylvania. Our experiences in Pennsylvania are
illustrative of the positive effect of Good Samaritan cleanups Over the
past 20 years, Pennsylvania has seen an increase in abandoned mine
reclamation projects by watershed groups, including TU. This boom has
been fueled by funding from the state's Growing Greener grant program
and the Federal Abandoned Mine Land (AML) reclamation fund. Most of
these projects involve treatment of acid mine drainage using passive
treatment systems, which run the polluted mine drainage through a
series of limestone basins and wetlands that increase the water's pH
and cause heavy metals to precipitate out. These projects have
significantly improved water quality and restored fish populations in
numerous Pennsylvania streams.
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection estimates
that public funding sources have paid for the construction of nearly
250 passive treatment systems in the state, the majority of which have
been constructed by private watershed groups, conservation districts or
other local groups.
Beginning in 1998, the work of TU and its partners in the lower
Kettle Creek watershed has resulted in the reclamation of approximately
160 acres of scarred abandoned mine lands and installation of nine
treatment systems that successfully improved mine water polluted with
high levels of acidity and metals. The results to date have been
tremendous, with water quality restored to 3 miles of previously dead
streams and 6 miles of a fully reconnected and thriving native brook
trout population.
This story of recovery plays out again and again in individual
streams and watersheds. Several years ago, the Babb Creek Watershed
Association accomplished delisting 14 miles of Babb Creek, now a wild
trout fishery, from EPA's impaired streams list. Another 14 miles in
the Tangascootack Creek watershed is pending removal from the impaired
streams list as a result of passive treatment systems constructed by
the Clinton County Conservation District.
On a much larger scale, the West Branch Susquehanna River watershed
has made tremendous strides over the past few decades. A comparison of
conditions in the West Branch Susquehanna in 1972 with those in 2009
indicated that fish species increased 3,000 percent, and pH increased
from 3.8 to 6.6.
These improvements result in economic benefits. In Pennsylvania,
almost $4 billion was spent on fishing, hunting, and wildlife viewing
in 2006. A 2008 study found that full remediation of the West Branch
Susquehanna River watershed would result in ``an additional $22.3
million in sport fishing revenues could be expected to be generated
each year. Additional recreation spending--over and above that for
fishing--would be expected after remediation is completed.''
Regardless of the overall scope of the abandoned mine problem, each
of these projects restored a significant water body and represents a
big win for the local community.
assessment of the draft bill
1. Positive Features of the Draft Bill

Houses the program within SMCRA and the existing AML
cleanup program. This will ensure that many of the positive
features of current AML programs will be retained.

The Clean Water Act liability protection mechanism for
Community Reclaimers is narrowly tailored, is located
within SMCRA, and relies on our state partners.

Allows eligible states to enter into abandoned mine
pollution clean up MOUs with Interior through the current
AML program, to be approved by Interior and EPA, to ensure
that water pollution cleanup results in a significant
improvement to the environment.

2. Sections of the Draft where clarifications or improvements should be
considered

The bill should ensure that ongoing, well functioning
projects should not have to go through the bill's approval
process if the states, through the MOU mechanism, certify
that the existing projects are being implemented
effectively and are improving water quality as planned. As
we mentioned, some 250 projects are currently functioning
well in Pennsylvania, and thus they should be smoothly
embedded in the new program with minimal additional review.

The bill language should clarify that adequate public
notice and comment is available for the draft MOUs from
each state, and for each project.

The bill should clarify that private landowners who are
not responsible for abandoned mine cleanup on their lands,
but who are willing to work cooperatively with the
Community Reclaimer and the state to clean up pollution
from abandoned mines on their land, should also receive
liability protection from the bill over the life of the
project.

Cleanup of abandoned coal mine pollution is a long-term job, and
long-term funding is needed to get the job done. Thus, Congress needs
to start work on reauthorizing Title IV AML for coal. The AML fund is
the lifeblood of funding for abandoned coal mine work in the coalfield
areas of America, especially the East. Congress passed a very useful
15-year reauthorization for the AML fund in 2006. Trout Unlimited and
other stakeholders urge Congress to get started on the task of
reauthorization now to ensure a smooth reauthorization is achieved by
2021. Such a valuable, complex law is worth the effort needed to make
sure the critical funding is maintained.
Last, the Subcommittee knows well the need to have a hardrock Good
Samaritan policy enacted to provide a critical tool for western
abandoned mine cleanup. We appreciate the Subcommittee's work in the
last Congress to find the solution. Under Chairman Lamborn's
leadership, good progress was made. After the Committee passes this
bill, we would like to see this Subcommittee take up the hardrock
abandoned mine bookend.
conclusion
Improving water quality around the Nation is a fundamental goal of
the work of this Subcommittee, and thus we are pleased that the
Subcommittee is looking at one of the most vexing water problems
remaining in coal country. We stand ready to work with you so that
affected communities around the Nation will again have clean, fishable
waters. Thank you for considering our views, and thank you for working
with us on these important matters.

______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Kay for his 5 minutes of
testimony. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THOM KAY, SENIOR LEGISLATIVE REPRESENTATIVE,
APPALACHIAN VOICES, BOONE, NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Kay. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member
Lowenthal, and members of the Committee, for the opportunity to
testify on the discussion draft of the Community Reclamation
Partnerships Act. I am the Senior Legislative Representative
for Appalachian Voices, an organization working to protect the
land, air, and water of central and southern Appalachia for
future generations, and to one day see the region upheld as a
national model of a vibrant, just, and sustainable economy.
Throughout Appalachia, there is an enormous need to restore
former coal mine lands. Abandoned mine lands from before the
passage of SMCRA and mines that have been bond-forfeited more
recently put large burdens on state agencies and the public.
State agencies work hard to treat existing problems, but they
simply do not have the resources necessary to complete the
reclamation of millions of acres of land and thousands of miles
of streams anytime in the near future.
Virginia, for example, has over $400 million in remaining
AML costs, but only receives in the ballpark of $5 million per
year in AML grants. In order to build wealth and prosperity in
rural communities, clean water is absolutely essential.
Additional resources are clearly needed for states to address
decades worth of mining pollution.
Cleaning up mine sites has both environmental and economic
benefits, along with creating immediate reclamation jobs and
drawing tourism to improving the land and protecting fish and
wildlife. Cleaning up mining pollution can help improve the
health of local communities.
Appalachian communities have demonstrated growing
excitement about the lasting benefits associated with mine
reclamation. Between the AML pilot program and the progress of
the RECLAIM Act, communities are envisioning new, long-term
economic opportunities that can be combined with reclamation.
Pairing such efforts with passage of the Community Reclamation
Partnerships Act could result not only in more cleanup, but
also spur innovative projects in coal communities.
It is my understanding that the bill is intended to
encourage organizations to take on some of the heavy burden of
treating water pollution, while also preventing mining
companies from escaping any of the responsibilities they have
under current law. Most importantly to Appalachian Voices is
that this bill does not allow companies to conduct any mining
with any reduction in standard permitting requirements under
the Clean Water Act or SMCRA.
In certain cases, incidental coal removal can reduce the
overall cost of site reclamation. This should be allowed if
reclamation leaves previously polluted streams cleaner than
they were before, but we see no reason for any company to
receive extra liability protection for re-mining.
We do not believe there is an intention to allow companies
to carry out re-mining projects under this bill; but, as
changes are made through the legislative process, I urge the
Committee to ensure no loopholes are created that would allow
any company to abuse the liability waivers granted under this
Act in order to obtain new surface mining permits at an AML
site.
Included in the bill's definition of a Community Reclaimer
are sensible restrictions that would prohibit companies with
unfulfilled reclamation obligations or outstanding violations
from qualifying. We agree with that decision, but defining such
persons or companies can be quite difficult. In many instances,
a parent company may own as many as several dozen subsidiary
mining companies.
For example, Alpha Natural Resources owns at least 22 coal
companies currently registered with the West Virginia Secretary
of State. These companies all list the same manager, organizer,
and office address, yet the state of West Virginia routinely
treats them as individual companies. We suggest updating the
definition to ensure that no one can get around the sensible
restrictions in the bill by acting through a subsidiary.
Last, there is a provision that requires a notice be
provided to the public before the project is initiated. That is
important, but should go further in providing an opportunity
for people to express concerns and have them addressed by the
state or a Community Reclaimer. After all, a notice in the mail
can raise a lot more questions than it answers.
Regardless of how beneficial a project might be, neighbors
may raise legitimate issues. They deserve the chance to share
their thoughts with the Community Reclaimer and the state, and
to have their concerns addressed in a timely manner.
As the Community Reclamation Partnerships Act moves
forward, we hope you will consider our thoughts and ensure that
re-mining is not considered eligible for liability waivers, and
that there is proper engagement with local communities. If the
Committee is able to sufficiently address those issues while
providing non-governmental entities the liability coverage they
need to help clean up Appalachian streams, then we would urge
Congress to pass this bill quickly.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kay follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Thom Kay, Senior Legislative Representative,
Appalachian Voices
Thank you Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Lowenthal, and members of
the Committee for the opportunity to testify on the discussion draft of
the ``Community Reclaimers Partnership Act.''
I am the Senior Legislative Representative for Appalachian Voices,
an organization working to protect the land, air, and water of central
and southern Appalachia for future generations and to one day see the
region upheld as a national model of a vibrant, just, and sustainable
economy.
there is an enormous burden on state agencies to deal with existing
pollution
Throughout Appalachia, there is an enormous need to restore former
coal mine lands. Mined land that existed prior to the passage of the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA), known as
Abandoned Mine Land (AML), and mines that have been bond-forfeited more
recently put large burdens on state agencies and the public. State
agencies work hard to treat existing problems, but they simply do not
have the resources necessary to complete the reclamation of millions of
acres of land and thousands of miles of streams anytime in the near
future. Virginia, for example, has over $400 million in remaining AML
costs, but only receives in the ballpark of $5 million per year in AML
grants. While distribution totals may change once the AML program is
reauthorized, there is no reason to believe sufficient funds will all
of a sudden become available.
The decline of the coal industry over the last 5 years has led to a
staggering number of bankruptcies and associated bond forfeitures.
SMCRA was supposed to address this issue through bonding; however,
bonding programs in central Appalachian states remain insufficient to
deal with the industry downturn. In many cases, bonds at individual
mines are insufficient to cover reclamation costs, especially when
long-term water treatment becomes necessary. Many companies have been
allowed to self-bond, in which states rely on a ``too big to fail''
approach, even as many of the largest companies have gone bankrupt. In
other cases, pool bond programs have not accounted for multiple
forfeitures at once. While these situations would not be directly
impacted by this bill, they are important to consider because they
place an additional burden upon state agencies. Once a mine is bond-
forfeited, its reclamation becomes the responsibility of the state.
clean up provides economic and environmental benefits
In order to build wealth and prosperity in rural communities, clean
water is absolutely essential. Additional resources are clearly needed
for states to address decades' worth of mining pollution.
Cleaning up mine sites can improve both surface water and
groundwater, which has clear environmental and economic benefits. Along
with creating immediate reclamation jobs and drawing tourism through
improving the land and protecting fish and wildlife, cleaning up mining
pollution can help improve the health of communities. Stream and well
water contamination are both widespread throughout central Appalachia.
Many rural communities do not have easy access to municipal water when
their well water becomes contaminated. Some common contaminants, such
as iron, are a nuisance--staining clothes and appliances orange. Other
common contaminants, like manganese, have potential effects on
childhood development that are only beginning to be understood. Though
thankfully more rare, some contaminants, such as arsenic, are known
carcinogens. Appalachian Voices has found all three of these
contaminants, as well as many others, in private well water throughout
the region.
Appalachian communities have demonstrated growing excitement about
the lasting benefits associated with mine reclamation. Between the AML
Pilot Program and the progress of the RECLAIM Act (H.R. 1731),
communities are envisioning new, long-term economic opportunities that
can be paired with the reclamation of our country's Abandoned Mine
Lands. Pairing such efforts with passage of the Community Reclaimer
Protections Act could result not only in more cleanup, but also spur
innovative projects in coal communities, many of which continue to
struggle with the decline of coal mining jobs.
the bill should not allow any company to abuse the liability waivers
for re-mining
It is my understanding that the bill is intended to allow for and
encourage non-governmental organizations to take on some of the heavy
burden of treating water pollution caused by coal mining before 1977,
while also preventing mining companies from escaping any of the
responsibilities they have under current law. Most importantly to
Appalachian Voices is that this bill does not allow companies to
conduct any mining with any reduction in standard permitting
requirements under the Clean Water Act, SMCRA, or other applicable law.
We understand that, in certain cases, incidental coal removal can
reduce the overall cost of site reclamation and does not further
threaten water resources. This type of activity should be allowed if
reclamation leaves previously polluted streams cleaner than they were
before. But we see no reason for any company to receive extra liability
protection for re-mining.
We do not believe there is an intention to allow companies to carry
out re-mining projects under this bill, but it is possible, perhaps
even likely, that changes to the existing language of this discussion
draft will occur. I urge the Committee to ensure no loopholes are
created that would allow any company to abuse the liability waivers
granted under this act in order to obtain new surface mining permits at
an AML site.
defining a ``community reclaimer''
While one solution to the issue of coal companies abusing the bill
is to simply prohibit any such company from qualifying as a ``Community
Reclaimer,'' I understand that the authors would like to give companies
that opportunity. Given the experience and resources mining companies
bring to the table, that decision is not unreasonable. Included in the
bill's definition of a ``Community Reclaimer,'' however, are sensible
restrictions that would prohibit companies with unfulfilled reclamation
obligations or outstanding violations from qualifying. We agree with
that decision, but defining such persons or companies can be quite
difficult.
In many instances, a parent company may own as many as a several
dozen subsidiary mining companies. These corporate structures often
shield each individual company, as well as the parent company, from
protective measures within SMCRA intended to prevent widespread
pollution issues. According to the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement, ``section 510(c) of SMCRA prohibits issuance of a new
permit to any applicant who owns or controls mining operations having
unabated or uncorrected violations anywhere in the United States until
those violations are abated or corrected or are in the process of being
abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the agency with jurisdiction
over the violation.'' State agencies routinely issue permits to
subsidiary companies even when other subsidiaries have outstanding
violations.
For example, citizens living around Coal River Mountain in West
Virginia recently objected to the issuance of several new mountaintop
removal permits in their area. Republic Energy, Inc., a subsidiary of
Alpha Natural Resources, applied for the permits. Republic's newest
permit for the Long Ridge Mine was issued over citizens' objection,
even when Alex Energy, another Alpha subsidiary, had outstanding
reclamation schedule violations at the time. Alpha Natural Resources
owns at least 22 coal companies currently registered with the West
Virginia Secretary of State. These companies all list the same manager,
organizer, and office address. Alpha Natural Resources and its
subsidiary have had numerous recent issues in West Virginia, including
ongoing violations, coal slurry spills, and allegations of fraud, yet
the subsidiaries are routinely treated as individual companies and
granted leniency when it comes to permitting decisions and enforcement
actions.
Due to the prevalence of permitting and enforcement issues among
subsidiary companies, the language defining ``Community Reclaimer''
should be strengthened. Currently, the definition includes, ``Is not a
past or current owner or operator of any site with ongoing reclamation
obligations or subject to violations listed pursuant to section 510(c)
of this Act (30 U.S.C. 1260(c)).'' We suggest updating the definition
to read ``Is not a past or current owner or operator, and does not
share a common owner or parent company with a past or current owner or
operator, of any site with ongoing reclamation obligations or subject
to violations listed pursuant to section 510(c) of this Act (30 U.S.C.
1260(c)).''
communications with the public
Last, there is a provision in this act that requires a notice be
provided to ``adjacent and downstream landowners and the public before
the project is initiated.'' That is important, but should go further in
providing each of the listed entities the opportunity to express
concerns and have those concerns addressed by either the state or the
Community Reclaimer. After all, a notice in the mail can raise a lot
more questions than it answers.
Regardless of how beneficial a project might be, neighbors may
raise legitimate issues. They deserve an accessible and clear method of
sharing their thoughts with the Community Reclaimer and the state and
to have their concerns addressed in a timely manner.
To be perfectly clear, we are not advocating for the creation of a
bureaucratic barrier that could serve to prevent good projects from
moving forward, nor do we want to allow any person from stopping
projects without cause. Instead, we think the bill could be improved by
making a clear requirement that the public should be given a reasonable
opportunity to express concerns and have those concerns addressed.
In doing so, it should also be clarified in the bill which entity
is responsible for communication with the public from a project's
inception to completion: the state or the Community Reclaimer. It
appears that the responsibility falls to the Community Reclaimer, but
clarification would be helpful.
conclusion
As the Community Reclaimer Protection Act moves forward, we hope
you'll consider our thoughts and ensure that re-mining is not
considered eligible for liability waivers and that local communities
are given an opportunity to voice concerns and have them addressed. If
the Committee is able to sufficiently address those issues while
providing non-governmental entities the liability coverage they need to
help clean up Appalachian streams, then we would urge Congress to pass
this bill quickly.

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Stefanko for his testimony.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF JOHN STEFANKO, DEPUTY SECRETARY FOR THE OFFICE OF
ACTIVE AND ABANDONED MINE OPERATIONS, PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT
OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA, ON
BEHALF OF THE INTERSTATE MINING COMPACT COMMISSION AND NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND PROGRAMS

Mr. Stefanko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee. I am appearing here today on behalf of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Interstate Mining Compact
Commission, and the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs. We appreciate the opportunity to share our
perspective on the status of the abandoned mine drainage
treatment efforts, and to express our support for this much-
needed amendment to SMCRA.
Acid mine drainage, casually known as AMD, is a massive and
pervasive problem. In Pennsylvania alone, over 5,600 miles of
streams are impacted by AMD pollution from abandoned coal
mines. The impacts to the health, environment, and economic
livelihoods of our state's communities are felt every day, and
the story is similar for historic coal communities throughout
the country.
The AML program, under SMCRA, gives states the resources
they need to counteract coal AML problems within their borders,
including impacts to water resources. In an era of increasing
economic hardship for coal field communities, this work has
become more important than ever. But due to the problematic
overlap in Federal law applicable to treatment of these sites,
the AML programs are not being allowed to fully realize their
mission.
Coal AML sites are generally handled exclusively through
SMCRA, but in cases where the Clean Water Act potentially
applies, the state's responsibilities are generally unclear.
And where they are clear, they are typically not practical, and
this is having a chilling effect on the state's efforts to
address AMD.
The Clean Water Act, as a cornerstone of Federal
environmental law, is intentionally very strict in regulating
impacts to our Nation's water resources. But as an unintended
consequence of the strict design, its requirements simply do
not comport well with the realities of treating AMD from
abandoned mines. These sites are, by definition, already
polluted and, therefore, do not meet the Clean Water Act
standards at the time treatment begins.
Furthermore, the nature of AMD pollution is such that, in
many cases, no amount of remediation work could achieve these
standards fully in any case. Even so, joint and several
liability under the Clean Water Act means any party who affects
such a site becomes permanently responsible for treating the
discharge to meet full standards.
As a result, the states and their partners are exposed to
significant, undeserved potential liability in the due course
of their work, even where the project is authorized under
SMCRA, conducted properly, and improving water quality.
The key to resolving these issues is bringing clarity and
practicality to the responsibilities borne by the AML programs
as they conduct AMD projects. The bill before the Committee
today--or discussion bill--would accomplish that goal by
setting an established process for states to work with the
relevant government authorities to outline a clear, achievable
strategy for AMD water treatment under SMCRA. This will result
in more prevalent and effective AMD water treatment work by the
state AML programs, and more effective overall implementation
of Federal law with respect to these sites.
As much as these obstacles to the AMD treatment work can
strain and complicate state efforts, circumstances are even
worse for the state's potential partners. These groups tend to
have limited sources of funding, often in the form of discreet
grants, and are, therefore, all the more vulnerable to the
risks of undeserved liability.
Pennsylvania recognized long ago that with the availability
of these voluntary efforts, many of the state's abandoned mine
discharges would be eliminated or improved at little or no cost
to the Pennsylvania taxpayer, if only the potential for
undeserved liability could be addressed.
To that end, Pennsylvania enacted its Environmental Good
Samaritan Act of 1999, under which 79 AMD treatment projects
have been undertaken in various partnerships among the
Commonwealth. While these projects often do not strictly adhere
to Clean Water standards, they nevertheless significantly
improve water quality in receiving streams, the aggregate
effect of which produces drastic improvements in overall health
of the greater watershed at a comparatively low cost.
Pennsylvania's program has enabled these projects to occur
without risk of undue liability under state law, but great
risks still remain for the Commonwealth and their partners
under Federal law, and still more projects could be pursued if
not for that fact.
The bill will allow the state-level program in Pennsylvania
to achieve its full potential, and will provide the mechanism
for other states to follow the successful model, and to enhance
our own AMD treatment. The specter of undeserved liability
under current circumstances constrains the state's efforts
under SMCRA, and deters motivated, well-intentioned volunteers
from assisting in that work, which serves only to prolong the
environmental, social, and economic harm these sites represent.
With this bill, Congress has the opportunity to restore
SMCRA's role in AMD water treatment, enable the state AML
programs and their partners to make meaningful progress in
restoring our watersheds, and, in doing so, put an important
piece of coal country's future into place. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stefanko follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Stefanko, Deputy Secretary, Active and
Abandoned Mine Operations, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, on behalf of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission, and the National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs
introduction
Good Morning Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. My name is
John Stefanko and I serve as the Deputy Secretary for Active and
Abandoned Mining Operations within the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. I am appearing today on behalf of the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission and the National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs, two multi-state governmental
organizations that represent the natural resource and environmental
protection interests of their 30 member states (and in the case of
NAAMLP, three Indian tribes).
We appreciate the opportunity to share our perspectives on the
current status of abandoned mine drainage water treatment efforts and
to express our support for this much-needed amendment to the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA).
In enacting the Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) Program under SMCRA,
Congress sought to address a very difficult problem. Legacy coal mining
sites have enduring impacts on public health and the environment; but
because the mining occurred so long ago and the coal companies that
conducted that mining are long since defunct, no known party exists
with reclamation obligations for these sites under any state or Federal
law. Put simply: abandoned mines are everyone's problem but no one's
responsibility.
SMCRA provides AML-impacted states the resources and authority they
need to counteract the massive and costly AML problems within their
borders. The state AML programs have made significant progress since
the Act's passage, but much remains to be done, in particular regarding
waters impacted by abandoned mine drainage (AMD). In Pennsylvania
alone, there are an estimated 5,600 miles of streams impaired by
AMD.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2016 Pennsylvania Integrated Water Quality Monitoring and
Assessment Report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress clearly intended the mission of the SMCRA AML program to
encompass mine drainage-impacted water treatment work,\2\ but due to
problematic overlap in Federal Environmental Law applicable to such
water pollution, the AML programs are not being allowed to fully
realize that mission. As a result of the significant, undeserved
liability faced by states and their AML partners under Federal Law,
even where an AMD project would improve water quality, many potential
projects are left sitting on the shelf, and many of the states'
potential partners are left sitting on the sideline. With the bill
before the Committee today, this paralyzing ambiguity can be clarified
and more effective overall implementation of Federal Environmental Law
can be achieved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, Section
101(h).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In an era of increasing economic hardship for coalfield communities
throughout the country, the state AML programs' work has become more
important than ever. As the RECLAIM Act (H.R. 1731) before the
Committee last month indicates, the AML programs are not only steadfast
defenders of our coalfield communities' health, safety, and
environment, but are also key contributors to economic revitalization
efforts.
The water treatment work conducted by the state AML programs and
their partners is particularly vital to economic revitalization. Clean,
unpolluted water supplies and recreational waterways are foundational
pieces of the new economic future for coal country that Congress seeks
to build. Meanwhile, AML impacts like water pollution only worsen over
time, and the resources available or that will become available to the
state AML programs under SMCRA for their work, and in particular for
water treatment, are significantly less than what is needed. Allowing
the state AML programs to fulfill SMCRA's role in treating water
impacted by abandoned mines and bringing the resources and passion
available from the states' AML partners to bear on this massive and
intractable problem is critical for the future of coal country. With
the bill before the Committee today, Congress has the opportunity to
achieve those ends and put an important piece of that future into
place.
amd water treatment and the clean water act
The environmental decade of the 1970s brought sweeping changes to
the way that water quality is regulated in the United States.
Foundational environmental laws like SMCRA and the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act) helped to clean up our
waterways and safeguard the health of our citizens and environment, and
the country is undoubtedly a better place as a result. It is therefore
a great irony that these laws, which were meant to facilitate water
quality, now stand in the way of water quality improvements at AMD
sites.
The Clean Water Act, as a cornerstone of Federal Environmental Law,
is intentionally very strict in the restrictions placed on and the
penalties potentially assessed against those who impact our Nation's
water resources. As an unintended consequence of that strict design,
and in particular its purposefully stringent and inflexible standards
for water treatment, Clean Water Act requirements do not comport well
with the realities of AMD treatment.

With regard to this issue, John Whitaker, a White House staffer
during the Nixon administration who played an integral role in the
passage of the Clean Water Act, recalls the following:

``When I and other White House staffers responsible for
environmental initiatives during the Nixon administration
recommended to the President new water pollution control
strategies for congressional consideration, our focus was
primarily on sewage treatment and industrial effluent, not the
acid mine drainage problems from abandoned mines. We should
have had more foresight . . . We did not envision at the time
that the day would come when the zero discharge provision would
prevent Good Samaritans from cleaning up acid mine drainage . .
.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Cleaning Up Abandoned Hardrock Mines In The West: Prospecting
for a Better Future''--Limerick, Ryan, Brown, and Comp, Center for the
American West.

This dilemma has been confirmed by the Environmental Protection
Agency on many occasions, and is summarized well by the following quote
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
from an EPA Administrator's testimony before Congress in 2006:

``Under the CWA, a party may be obligated to obtain a discharge
permit which requires compliance with water quality standards
in streams that are already in violation of these standards . .
. Yet, in many cases, the impacted water bodies may never fully
meet water quality standards, regardless of how much cleanup or
remediation is done. By holding Good Samaritans accountable to
the same cleanup standards as polluters or requiring strict
compliance with the highest water quality standards, we have
created a strong disincentive to voluntary cleanups.
Unfortunately, this has resulted in the perfect being the enemy
of the good.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Benjamin H. Grumbles, Assistant Administrator for Water, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Testimony before the Subcommittee on
Water Resources and Environment, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, U.S. House of Representatives, March 30, 2006, pp. 2-3.

The crux of the problem is that the Federal statutory paradigm for
treating AMD-impacted water is not well-suited to the unique
characteristics of these sites. The fundamental issue with AMD
treatment is that impacted waterways are by definition already
impaired, and in the case of abandoned mines, the originators of the
pollution have long since gone out of business. Even so, due to joint
and several liability under the Clean Water Act, any party who re-
affects an AMD-impacted site risks being held permanently responsible
for fully eliminating the existing discharge, even where the pollution
is the result of legacy mining, the project is significantly improving
water quality, the party in question has no connection to the
pollution, and no recklessness or negligence is exhibited.
The EPA has acknowledged and attempted to mediate the conflict
between AMD treatment and the Clean Water Act in the past, but the
Agency's efforts have not meaningfully facilitated progress. The EPA's
guidance memoranda of 2007 \5\ and 2012 \6\ regarding ``Good
Samaritan'' involvement in such projects, and the ``comfort letters''
issued by the Agency pursuant to that approach, have, for reasons which
will be discussed further below, unfortunately led to very few
additional projects being undertaken.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``Interim Guiding Principles for Good Samaritan Projects at
Orphan Mine Sites and Transmittal of CERCLA Administrative Tools for
Good Samaritans,'' June 6, 2007.
\6\ Clean Water Act Sec. 402 National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit requirements for ``Good Samaritans''
at Orphan Mine Sites, Dec. 12, 2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The obstacles posed by the Clean Water Act to the treatment of AMD-
impacted water have significantly slowed progress with such projects
throughout the country and efforts to rectify the issue have been
underway for over 20 years. While the need for resolution of this issue
has been widely agreed upon for some time, the specifics of the ideal
solution have long been debated--and it is clear that debate is
stalling water treatment work that our coalfield communities
desperately need.
While the issue is typically discussed in the context of hardrock
AML (mainly due to the absence of a dedicated national hardrock AML
program, which accentuates the need to facilitate those efforts)
current circumstances also strongly disincentivize AMD treatment at
coal AML sites, even where conducted under SMCRA. IMCC and NAAMLP
strongly support efforts to facilitate much-needed hardrock AML work
through Good Samaritan legislation, as well as the enactment of a
national hardrock AML program akin to the coal AML Program under SMCRA,
and we intend to continue our work with Congress and affected
stakeholders to support the development of legislation to those ends.
In the meantime, the bill before the Committee today presents a
comparatively simple path to making meaningful progress with a
significant portion of the country's AMD-impacted water resources
through the existing coal AML Program.
obstacles to amd water treatment under smcra title iv
Under the SMCRA AML Program, Congress has already established a
system to contend with water pollution resulting from AMD at abandoned
coal mines, which was clearly intended to become the primary mechanism
by which these sites are handled under Federal law.
As defined by SMCRA Title IV, lands and waters eligible for state
AML projects are confined to those for which ``no reclamation
obligation exists under state or other Federal Laws,'' which is
essentially to say that no party with responsibility for the pollution
is known to exist. Essentially, if these sites were subject to existing
Clean Water Act, CERCLA, or other Federal liability, they would not be
eligible under SMCRA Title IV in the first place, and thus it is
generally understood that other Federal laws potentially relevant to
abandoned AMD pollution are not necessary for AML sites listed and
treated under the auspices of SMCRA.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ House Report 101-24, to accompany the Abandoned Mine
Reclamation Act of 1989, pg. 37.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SMCRA eligible AML sites can involve discharges of AMD, but in the
absence of any liable party with respect to the site, there are
generally not the means available to treat the site under other Federal
environmental programs. Accordingly, the status quo is that SMCRA Title
IV has served as the primary mechanism to treat AMD resulting from
eligible coal AML sites. With SMCRA being specifically aimed at this
sub-group of uniquely situated, abandoned discharges, and Federal and
state efforts under CERCLA and the Clean Water Act being generally
targeted at, and often overwhelmed with, other cleanup activities, this
arrangement is reasonable and has worked well.
While the above generally holds true for coal AML work, the Clean
Water Act's relationship with AML work has become a special case.
Despite the fact that Title IV eligible sites are not subject to
existing Clean Water Act liability and that the handling of Title IV
eligible sites with AMD-impacted water are generally deferred to the
SMCRA AML programs, the act of constructing, operating, or otherwise
affecting a mine drainage treatment system or other point-source
discharge carries the risk of exposure to liability with respect to the
discharge under the Clean Water Act, as well as responsibility to
comply with Clean Water Act Sec. 402 and obtain an National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. For the reasons explained
above, this risk has proven very problematic.
SMCRA Title IV Section 405(l) is intended to allow states with
approved AML programs to proceed with their efforts unimpeded by
unnecessary liability under Federal Law--but this section only applies
with respect to potential liability under such laws, as opposed to
compliance with those laws.\8\ While that distinction is generally
immaterial to the states' AML work vis-a-vis other relevant Federal
Law, since as explained above, there is generally no cause for such
responsibility at Title IV eligible sites, Section 413(d) of SMCRA
specifically requires that treatment systems constructed and operated
by the states under SMCRA fully comply with the Clean Water Act. AMD is
generally understood to be defined as a non-point source and would
therefore not generally be subject to NPDES requirements even given the
requirement in 413(d), but recent court decisions have created a
different expectation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Program; Limited Liability for
Noncoal Reclamation by Certified States and Indian Tribes, 80 Fed. Re.
24 (February 5, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under current circumstances, an AMD treatment system may be
considered to ``convey'' a polluted water source and therefore in fact
to be a point-source discharge, even where the system is actually
reducing pollution loading.\9\ The courts have also created an
expectation that states and volunteer groups affecting an existing
source of water pollution may be held as ``operators'' under the Clean
Water Act and compelled to comply with full requirements of and
liability associated with an NPDES discharge,\10\
,}
\11\ even
where those requirements are clearly unreasonable and the liability
clearly undeserved with respect to the parties in question. These
developments have exacerbated the concern surrounding the potential for
untenable consequences for well-intentioned and well-performed cleanup
efforts at AMD sites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Environmental Defense Fund, Inc. v. East Bay Municipal Utility
District.
\10\ Pursuant to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals decision in
West Virginia Highlands Conservancy v. Huffman to designate water
treatment facilities as point-source discharges, West Virginia must now
obtain CWA permits for bond forfeiture sites. There have been concerns
that this ruling could be extended to AML projects being undertaken by
the states and tribes under SMCRA.
\11\ It is important to note that AML reclamation is handled
separately and distinctly from bond forfeiture sites, and that these
sites, and any companies experiencing bond forfeiture, would not be
eligible for participation under the bill before the Committee today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the center of this concern is the simple fact that, as noted
above, NPDES permits are not well-suited for treating AMD-impacted
water. In many instances, strict compliance with water quality
standards imposed under Section 402 of the CWA is not logistically
possible or technically practical. Even where achieving compliance is
possible, the diminishing return on funding needed to achieve that
standard renders the pursuit uneconomical and imprudent given limited
resources and the prevalence of other critical AMD water treatment
priorities. These realities of AMD treatment have led many state AML
programs to adopt an approach that attempts to maximize the number of
discharges that receive treatment to the highest standard practicable,
in particular such that they support biological and other functions of
the water resource. While these projects often do not strictly adhere
to NPDES water quality based effluent requirements, they nevertheless
significantly improve water quality in the receiving streams, the
aggregate effect of which produces drastic improvements in overall
health of the greater watershed at a comparatively low cost.
The network of pollution-reducing active and passive water
treatment systems employed by many state AML programs under this
approach has led to great strides in restoring AMD-impacted watersheds,
as well the community health and livelihoods which depend on those
watersheds; but as a result of these systems' inability to comply fully
with the Clean Water Act as described above, the state AML programs
risk exposure to daunting undeserved liability (and therefore risk to
their past and future progress with other AMD priorities) whenever they
undertake such projects. These circumstances continue to discourage if
not totally preclude many states' (and even more so their potential AML
partners') ability to treat water under their approved SMCRA AML
programs; and even in states that have been able to proceed with some
amount of water treatment work, these circumstances have been a
severely complicating factor.
To summarize, Title IV-eligible coal AML sites are generally
handled exclusively through the auspices of SMCRA, but in cases where
the Clean Water Act does or seems potentially to apply based on certain
relevant legal decisions, the states' responsibilities under Section
402 of the Clean Water Act are generally unclear, and where they are
clear, are typically impracticable.
facilitating amd treatment work under the community reclamation
partnerships act
As noted above, the EPA has attempted to resolve this issue
administratively through Guidance memoranda, which essentially outline
conditions under which the Agency will waive its enforcement authority
under the Clean Water Act (i.e. forego applying undeserved penalties
and unreasonable compliance responsibilities) for mine drainage
treatment projects conducted under certain conditions. In similar
fashion, many state AML programs have reached understandings \12\ with
the EPA and/or their state NPDES authority counterparts to outline
practicable levels of compliance with NPDES for their respective AML
programs based on the main goal: improving water quality.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ For example, under such agreements, the states may not be
expected to achieve full water quality compliance where infeasible, may
not be required to sample for the full range of constituents generally
applicable, and may have their responsibility otherwise proscribed
based on conditions at a given site and the state's staffing and
financial capability--but for reasons described below, these agreements
provide limited assurance to the AML programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The primary remaining obstacle is that, despite assurances and
understandings described above, these projects are still potentially
subject to citizen suit liability under the Clean Water Act. Due to the
requirement in 413(d), and the developments in relevant legal
precedence described above, the states' efforts may be deemed non-
compliant by the courts where they do not fulfill NPDES requirements.
This means that even where these projects are conducted under SMCRA,
condoned by the EPA and/or state NPDES authority, and are improving
water quality by reducing pollution loading, a state could still be
assessed liability and compelled to take immediately required,
expensive, tax-funded action to return a given site to an impracticable
condition, which is ultimately what the states must avoid.
The key to resolving this issue is bringing clarity and
practicality to any Clean Water Act compliance responsibilities borne
by the states as they conduct AMD water treatment under SMCRA. This
bill would accomplish that goal by setting an established, thorough
process by which state AML programs can work with their NPDES authority
counterparts (contingent on EPA approval) to outline a clear,
achievable, statutorily-sanctioned strategy for their water treatment
work. This approach will ensure that the purposes of the Clean Water
Act are upheld while providing necessary assurance that such efforts
will be considered compliant with the Clean Water Act in the future,
and can be pursued free from concerns with liability stemming from the
unreasonable, unhelpful aspects of the Clean Water Act's application to
AMD treatment work.
The amendment proposed by the bill represents a genuine attempt to
find the appropriate middle-ground between SMCRA and the Clean Water
Act for AMD projects, and ensure that the purposes of the Clean Water
Act are fulfilled through the state AML programs' efforts. These
improvements will result in more prevalent and effective AMD water
treatment work by the state AML programs, and more effective overall
implementation of Federal Law with respect to these sites. Without such
improvements, the ambiguity remaining in (and certain other prohibitive
aspects of) the Law's application to abandoned AMD pollution will
continue to constrain and delay the states' progress under SMCRA.
removing obstacles to partnerships for amd treatment work
The obstacles to AMD treatment work described above constrain and
complicate the states' efforts significantly, but for the states'
would-be partners in those efforts, the impediment is much worse. Now
more than ever, the states and their AML-impacted communities could use
the assistance of their passionate and capable Community Reclaimer
partners, but current circumstances unfortunately heavily
disincentivize that possibility.
Much like the state AML programs themselves, their partners face
the potential for devastating undeserved liability in the due course of
their AMD treatment work, even where the group in question has no
connection to the site and the project is significantly improving water
quality. What's more, the states' partners tend to have limited sources
of funding, often in the form of discrete grants, and are therefore all
the more vulnerable to the risks of undeserved liability and infeasible
compliance responsibility. If these groups are not completely certain
of their responsibilities and potential liability as a result of
conducting, participating in, or funding a project, and that those
responsibilities will be practicable, they will have little choice but
to forego those activities or risk lethal impacts to the financial
health of their organization.
Pennsylvania recognized long ago that with the availability of
these volunteer efforts and advances made in our understanding of mine
drainage, many of the state's abandoned coal mine AMD discharges could
be eliminated or improved at little or no cost to the Pennsylvania tax-
payer if only the potential for undeserved liability could be
addressed. To that end, Pennsylvania enacted its Environmental Good
Samaritan Act of 1999,\13\ under which 79 AMD treatment projects have
been undertaken in various partnerships between the Commonwealth, local
governments and municipal authorities, individual community supporters,
corporations, watershed associations, and conservancies. These projects
are spread among 20 counties and 53 distinct groups, and the majority
of these projects are active today. State-level liability protections
have enabled these projects to occur without risk of undue liability
under state law, but risks remain for the Commonwealth and their
partners under Federal law, and still more projects could have been
pursued if not for the remaining specter of liability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Title 27 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated Sections
8101-8114.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Much like the proposal in the bill before the Committee today,
projects eligible under the EGSA must abate water pollution resulting
from abandoned mine lands and eligible participants must meet certain
conditions demonstrating that they and the project are worthy of
liability protections offered by the program. A key component of the
program's success is its reliance on the state AML program's long-
standing expertise in their field. Under the EGSA, all activities
related to a given project proceed under the guidance and approval of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), which
utilizes its expertise and long resume of successful water treatment
projects to appropriately adjust requirements to match the scale and
complexity of the proposed project and to ensure that only well-
conceived projects move forward. The program proposed by the bill
before the Committee today reflects the structure of the EGSA, and
should successfully integrate its advantages.
Pennsylvania's experience in the almost 20 years since the passage
of the EGSA demonstrates that there are countless opportunities for
Community Reclaimers to assist the AML programs, especially in the
treatment of AMD-impacted water. The Commonwealth and its partners'
work under the EGSA provides a proof of concept for the beneficial,
responsible participation of such groups in the AML programs' work as
well as for the bill before the Committee today.
facilitating amd treatment work under the community reclamation
partnerships act
This bill would build on the proven program in SMCRA, take the
lessons of the successful program in Pennsylvania, and responsibly
confer with relevant authorities, to establish a distinct process for
unnecessarily marginalized groups to work with the state AML programs
as partners.
The critical components of this approach are the states' assumption
of ultimate responsibility for the project under Federal law, the
strong definition of Community Reclaimer, and the requirement that
these projects be conducted pursuant to a state's approved Reclamation
Plan, including where applicable the jointly developed strategy for AMD
treatment as developed under Section 405(m) of the proposed amendment.
The states' assumption of responsibility under Section (n)(1)(v) of
the bill will ensure that ultimate care of affected sites will be
accounted for in accordance with the State Reclamation Plan. It will
also allow the states to provide the necessary assurances to
prospective partners that they will not be assessed Federal liability
outside the terms and conditions of the State Reclamation Plan and the
state's agreement with the partner as described in (n)(1)(v). It is
interesting to note that AML contractors utilized under the
conventional AML program are similar to volunteer groups in that they
could theoretically be subject to similar liability by affecting a
polluted site, becoming considered ``operators'' under Federal
environmental law, and thus being exposed to joint and several
liability. In some cases, states mitigate liability risk to prospective
contractors by formally agreeing as a condition of the contract to
assume potential liability as a result of remaining pollution or
certain accidental releases (basically any instance in which the
contractor would be exposed to undue liability, meaning other than
liability that is a result of their own recklessness or negligence).
The program proposed by the bill before the Committee today would
emulate this not-unprecedented solution represented by the assumption
of ultimate liability by the state, thereby providing volunteer groups
the assurance they need to securely proceed with their efforts, while
also ensuring that, at the end of the day, the site will be taken care
of appropriately.
The proper care of these sites will be further ensured by the fact
that these projects will be conducted in compliance with the States
Reclamation Plan and under the guidance of the state AML program, and,
where applicable, will support the attainment of water improvements
under the terms and conditions agreed to by the state AML program and
other relevant agencies and approved by the EPA as required by Section
405(m) of the proposed amendment.
Through the definition of Community Reclaimer provided by the bill,
eligible groups will be confined to those who have no connection to the
pollution at the site, genuinely seek to improve the environment, have
a strong history of environmental compliance, and are otherwise worthy
of participation in this program. Between the fundamental requirement
that no Title IV AML site may be subject to existing liability, the
strict bar set for participation in the program by the Community
Reclaimer definition, the appropriate exceptions for instances of
reckless and gross negligence, and the fact that the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement will review and approve each project
pursued under the program, this bill is clearly designed to ensure that
only parties deserving of participation in the program are allowed to
do so. For this reason and those described above, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, IMCC, and NAAMLP believe that this bill provides a
responsible approach to achieving its much-needed ends.
Pennsylvania's citizen, watershed, and environmental groups have
long been working to address the impacts of legacy mining under the
state-level protections of the Commonwealth's model EGSA, but even this
particularly well-established community of potential Community
Reclaimers has the potential to make an even more impactful
contribution given the chance through the bill before the Committee
today. For states who, in the absence of a program similar to the EGSA,
do not benefit from such fruitful partnerships with their potential
Community Reclaimers, this bill will ease the inadvertent suppression
of these groups' assistance and help those partnerships to grow.
The bottom-line is that if we are to eliminate the lingering
effects of abandoned coal mines, and in particular the impairment of
our communities' water resources, every available tool and every source
of help is needed. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, IMCC, and NAAMLP
believe this bill is a responsible solution to providing the long-
awaited assurances potential Community Reclaimers need to enhance their
work and give the state AML programs the assistance they need to
fulfill the potential of the SMCRA AML Program.
conclusion
The SMCRA AML Program has made great progress with the reclamation
of abandoned coal mines, but the cost remaining to complete reclamation
in every state far outweighs what has been or will be available from
the AML fee. SMCRA Title IV justifiably prioritizes immediate dangers
from AML sites to public health and safety, but the investment of
limited grant funding in this work makes it difficult for the states to
maintain adequate, consistent funding for water treatment work. As coal
production declines, AML grant funding declines in turn, and with
expiration of the AML fee pending in 2021, the future of AML grant
funding under SMCRA is seemingly limited, or at best unclear.
Meanwhile, the current inventory of known AML problems sits at over $10
billion--which would be significantly higher were the full long-term
costs of AMD water treatment accurately reflected in the inventory.
While the future of the AML program remains unclear, with each
passing year in which the resolution of these obstacles to AMD
treatment is delayed, this fact at least has become increasingly
difficult to ignore: the remaining inventory of abandoned mine lands is
so large and the existing governmental resources so comparatively
limited, that without a clearer, more practical process for treating
AMD under SMCRA, and without the robust assistance of the states' AML
partners, it will be impossible to complete the SMCRA AML programs'
mission of restoring our country's AML-impacted lands and waters.
The specter of undeserved liability under current circumstances
constrains the states' efforts under SMCRA and deters motivated, well-
intentioned volunteers from assisting in that work, which serves only
to prolong the environmental, social, and economic harm these sites
represent.
It is time for Congress to restore SMCRA's role in AMD water
treatment and enable the state AML programs and their partners to make
meaningful progress to that end.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Gosar to Mr. John Stefanko
Question 1. How does Pennsylvania handle public involvement in Good
Samaritan projects? For example, does the state provide public notice
for each project or provide opportunities for public comment?

1a.  If public notice is required, who provides that notice, the
state or the Good Samaritan?

Answer. Under the Pennsylvania (PA) Good Samaritan program, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) is
responsible for providing public notice of proposed projects. (The
person or group proposing the project may also give public notice, but
is not required to do so.) There are two acceptable methods of public
notice. The first approach is to provide a 30-day comment period by
certified mail to adjacent property owners and riparian landowners
identified by the applicant. The second approach is to provide public
notice of the proposed project in a newspaper of general circulation in
the locality of the project. The newspaper advertisement must be
published once-a-week for 4 consecutive weeks with a 30-day comment
period after the last publication date. PADEP consults with the
applicant when deciding on which method to use. Project participants
and project landowners can be held liable if the project causes damage
to adjacent landowners or downstream riparian landowners who did not
receive the certified mail notice. It is therefore important that the
project applicant fully assess the potential for off-site damage to
determine how far downstream damage may occur. Alternatively, the
newspaper notice is more expensive and it requires a longer review
period; however, it provides immunity from liability for damage to all
adjacent landowners and all downstream riparian landowners. It should
be noted that some newspapers no longer print but only publish online.
PA is currently evaluating potential changes to our public notice
process to address this trend and ensure that public notices continue
to meet the requirements of the Act while reaching the maximum intended
audience.

Any person having an interest that may be adversely affected by the
proposed project has a right to file written objections with the DEP.
Objections must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of the
certified letter or the date of the last newspaper advertisement. PADEP
provides a copy of all objections to the project applicant and
considers the objections when approving or disapproving the project.

Question 2. How does Pennsylvania handle instances of gross
negligence with their Good Samaritan partners? Are the Good Samaritans
considered liable in those cases?

Answer. The PA Environmental Good Samaritan Act (Act) does not
provide immunity in cases where injury or damage results from the
landowner's or participant's acts or omissions that are determined to
be reckless, grossly negligent or willful misconduct. The Act also does
not provide immunity for unlawful activities by the landowner or
participant.
The Act does not give PADEP the authority to determine who does or
does not receive protections from liability. That question must be
resolved in civil court. If a lawsuit is brought against a landowner or
project participant for injury or damage, the landowner or participant
will have to demonstrate to the court that they qualify for the
protections in the Act.

Question 3. Do Good Samaritan partners often use subcontractors in
executing projects?

3a. How are the subcontractors selected?

3b.  Are these subcontractors protected from liability under
Pennsylvania law as well?

Answer. Subcontractors are used by Good Samaritan partners in
Pennsylvania. The subcontractors are chosen by the Good Samaritan
partners. That selection process is not subject to the provisions of
the Act.

Under the Act, a person or organization that receives payment or
consideration, or receives some other benefit through a contract for
reclamation, treatment or abatement is not entitled to the Act's
protections. Typically, this would exclude mine operators, contractors
under Government-Financed Construction Contracts, PADEP Bureau of
Abandoned Mine Reclamation contracts, and contracts with sureties and
private contracts with landowners.

Question 4. Does Pennsylvania currently allow mining companies to
serve as Good Samaritans and conduct reclamation work?

4a.  What requirements must a mining company meet in order to serve
as a Good Samaritan in Pennsylvania?

4b.  How do these companies prove their ``innocence'' with respect
to abandoned mine lands? Are there any requirements regarding
outstanding reclamation obligations or SMCRA violations? If so, please
describe them and how companies demonstrate their eligibility.

4c.  Are ``innocent'' companies that are somehow tied to other
companies with SMCRA violations allowed to serve as Good Samaritans?
For instance, if a company without any SMCRA violations is owned by a
parent company with SMCRA violations, is the ``innocent'' company able
to serve as a Good Samaritan?

Answer. The PA Environmental Good Samaritan Act covers persons who
voluntarily provide equipment, materials or services at no charge or at
cost for reclamation and abatement work on eligible lands and water. A
``person'' is defined as a natural person, partnership, association,
association members, corporation, political subdivision of the
Commonwealth, an agency, instrumentality or entity of Federal or state
government or other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and liabilities. Mine operators may quality as Good Samaritans.
However, a mine operator who has an obligation under a consent order or
any other legal responsibility for the reclamation or pollution
abatement would not be eligible. Legal responsibility or liability of
the mine operator would be shared with the operator's officers,
principal shareholders, agents, partners, associates, parent
corporation, contractors or subcontractors, or related parties.
Additionally, mine operators with any outstanding violation of the
mining statutes would be ineligible. Compliance status and potential
legal responsibility is determined using current compliance and
ownership/control database information.

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank the panel for their testimony. Reminding
the members of the Committee that Rule 3(d) imposes a 5-minute
limit on questions, the Chairman will now recognize Members for
any questions they may wish to ask the witnesses.
I would like to recognize the gentleman who is the author
of the current bill today, Mr. LaHood from Illinois.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that very
much. I want to thank the witnesses for your valuable testimony
here today, and I am honored to be the author of this proposed
legislation.
And, Chris, I enjoyed looking at the map up on the TV
monitor there. As I looked at central and west central
Illinois, which includes much of my district, the volume of red
dots up there--and this is not only an area that is in the
Rocky Mountains or in the Appalachian area, it is applicable
all across the country.
As we look at this legislation, I do think about those
areas of abandoned mines in my district, and the tourism,
recreation, and fishing opportunities that we currently have in
much of that area. But there are many blighted areas with
abandoned mines that do not have that same ability.
I have also interacted with a lot of private organizations
that want to help, want to be involved, and want to be Good
Samaritans. The Nature Conservancy has done a big project
called Emiquon in my district along the Illinois River, which
has created a vast area for recreation and tourism.
As I look at this legislation and how we get it right here,
there is a lot that is going to be focused on the mechanics and
the process and procedure for the application. And how do we
codify that the right way before we move forward? All of you
have touched on that a little bit.
I guess, Mr. Stefanko, I would start with you. In looking
at the application process, and working with, obviously, the
different secretaries on these reclamation projects, give us
your thoughts on how we get this right, in terms of the
application process.
Mr. Stefanko. Pennsylvania, itself, already has an
application in process by which, essentially, you do register
to be eligible for the Good Samaritan Act in Pennsylvania.
You have to show what organization you are, the project
that you are going to do, that you have absolutely no
connection to that particular discharge or are liable for it in
no manner, in what way. You have to show that there is property
owner access to the property, and that the property owner will
allow access to actually do the treatment on the site itself.
If you meet all these specific criterias for that
particular project, then we consider you registered for the
Good Samaritan liability. I think something on the Federal
level very similar to that would work very well.
Mr. LaHood. Chris, any further thoughts on that?
Mr. Wood. No, I think that is exactly right. What we want
to do is try to replicate what we have been able to do
successfully in Pennsylvania around the rest of the country.
And even in Pennsylvania I would say that, because of some
judicial interpretations of the Clean Water Act, we are
operating at some liability risk. It may not be as substantial
in other states that don't have stand-alone state legislation,
but this would provide security for all of this kind of work,
all around the country, which is what is needed.
Mr. LaHood. And Mr. Kay?
Mr. Kay. Thank you. Yes, I think making sure that
communities are involved in the discussion of this, I would
want to make sure that we not only talk to the Community
Reclaimers and the state, but also talk to some people who have
lived near some of these sites, and give them a chance to
address any issues they have had in the past that we might want
to include in this process. But I think we can look at that for
best practices from the state, which I hear only good things.
Mr. LaHood. And Mr. Wood, in terms of what you have seen in
Pennsylvania in terms of a success story, can you give us an
idea of the amount of private-sector money that has flowed into
these projects?
Mr. Wood. I can't give you an exact amount. I can get back
to you with that, though. But I will tell you that the return
on investment is fairly significant. Going back 11 years ago,
we looked at the West Branch of the Susquehanna and determined
that for every Federal dollar going in $1.50 was being spent.
That is really dated, that is 11 years old.
Notably, given how you started your question earlier, we
also determined that if we improved water quality in the West
Branch to a substantial degree, we would be able to see at
least $50 million in additional economic benefit coming to the
region, just from having an improved fishery alone.
Mr. LaHood. Mr. Stefanko, do you have any further thoughts
on that, in terms of the amount of investment?
Mr. Stefanko. I do. Basically, because of the fact that
this provides another option for the states that have these AMD
problems to get a lot of work done. We have limited funding to
address these resources, so by allowing these entities to come
in--whether it be industry, whether it be a local watershed
group, who could potentially have access to other funding--it
does allow us to enhance our programs and get a lot more work
accomplished that we may not be able to do.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Lowenthal, for his 5 minutes.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to follow up on
my introductory remarks. I would like to ask a question about
Section 4, which is titled, ``Conforming Amendments,'' but
seems to make major changes to the law. I am referring to
Section B, in particular.
Currently in Section 413(d) of the Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act, or SMCRA, it reads, ``The Secretary or the
state, pursuant to an approved state program, shall have the
power and authority to construct and operate a plant or plants
for the control and treatment of water pollution resulting from
the mine.'' And also, ``No control or treatment under this
subsection shall in any way be less than that required under
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.''
Section 4(b) of the discussion draft before us amends that
by adding at the end, ``unless for areas within that state
there exists a state Memorandum of Understanding approved under
Section 405(m) of this Act.''
So, therefore, it appears that this language would now
allow the state to meet standards below the Clean Water Act, as
long as there is an MOU. I don't know if that is the intent of
the bill, but it does seem to me that it goes far beyond the
projects involving Community Reclaimers.
Could each of you address what you believe the impact of
this language would be, and whether you think this amendment,
this language, is appropriate?
I want to start with--anyone want to----
Mr. Stefanko. I will jump in.
Dr. Lowenthal. Good.
Mr. Stefanko. The intent of the language is we want to meet
the intent of the Federal law. But in the case of these
particular AMD discharges, when these groups are going in--even
when we go in--the site is already polluted. So, does the
benefit outweigh the good here?
If we can go in and address an AMD discharge that has been
polluting a stream for over 50 years, and we can get it 90
percent to where it needs to be, I think we should allow those
opportunities to happen, especially for those groups, those
community groups, who live in these communities. And there are
kids in these communities that have never realized what a clean
stream looks like, because all they have ever seen is this
orange stream.
So, the intent is for those that are covered under SMCRA,
which is what we will operate under----
Dr. Lowenthal. Right.
Mr. Stefanko [continuing]. And if that project is approved
under SMCRA--so it might be a matter of clarifying that
language in there to ensure that it only covers what we are
trying to do, which is--we are already doing these projects
with the authority under SMCRA, and we just want those to be
able to continue without the concern of the----
Dr. Lowenthal. So, you believe that the language might be
vague or something that might need to be clarified?
Mr. Stefanko. Yes, it probably would need a little bit more
clarification.
Dr. Lowenthal. Mr. Kay, do you have any response?
Mr. Kay. We have been looking at that section, too, with a
little bit of confusion. I think clarity is the most important
thing to offer there, but I very much agree with Mr. Stefanko
about the need for states to be able to improve streams, even
if they cannot quite----
Dr. Lowenthal. Got it. And we understand what you are
getting at. But it does seem that there is the potential for
this to go far beyond the Community Reclaimers, just by the
very language that was presented, not so much the intent of the
state and what they are doing.
Do you have any comments on that, Mr. Wood?
Mr. Wood. I will simply add that we read Section 4(m) to
speak to remediate mine drainage on abandoned mine land and
water within the state. That would be the purpose of the MOU. I
think one of the substantive recommendations that we will offer
in the coming days would be that we see some language that
speaks about measurable improvements in water quality, or some
such thing that clarifies the intent of the provision.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you all. I have some more questions,
but I am going to yield back now until we--thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman.
I understand that those concerns have been raised as to how
landowner liability will be handled for the Community Reclaimer
projects.
Mr. Stefanko, does the state of Pennsylvania enter into any
sort of contract with landowners of the sites where Good
Samaritans are conducting reclamation?
Mr. Stefanko. The Commonwealth itself does not. The Good
Samaritan groups that actually do the work that they submit to
us do enter into agreements with the property owner to allow
them access. We do provide grant funding out to groups to do
this type of work, and one of the requirements that we do have
at the Commonwealth is that they show us that they do have
access to the property.
There are a lot of property owners out there that are a
little hesitant, especially a property owner that maybe the
discharge is not currently on their property, but they are
willing to donate a piece of their property such that they can
build a treatment system on it. They would be hesitant that
they would potentially then be liable. But we do require an
access agreement to a property, so it can be built on the
property.
Dr. Gosar. Yes. You have examples of that, so that you are
able to explain and give a detailed in situ-type of project
that you could reference to the landowner?
[No response.]
Dr. Gosar. For example, if they are hesitant, you can
actually take an example that actually went forward, and
actually have them oversee that, the remedy.
Mr. Stefanko. Yes. I mean, because there are a lot of good
folks that want to build something.
We have our own access agreements that we, at the
Commonwealth, use that, as everybody in this room would
probably know, has a lot more language in it that can be
intimidating to a property owner regarding liability. But if we
could provide some type of an access agreement to them that
shows that they don't have that liability concern any more in a
simplified manner, I think it would enhance that many more
projects that we do get.
As far as the individual agreements that maybe are entered
into between the Community Reclaimer and itself, all we need is
something from them showing that they do have access. That
could come in any form. It could be something as simple as a
letter. It could be a formal agreement, which could very much
differ from an actual consent for right of entry that we, the
Commonwealth, would enter into when we are building one of our
own projects.
Dr. Gosar. You kind of went into my next question, so this
is for you and for Mr. Wood.
Are the landowners granted a liability waiver during the
execution of that project?
Mr. Stefanko. Under Pennsylvania's Good Samaritan, yes.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Wood?
Mr. Wood. It is blinking at me.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wood. Yes. We work under the protection of the
Pennsylvania Good Samaritan law, so in that case we just
default to their standards.
Dr. Gosar. And since I am on that subject, do we have
documentation--I mean, Mr. Wood, you showed some documentation
on the screens. Do we have videos that actually show past
projects, from beginning to end?
Mr. Wood. It is so interesting that you mentioned that. We
were just talking before the hearing that what we want to do
is, because it is so stunning----
Dr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. Wood [continuing]. The before and after, we said there
are tons of before-and-after shots we can share with you. But
what would be really powerful would be to take a drone and fly
over one of those orange streams, and then construct some
passive wetland treatment systems as we do, and then fly over
that same stream. And the result is stunning. I mean the water
goes from yellow to clear.
Dr. Gosar. Well, not just beginning and end, but during. I
mean time lapse, the scientific exposes that show how it is
done, you know? There are inquisitive minds out there that want
to see that, and I think that is kind of a teaching tool that
we miss if we don't.
Mr. Wood. I agree with you. And knowing your passion for
fly fishing, there is also a benefit at the end of the line at
the end of the day.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. Absolutely, absolutely.
Mr. Stefanko and Mr. Wood, once again, can the issue of
landowner liability be addressed with the MOUs developed by the
states, or through the contracts established by the states with
landowners granting access to their property?
Mr. Stefanko first.
Mr. Stefanko. I believe that could be addressed through
maybe a standardized access agreement that could be shared with
them that would then be acceptable to be registered to get the
Federal Good Sam. We could maybe potentially draft that
agreement such that when we would submit this MOU to EPA for
their approval, that it would satisfy the concerns that the
property owner has signed the proper access, meets all the
requirements, and addresses the concerns on liability.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Wood?
Mr. Wood. I agree. We have some experience with this. It
was mentioned earlier by Mr. Lowenthal about hardrock mining.
We worked with the EPA during the Bush administration to
develop a so-called Good Samaritan agreement for cleanup of
hardrock mines that are implicated by CERCLA, and they came up
with a standard policy that we now use with other landowners
around the West.
So, I am very confident that we can come up with something
similar here.
Dr. Gosar. I just want to compliment you, Mr. Wood, and
your organization, because it is stellar, what it starts out
with and what--the end of the line, when it is tugging on your
fly, it makes a wonderful impact.
Mr. Wood. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Gosar. I appreciate it.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Beyer, for
his 5 minutes.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Reclaiming
abandoned coal mines and addressing mine draining is a huge
issue in my Commonwealth.
Virginia has over $421 million in priority sites waiting to
be reclaimed, yet this year Virginia received less than $4
million in AML grants. At that rate, we are looking at over a
century to deal with these sites, and that does not even count
the additional environmental damage that is caused by mountain-
top-removal mining, which has already flattened at least 67
mountains in southwest Virginia.
So, naturally, I am interested in any solution such as Mr.
LaHood's bill that can help speed up the pace of this cleanup,
as well as help the people of southwestern Virginia and other
coal communities who are struggling with high unemployment and
polluted water.
Unfortunately, the President's budget announced yesterday
would do nothing but hurt the people who need the most help.
His new proposed budget eliminates funding for the Appalachian
Regional Commission, cuts programs for health, clean water,
clean air programs. In short, this proposed budget is callous
and short-sighted, especially of the people who live in our
coal communities.
Thankfully, the Congress has taken more interest in the
welfare of the people of Appalachia, particularly through the
bipartisan pilot program to reclaim abandoned coal mines in a
way that provides economic development opportunities. This year
the program was expanded to include Virginia, which will
receive $10 million to facilitate these sorts of community-
driven projects that have an economic development nexus.
A little while ago we heard in this Subcommittee on the
RECLAIM Act, which would make this pilot project permanent. And
there are some changes that I think could be made to the
RECLAIM Act and to this bill, but together they are a very
powerful combination to provide critically-needed investment
into the economy and the environment of southwest Virginia.
So, Mr. Kay and Mr. Wood, could you give any concrete
examples of the impact these bills might have on Virginia, and
how these bills could act to improve the health and economic
prospects of the people of the coal fields?
Mr. Kay. Yes, we worked with a mining engineering firm last
year to look at all the possibilities of RECLAIM in southwest
Virginia. And one example in the city of Norton, there is a 2-
mile-long river walk, they call it the River Walk Project they
are working on. It goes through an old coal processing facility
that has some acid mine drainage issues and it is on the AML
inventory. They are trying to create a river walk through that,
get that cleaned up.
And then, just across the street from that, they also have
a highwall that is right in the middle of what should be a
really good commercial development area. They are hoping to
clean all that up, invest some additional funds, and really
turn around the entire city of Norton. So, those are some of
the exciting things that are going on, but it goes well beyond
that, and we are very excited about the pilot money now going
to Virginia.
Mr. Beyer. If I can add to that, my friend, Jack Kennedy,
is the clerk of the court in Norton, and is trying to make
Norton and Wise County the UVA capital of America, if not the
world, so I hope the RECLAIM funds help to do that.
Mr. Kay. He has had no small part in making that happen,
along with Congressman Griffith.
Mr. Beyer. Yes, thanks.
Mr. Wood, do you have any insight, and not just the
Virginia coal fields, but coal fields in general?
Mr. Wood. Well, I will start with Pennsylvania because,
again, of the state Good Samaritan protection that they have
offered. We have been able to do--there are over 250 active
reclamation projects that are ongoing across the state, but one
in particular, that I think has relevance for places like
Virginia and other parts of Appalachia, is in the Babb Creek
drainage.
And there, the Babb Creek Watershed Association, one of
these local watershed associations that has membership--TU
members are a part of it--they worked to clean up over 14 miles
of stream that is now a wild trout fishery. It was historically
a dead, red stream, and now it is 14 miles of destination wild
trout fishery. And people are coming there now to fish these
waters that they had never been able to fish before.
That is the kind of thing that we can promote all across
Appalachia--and not just Appalachia, all across the country.
Mr. Beyer. Great. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Pearce, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
hearing on the bill today, and appreciate the input from both
sides.
I was listening to the opening comments of the Ranking
Member and then the follow-up questions, and my read is that
you are open to the idea, but this bill might need some
manipulation.
Mr. Chairman, I just think that is ultra-important. I might
not have the same reservations about the exclusion on the
states having some right, but if we could provide that
protection in the language of the bill--and I talked to Mr.
LaHood--I think it is imperative that we give as much assurance
across the aisle, get this thing as bipartisan as we can,
because it has been such a divisive issue. And it is such a big
issue for us states that have mining interests that I would
gladly work to see if we could accommodate.
I would yield to the Ranking Member to make comments about
that. I don't want to put words in your mouth.
Dr. Lowenthal. Absolutely. What we are talking about is the
clarity in the language, and we don't believe that the issues
that we are raising go in any way against the intent of the
bill, and we want to work. We just want to make sure, as some
of the witnesses have pointed out, that they do add some needed
clarity----
Mr. Pearce. Absolutely.
Dr. Lowenthal [continuing]. In understanding what that
section really was, and what is appropriate.
And I agree with you, this should be a bipartisan bill and
we would like to work with you.
Mr. Pearce. If the gentleman would yield just a bit
further----
Dr. Lowenthal. I yield back.
Mr. Pearce. One of the things that affects us is Homestake
Mine in my district, and they have been remediating for years.
The EPA is thinking about changing the standard to where they
would have to remediate naturally occurring minerals, and that
seems like an untenable position. Is that something that you
are open to discussing, too? Again----
Dr. Lowenthal. Yes, I think we can----
Mr. Pearce. I am not trying to catch you on a corner, I am
just saying that----
Dr. Lowenthal. I think we should be discussing that.
Mr. Pearce. OK.
Dr. Lowenthal. I would be open to discussing that,
absolutely.
Mr. Pearce. Yes, and that is probably----
Dr. Lowenthal. We are not going to commit right now, but
that is something that we can really clarify.
Mr. Pearce. And I think that the company should have to
remediate all the way that they can, but then it gets down to
this--if you get to 95 percent and you cannot get any further,
if you get into the naturally occurring, then we should have
some further discussion.
But if the gentleman is open to it, then I will commit that
we will work--and Mr. LaHood--be happy to work on this. And I
thank the gentleman for his comments.
Mr. Stefanko, have you run into the problem I am discussing
with the Homestake Mine in my district, that the government
might change the game after you are in? And what have you all
done about that? It is particularly thorny, because I was there
visiting on the site about a year ago, and they expressed, OK,
we are getting close. And now it looks like it may never end,
because the minerals that they are trying to work on, some are
naturally occurring.
So, if you could tell me a little bit of your experience,
that would be valuable.
Mr. Stefanko. I am familiar with both the active and the
abandoned, because I oversee both programs. On the active side,
we have run into the issue that you are bringing up. But when
we permit the site, we do a characterization of what that water
should look like. And that would include historically what it
was and what it naturally should be. But we have run into
instances like that.
On the AMD side, not so much. We know what the major
constituents are that impact the streams to get them to
recover. And when we go forward with a lot of these AMD
projects, which are done through our Good Samaritan projects,
which enhance our program, like I said earlier, we are getting
back probably about 90 percent of what it should be sometimes.
But doing nothing versus getting back 90 percent, to us, is a--
--
Mr. Pearce. If I can jump in here before the last minute
runs out, how about the expertise? Do you find that you all
have developed enough expertise to not need the Feds on site,
or is that something that you all think is very difficult?
Again, I am thinking about for a state like New Mexico.
Can you develop the local expertise, or is that Federal
oversight needed and desired? Tell me a little bit about that.
Mr. Stefanko. We have a great internal expertise, as well
as along with some of our sister states. The addressing of acid
mine drainage and treating acid mine drainage has a long
history of improving to the point where we are today.
And part of that does include a lot of our watershed groups
who have engaged consultants and companies that are aware of
how to treat it in various manners, and what we have known over
the years. We have internal, but we also do external.
I would say we, at the state of Pennsylvania--I would feel
very confident that we do have the expertise. And we do reach
out to our Federal partner, OSM--there is a lot of key staff in
the OSM, at least--we deal with in PA--that have that knowledge
with regards to the treatment of acid mine drainage, and we
work with them a lot, as well.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that and I yield
back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thank you so much, and I want to
say thank you to the author of this bill. As a Member of
Congress that has over $442 million in AML liabilities in a
state that has $5 billion in AML liabilities, we do take great
pride in the fact that much of the mining that fueled both the
Industrial Revolution and the manufacturing of tanks and
artillery to defend our Nation in World War I and World War II,
a lot of that coal came out of Pennsylvania's Fifth District.
But we also know that we have a responsibility now to get those
mining sites that really did not have the technology and the
insight cleaned up.
First of all, Mr. Woods, thank you for being here. I am
real proud that my home TU chapter possesses the Golden Trout
Award, Spring Creek Chapter, and I think that is Amy sitting
behind you there. You all have been a great partner in my work
on this Committee, and in the Agriculture Committee with the
Conservation and Forestry Watershed Subcommittee, the past
three terms.
I have enjoyed spending time out on these sites. It is
amazing to watch, whether it is passive or active, processes
are put in place, the reclamation that occurs to streams that
run orange to be reclaimed into--and these are active mining
sites, they are some of the best trout waters that I have
experienced, and let alone the re-planning on those sites that
are just a magnet for game. It is a good place to hunt and
fish.
Mr. Wood, can you discuss the variety of non-governmental
entities that currently partner or would be encouraged to do so
under this bill? And does this include both non-profit and
private commercial businesses?
Mr. Wood. Well, I think if the bill were to pass, you would
see a groundswell of support for doing a lot of this kind of
abandoned mine cleanup that, right now--I mean Pennsylvania
sort of is a bastion, it is a hotbed of these watershed groups,
because of the protection the state offers, that are out there
doing restoration.
As I mentioned earlier, there are 250 active projects that
are happening right now in the West Branch Watershed alone. We
have provided technical assistance to something like 75
different watershed associations who are actively working on
treatment projects.
I think this would basically free up people like private
landowners, who are just thoroughly intimidated by liability
right now, maybe owners of hunt clubs, or things like that,
that have a vested interest in conservation, they want to do
the right thing, they just do not want the liability
implications.
I think more local communities would probably get involved
than have been involved historically. I mean there is something
in this for everyone. Anyone who has an interest in clean
water, and anyone, presumably, who wants to maintain the value
of their property, should have an interest in clean water, I
think, would be an advocate, a supporter, and a partner in
this.
Mr. Thompson. I think the term you used, groundswell, is a
great way to describe it. Because I would see that, as well. It
is exciting.
Mr. Stefanko, thank you for your service to the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania over many years, going back to
your internship with PennDOT, but mostly with the Department of
Environmental Protection.
My question for you is, does Pennsylvania allow for re-
mining under the Good Samaritan program, and have companies
sought to conduct a re-mining along with Good Samaritan
reclamation projects?
Mr. Stefanko. We do not allow re-mining under the Good
Samaritan Act. All of our re-mining is done under the Title V
program. We have an extensive re-mining program that works very
well, and it is all under the regulatory arm.
Mr. Thompson. Well, a follow-up question, since
Pennsylvania already has a program in effect, will this
legislation have any unintended consequences in Pennsylvania,
as a result of that?
Mr. Stefanko. None, to my knowledge. If anything, it will
further enhance Pennsylvania's program. I think we can increase
from the 79 and get a lot more groups and communities
interested in doing these types of projects, which is only a
benefit, because as you well know of the problems we have in
PA, and we do not have the funding to do all of those.
Mr. Thompson. Right.
Mr. Kay, in your testimony you mentioned the issue of re-
mining and stated your opinion that incidental coal removal can
facilitate reclamation by reducing costs without causing more
harm to the environment. Can you explain what you mean when you
referred to incidental coal removal in your testimony, please?
Mr. Kay. Yes, thank you, Congressman. In some cases during
reclamation there is really no way to do it without removing a
little bit of coal, especially for some large highwalls. There
is really no way around it, so you are going to get that.
I believe in the state of Pennsylvania they have a good way
of defining incidental coal removal versus re-mining. I think
that is a difficult thing to do, and I hope one that we do not
have to tackle through this bill, but that is still something
to make clear that it is important.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman and now recognize the
gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Westerman, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses, and thank you to my colleague, Mr. LaHood, for
proposing this legislation. I agree, there is no reason this
should not be a bipartisan piece of legislation.
I am reminded of the hearings we had in the Full Committee
on the Gold King Mine spill last year, and that is probably a
crash course on how not to do mine reclamation. I was very
disappointed as we got into the details on that about how there
were no professional engineers involved in the planning
process, there were no drawings or documentation. And we were
talking about liability here, and, ultimately, I still don't
think anybody has been held accountable for that mine spill
last year.
But in reading this bill in Section 3, I do want to point
out there has been a question about liability, but one thing
that is very positive, it says, ``A description of the proposed
project, including any engineering plans which must bear the
seal of a professional engineer that must be submitted.''
So, when you do the proper planning and the engineering on
the front end, you are mitigating the liability and reducing
the amount of liability that you actually would have. We may
need to do some more work, but I think this is definitely
moving in the right direction.
When we are thinking about the Gold King Mine, and we talk
about acidic water, I know that is a problem that can be there
in treating mine drainage, and that is one of the most
challenging aspects of mine reclamation. Those states face not
only technical challenges, but also compliance challenges under
the law.
Mr. Stefanko, how has Pennsylvania handled the problem of
treating acid mine drainage?
Mr. Stefanko. We have an internal abandoned mine land
program, where we get the Federal grants. We do our own
projects to treat the acid mine drainage, which is done through
our own process, where we have in-house engineering, or we
consult that out. Projects are designed and built all under the
Commonwealth rules and regs.
We also have this piece here, which is where we have a lot
of our non-government entities and watershed groups that have a
lot of interest in it. We have a number of grant programs. One
of our biggest and probably most well-known is the Growing
Greener program, where groups provide us a project that is
submitted, it is reviewed and done through a review process,
including a technical review, and whereby then we would provide
funding back to them for that watershed group then to build a
treatment system to address the AMD.
It can be done either passively or actively. Actively,
obviously, is more costly, because of the O&M costs. So, there
is the passive, but we look at all of these different aspects
when we are actually going to design and/or provide grant funds
and/or monies or look at these projects that we get under the
Good Samaritan Act, to ensure that they are being properly
designed and built, and address the type of acid mine drainage
that it is.
Mr. Westerman. Yes. And, Mr. Wood, same question to you
about how has your organization approached such projects. And I
will say that Arkansas may not be well known for trout fishing,
but we have probably have some of the best trout fishing in the
country, some of the nicest trout streams there, and really, if
you want to catch really big trout, come to Arkansas.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wood. I think you had the U.S. record largest trout
caught out of the white, actually.
Mr. Westerman. The brown trout.
Mr. Wood. Yes, a big brown trout. It was caught by, like, a
10-year-old on a Snoopy rod, or something.
Mr. Westerman. Something like that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wood. So, as Mr. Stefanko said, we work almost as an
adjunct to the state in our cleanup. In Pennsylvania, we will
submit a plan to them, it will be reviewed, and they will
approve it.
Largely, what we have done in places like Kettle Creek are
passive treatments, where we have constructed wetlands that we
would sweeten with lime, and then we divert the stream through
these constructed wetlands that then sweeten the water so that
by the time it returns to the stream, its pH is in good shape.
Mr. Westerman. And my understanding is, even with some of
the best water treatment techniques available, the stream
sometimes still cannot meet the Clean Water Act standards. Can
you explain that?
Mr. Wood. Well, there are--you know, I am a political
science major, you may not want me to do that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wood. But typically what happens--fairly low cost, this
isn't intensively engineered stuff. I mean for several hundred
thousand dollars, you might be able to get to 80 or 90 percent
improvement, but it might be a couple million dollars to get
that additional increment. And----
Mr. Westerman. So, you get some diminishing returns, but
even though they might not meet the Clean Water Act standards,
they can still support wildlife habitat?
Mr. Wood. And naturally reproducing trout populations.
Mr. Westerman. Which is a pretty high standard.
Mr. Wood. That is exactly right.
Mr. Westerman. I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman and now recognize the
gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Tipton, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize that I had
to step out, so if I get a little redundant, I hope you will
forgive me.
I found it interesting, when we have had the conversation
going on, and understand the admirable draft that my colleague,
Mr. LaHood, is putting forward, to be able to address it. It
points specifically to a lot of challenges that we are also
facing, in terms of hardrock mine cleanup, as well, with Good
Samaritan legislation that we are trying to be able to put
forward.
So, I would like to ask Mr. Wood a couple of questions, if
you would. And if you want the actual best-tasting fish caught
out of a stream, those come out of Colorado.
Mr. Wood, in your testimony you stated that, as an NGO,
your organization is not well suited to be able to apply for or
to hold a discharge permit. Can you go into maybe a little more
detail for us, and for everyone, why that is the case?
Mr. Wood. Yes, sir. And I want to thank you, Mr. Tipton,
for your leadership on the hardrock side of this equation in
Colorado, as well. And, just for the record, it was not me that
said anything about fish tasting.
Mr. Tipton. OK.
Mr. Wood. We are big believers in catch and release at
Trout Unlimited.
So, NPDES permits, the non-point discharge elimination
system, I think. Is that right? They are very expensive to get,
and often they are associated with perpetual treatment systems,
which a non-profit entity like mine is not well suited to have.
And frankly, just the liability associated with holding such a
permit is a profound disincentive for groups like TU to do
that. We have never even tried, for example.
Mr. Tipton. And to clarify, just to be able to do the right
thing, to try and be able to clean up some of these areas.
I was a little curious on the slide that you put up with
the passive system. And it actually goes to my colleague, Mr.
Westerman's question, in terms of being able to comply with the
Clean Water Act. That is not often the case, is it, with the
passive systems? Is that effectively seeking the perfect to
opposition to the good, and----
Mr. Wood. Right.
Mr. Tipton [continuing]. Actually impacting our ability to
move the ball forward to be able to clean up some of these
streams, and to be able to create a better environment?
Mr. Wood. I think that is right, sir. I mean, again,
remember, we are not talking about places where we can even
hold people accountable any longer. And this is especially the
case with some of your western hardrock mines. Those people are
100 years gone.
But to the extent that we can make it easier for people who
want to make the world a better place, who want to make the
water cleaner for their kids, I mean that is something everyone
should be interested in doing.
Mr. Tipton. You know----
Mr. Wood. And I think that is what this bill does.
Mr. Tipton. I agree with you. And talking about it, do you
believe, when we are talking about these passive systems, that
an AML treatment system, passive water treatment system,
should--when we are going to materially improve those water-
quality systems, that it should be a point of discharge for
compliance purposes under the Clean Water Act? Would that be
useful?
Mr. Wood. We would like to see some language inserted into
the bill--and this came up a little earlier, I am not sure if
you were here or not--where we talk about substantial or
significant improvements to water quality. There should be an
upward trend, anyway, there should be an improvement. And that
is what this is all about.
Mr. Tipton. Great. Thank you so much. And I didn't mean to
imply that you were eating the fish.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tipton. So, Mr. Stefanko, I thought it was pretty
curious, listening to you, and I appreciate your comments. In
your testimony, you said 90 percent--where you achieved that
cleanup to where it should be, we should be able to go forward.
Do you have anything to be able to add to some of these
treatment systems, those points of discharge, how that is going
to be a positive for us with the passive systems?
Mr. Stefanko. I am not sure I actually understand what you
are asking.
Mr. Tipton. Well, do you have anything to be able to add on
the treatment systems as a point of discharge, in terms of some
of the comments that we----
Mr. Stefanko. Basically, when I said about achieving 90
percent, one of the things--and I think the Chairman might have
mentioned this--is the technology has advanced, and we have
seen it evolve even in the many years since I started in the
Abandoned Mine Land Program.
If we can go out there with a current technology and we can
get to 85, 90 percent, maybe next year something else is going
to come along that will get us to the other 10 percent.
It has been an ongoing thing in Pennsylvania, as well as
all of our sister states, that as technology improves, we are
finding better and better ways to treat the acid mine drainage,
and doing it in a more cost-efficient manner. And being that we
have such a large problem, we need to continue to do that.
So, if we can get to a point now, and knowing that maybe
next year something else will come along better that we could
either add to that system or replace that system in the future
to get us to the end point, that is where we would like to go.
Mr. Tipton. Great. Thank you. And I am just about out of
time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. But I have a question
here. How big was that fish?
Mr. Westerman. That brown trout?
Dr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. Westerman. It was, what, 40 pounds or something?
Mr. Wood. I want to----
Mr. Westerman. Massive, yes.
Mr. Wood. I think it was 40-ish. But, you know, we are
anglers, so it could be a couple pounds on either side.
Mr. Westerman. Was it that big?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wood. Oh, no, it was as big as the child that caught
it.
Dr. Gosar. I know, but typically, a fisherman always says,
``Hey, I caught the big one, let it go,'' and they are really
telling you that it is this size--a deception.
Mr. Westerman. We have this amazing tool called Google. I
will get back to you.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. OK. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While we are on it, I
will say that we live on Lake Oconee in Georgia. And just last
week while we were here, my wife sent me pictures of five fish
that she caught that day, one of which she cleaned, fried it
up, and ate it. And I would challenge anyone on the best
tasting fish. She knows how to do it extremely well.
But I do thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman.
And, as you are aware, I partnered with my good friend, Mr.
Lowenthal, on the Bureau of Land Management Foundation Act, and
that was a great step forward for the bipartisan goal of
protecting our environment through the cleanup of mines on BLM
lands. And I thank the gentleman for that.
And I think pretty much we all agree that we believe God
gave us this land that we live in, and we should work it to our
benefit. But at the same time, we have the enormous
responsibility to be good stewards and to be good caretakers of
the land that we love.
I just want to say thank you to my good friend, Mr. LaHood,
on his efforts on this bill that will help the process of
cleanup from a different angle.
And again, the Ranking Member, thank you for your
willingness to work on adjustments and clarifications on this,
so that we can work together in this regard.
I do want to go back on some of Mr. Tipton's comments,
particularly regarding the EPA. I understand that they have
attempted to solve some of the problems posed by the Clean
Water Act on the compliance side of things. In fact, there were
a couple of guidance memoranda explaining under what conditions
they would waive enforcement; and states also have engaged with
the EPA to address some of the compliance challenges and some
of the issues and guidelines, outlines, how they can improve
water quality.
So, kind of within all this context, Mr. Wood, let me ask
you. Although the EPA has put out this guidance, why haven't
the states--why hasn't this gone anywhere? Why isn't there any
compliance relief?
Mr. Wood. Are you speaking specifically about hardrock
mines, or coal mines?
Dr. Hice. Well, specifically with the acid mine drainage
abatement process, all that. It just seems to not be getting
the relief needed.
Mr. Wood. So, I want to commend the EPA, because we did
work well with them to come up with this so-called Good
Samaritan provision, which does relieve a lot of the liability
associated with cleaning up so-called dry sites for hardrock
mines that are regulated under CERCLA.
And those cleanups are relatively straightforward, too. I
mean it often involves simply digging a ditch, lining it,
bulldozing material--acid mine leaching material--into the
ditch, covering it with parent material, and then putting an
impermeable liner over it and digging a French drain. Again, it
is not complicated work.
And that is 80 percent of the problem with dry sites. Dry
sites represent 80 percent of the problem in the West. The
really tough problems, though, are associated with these
draining adits that implicate the Clean Water Act. And EPA has
tried to offer guidance on that front, as well. But at least my
organization did not find enough comfort in that, that the
liability really was significant enough that we would want to
engage.
Dr. Hice. Well, that is really what I am trying to get
toward.
So, can citizens still sue? I mean the Good Samaritan does
not cover everything.
Mr. Wood. Right, that is right. Citizens can still sue
under the Clean Water Act. Citizen suits are a part of that
law.
Dr. Hice. For projects that do not meet the standards of
the Clean Water Act.
Mr. Wood. Right, which is one reason why groups like mine
have not, to date, stepped up and taken advantage of that
guidance that EPA has put out there to try to make it easier to
do those cleanups.
Dr. Hice. So, we have this huge hurdle in the way--what is
it going to take to get over that?
Mr. Wood. Well, I think, as we are doing right now with
coal, some good-faith conversations to make very minor
adjustments to the laws that are really important, and that TU
really supports.
I mean, make no mistake about it. We are the most full-
throated advocate for the Clean Water Act there is. But just
some minor tweaks that make it easier to make improvements to
water quality that may not be perfect, I think, is what we are
looking for.
Dr. Hice. So, although there have been attempts to clarify
with the EPA, there is still work to do to provide legal cover.
Is that the bottom line?
Mr. Wood. Yes.
Dr. Hice. OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. I think the gentleman is looking for trust.
Trust is a series of promises kept. And I think we are sitting
on that application. That is why we want to see visual examples
of that, because that goes a long way.
So, I applaud the gentleman for his questions, I applaud
the gentleman for bringing the legislation forward, and the
cooperative spirit that we see today.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The members of the Committee may
have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we will
ask you to respond to these in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3(o), members of the Committee must
submit witness questions within 3 business days following the
hearing. And the hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business----
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Chairman?
Dr. Gosar. Yes?
Mr. Westerman. For the record, can I respond to your
question? The world record German Brown Trout----
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. I want to hear this.
Mr. Westerman. Was 40 pounds and 4 ounces, caught from the
Little Red River in Arkansas in 1992.
Dr. Gosar. Wow. That is a fish.
Well, having been up in Alaska, that is the only thing I
was going to comment on, is his consistency.
So, without further objection, the Subcommittee stands
adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:25 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
