- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING POLICY IMPACTS OF EXCESSIVE LITIGATION AGAINST THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING POLICY IMPACTS OF EXCESSIVE LITIGATION AGAINST THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, June 28, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-166 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Chairman Emeritus                  Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Jim Costa, CA
Vice Chairman                      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug Lamborn, CO                         CNMI
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Niki Tsongas, MA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Stevan Pearce, NM                      Vice Ranking Member
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Norma J. Torres, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Ruben Gallego, AZ
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Colleen Hanabusa, HI
Jeff Denham, CA                      Nanette Diaz Barragan, CA
Paul Cook, CA                        Darren Soto, FL
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Jimmy Panetta, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    A. Donald McEachin, VA
Jody B. Hice, GA                     Anthony G. Brown, MD
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS    Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Darin LaHood, IL
Daniel Webster, FL
Jack Bergman, MI
Liz Cheney, WY
Mike Johnson, LA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Greg Gianforte, MT

Todd Ungerecht, Acting Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
A. DONALD McEACHIN, VA, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Jared Huffman, CA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS    Darren Soto, FL
Mike Johnson, LA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Vice Chairman                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio
-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, June 28, 2017.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Johnson, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Barron, Mark S., Partner, BakerHostetler, Denver, Colorado...    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Questions submitted for the record.......................    19
Jorjani, Daniel, Principal Deputy Solicitor, Office of the
Solicitor, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Questions submitted for the record.......................     9
Lobdell, Caroline, Executive Director and Supervising
Attorney, Western Resources Legal Center, Portland, Oregon.    28
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Questions submitted for the record.......................    31
Schiffer, Lois, Former General Counsel, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Questions submitted for the record.......................    25

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Department of the Interior, Director Jonathan Jarvis, January
31, 2017 Memorandum to the Department of the Interior
Regional Director for the Pacific West Region..............    44
List of documents submitted for the record retained in the
Committee's official files.................................    52
Western Watersheds Project, Greta Anderson, Deputy Director,
July 3, 2017 Letter to the House Committee on Natural
Resources..................................................    52

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING POLICY IMPACTS OF EXCESSIVE LITIGATION
AGAINST THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

----------

Wednesday, June 28, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Mike Johnson
[Vice-Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Radewagen, Bergman, Johnson;
Huffman, Soto, Clay, and Grijalva.
Also present: Representatives McClintock, Pearce, Gosar;
and Barragan.
Mr. Johnson. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will come to order. Thank you all for being here
this morning.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
``Examining Policy Impacts of Excessive Litigation Against the
Department of the Interior.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f) any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman, the Ranking Minority
Member, the Vice-Chair, and the Vice-Ranking Member. Therefore,
I ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5:00 p.m.
Hearing no objections, so ordered.
Also, I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
California, Mr. McClintock; the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Pearce; the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar; the gentleman
from California, Mr. Costa; and the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Barragan, be allowed to sit with us today in the
Subcommittee, and participate in the hearing.
Hearing no objection, that is so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Mr. Johnson. Today we will explore how litigation against
the Department of the Interior impacts the Department's ability
to carry out its mission of managing our country's vast natural
resources and trust responsibilities. Legal actions shape
agency decision making and influence its policies.
While a case may involve only the Department and a
plaintiff, the parties to the suit are not the only ones bound
by the outcome. In reality, a legal sub-industry has thrived
from endless environmental litigation, while burdening the
livelihoods of countless citizens. The costs also include the
inhibition of multiple use and sustained yield, as well as
species recovery. Excessive litigation against the Department
drains our taxpayer dollars away from good stewardship of our
natural resources.
Our legal system is an important avenue for citizens
seeking redress of wrongs perpetrated by the Federal
Government. Litigation, like legislative and regulatory
processes, is intended to provide a crucial check against
agency over-reach.
However, special interests repeatedly exploit our legal
system to further their own agendas, and sidestep the
legislative and regulatory processes. Excessively litigious
organizations constantly abuse opportunities to impede agency
actions, simply because they generally oppose a particular land
use, species management, or trust activity.
Litigation begets litigation, and some of our current laws,
including the Equal Access to Justice Act, perpetuate the cycle
by allowing plaintiffs to collect attorney's fees above a
statutory cap for suing the Federal Government. Originally
intended to ease the burden on individuals and small businesses
that contest government actions, activist groups now leverage
the holes in this law as a weapon to paralyze agency actions,
finance endless lawsuits, and drain taxpayer dollars away from
important programs.
Today, we hope to identify some of the incentives that
facilitate repeat plaintiffs and obstructionist litigation. We
will also discuss potential solutions that may be available to
curb excessive lawsuits, and we are seeking some transparency
into the process.
Previous Subcommittee efforts to learn more about the
opaque litigation process and the true volume and nature of
litigation against the Interior have produced little useful
information. Publicly available resources, such as the
Interior's budget justifications and the Judgment Fund online
database, provide an incomplete picture.
We also hope to learn more about the nature of the
relationship and collaboration between the Department of
Justice and Interior's Office of the Solicitor in managing
litigation against the Department of the Interior.
For example, last December, the Subcommittee sent a letter
to then-Secretary Jewell requesting information about
settlement agreements with Native American tribes in excess of
$3.3 billion in the previous administration. The Subcommittee
is still waiting to receive a substantive response to some of
the requested information.
The Subcommittee eventually learned that the Solicitor's
Office does not keep centralized records regarding litigation
against the Department and resulting settlements. There are
also no Department-kept records of which statutes generate the
most litigation. The Justice Department also does not track the
quantity of suits filed against the Interior Department
compared to those against other departments in the Federal
Government.
In addition to leaving the public with little insight
regarding pending and finalized litigation that affects their
lives, the lack of reporting and recordkeeping deprives the
Congress and the agency of a chance to identify vulnerabilities
created by excessive legal action and challenges.
We look forward to learning more about the Department's
processes for dealing with litigation and any efforts it may
undertake to become more transparent and accountable in
tracking litigation in the future.
There is an expectation that the problem will worsen as
opponents of domestic energy resource development and multiple-
use principles utilize the court system as a weapon to advance
their agendas. In fact, in its most recent budget
justification, the Department's Office of the Solicitor
reported that it is bracing for an ``influx of litigation,''
including litigation on ``every major permitting decision
authorizing energy development on Federal land.''
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and we thank
them again, and in advance, for their testimony today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Mike Johnson, Vice Chairman,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
Today, we will explore how litigation against the Department of the
Interior impacts the Department's ability to carry out its mission of
managing our country's vast natural resources and trust
responsibilities. Legal actions shape agency decision making and
influence its priorities. While a case may involve only the Department
and a plaintiff, the parties to the suit are not the only ones bound by
the outcome. In reality, a legal sub-industry has thrived from endless
environmental litigation while burdening the livelihoods of countless
citizens. The costs also include the inhibition of multiple use and
sustained yield as well as species recovery. Excessive litigation
against the Department drains our taxpayer dollars away from good
stewardship of our natural resources.
Our legal system is an important avenue for citizens seeking
redress of wrongs perpetrated by the Federal Government. Litigation,
like legislative and regulatory processes, is intended to provide a
crucial check against agency over-reach. However, special interests
repeatedly exploit our legal system to further their own agendas and
sidestep the legislative and regulatory processes. Excessively
litigious organizations constantly abuse opportunities to impede agency
actions simply because they generally oppose a particular land use,
species management, or trust activity.
Litigation begets litigation and some of our current laws,
including the Equal Access to Justice Act, perpetuate the cycle by
allowing plaintiffs to collect attorney's fees above a statutory cap
for suing the Federal Government. Originally intended to ease the
burden on individuals and small businesses that contest government
actions, activist groups now leverage the holes in this law as a weapon
to paralyze agency actions, finance endless lawsuits, and drain
taxpayer dollars away from important programs.
Today, we hope to identify some of the incentives that facilitate
repeat plaintiffs and obstructionist litigation. We also will discuss
potential solutions that may be available to curb excessive lawsuits.
We are also seeking some transparency into the process.
Previous Subcommittee efforts to learn more about the opaque
litigation process and the true volume and nature of litigation against
Interior have produced little useful information. Publicly available
resources such as Interior's budget justifications and the Judgement
Fund online database provide an incomplete picture. We also hope to
learn more about the nature of the relationship and collaboration
between the Department of Justice and Interior's Office of the
Solicitor in managing litigation against the Department of the
Interior.
For example, last December, the Subcommittee sent a letter to then-
Secretary Jewell requesting information about settlement agreements
with Native American tribes in excess of $3.3 billion from the previous
administration. The Subcommittee is still waiting to receive a
substantive response to some of the requested information.
The Subcommittee eventually learned that the Solicitor's Office
does not keep centralized records regarding litigation against the
Department and resulting settlements. There are also no Department-kept
records of which statues generate the most litigation. The Justice
Department also does not track the quantity of suits filed against the
Interior Department compared to those against other departments in the
Federal Government.
In addition to leaving the public with little insight regarding
pending and finalized litigation that affects their lives, the lack of
reporting and recordkeeping deprives Congress and the agency of a
chance to identify vulnerabilities created by excessive legal action
and challenges. We look forward to learning more about the Department's
processes for dealing with litigation, and any efforts it may undertake
to become more transparent and accountable in tracking litigation in
the future.
There is an expectation that the problem will worsen as opponents
of domestic energy resource development and multiple use principles
utilize the court system as a weapon to advance their agendas. In fact,
in its most recent budget justification, the Department's Office of the
Solicitor reported that it is bracing for ``an influx of litigation,''
including ``litigation on every major permitting decision authorizing
energy development on Federal land.''
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and thank them for
their testimony.

______

Mr. Johnson. Since the Ranking Member of our Subcommittee,
Mr. McEachin, could not be here this morning, the Chairman now
recognizes the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Grijalva, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to welcome all the witnesses, with a special welcome to
Lois Schiffer, who is taking time away from a well-deserved
retirement to testify on very, very short notice. I appreciate
that very much. Lois' experience and perspective will be
critical to this hearing.
The premise of this hearing is false. Judges are already
empowered to deal with litigation that is without merit or
frivolous, including the authority to punish attorneys for
pursuing abusive litigation. The number of cases where courts
use that authority is small, and it happens no more often with
environmental litigation than with any other kinds of cases.
So, why does the Interior Department get sued? Because it
fails to live up to the standards set by this Congress for
managing our natural, cultural, and historical resources.
Who sues the Interior Department? Non-profit organizations
seeking to uphold the standards we set, average citizens who
want their government to be more accountable, and industry,
when they think they are getting a raw deal.
Why does the Interior Department lose when they get sued?
Often, it is because this Congress has failed to give agencies
the people and the money they need to meet the demands that are
placed on them.
House Republicans set out to cripple these agencies, to
prevent NEPA, ESA, or the Clean Water Act from being enforced,
and then hold hearings bemoaning the fact that there is so much
litigation and the process is too slow. Too often, it seems
like my Republican colleagues are starting the fire one day,
and then they are firefighters the next.
The ability to sue the government and win leads to better
policy outcomes, more faith in government, more stable and
predictable regulations over time, and can save enormous
amounts of money compared to big government schemes that are
put in place and never challenged, no matter how ill-conceived
or unfair they turn out to be.
This litigation is not excessive, and the doors to the
courthouse do not need to be slammed shut in the name of
efficiency.
My Republican colleagues need to make up their minds. Are
judges power-mad, judicial activists, or are they just
defenseless victims being abused by environmental lawyers? The
truth is, they are neither.
You will hear no evidence today that environmental
plaintiffs are subject to more fines or punishments than any
other kind of plaintiffs. This is not a real problem. The irony
is, courts have strict standards requiring honesty and evidence
in pleadings and rulings, and there are standards that most
hearings in Congress, including this one, could never meet.
If House Republicans think we should no longer enforce the
Endangered Species Act or NEPA, they should have the courage to
go before the voters with plans to repeal these laws. What they
should not do is attack citizens and businesses who seek help
from the courts to enforce those laws as a back-door way to
undermine statutes they don't like. This is exactly the kind of
misleading and unfair tactic a responsible judge would throw
out of court.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to welcome all of our witnesses, with a special welcome to
Lois Schiffer, who is taking time away from her well-deserved
retirement to testify on very short notice. Lois' experience and
perspective will be critical to this hearing.
The premise of this hearing is false.
Judges are already empowered to deal with litigation that is
without merit or frivolous, including the authority to punish attorneys
for pursuing abusive litigation. The number of cases where courts use
that authority is small, and it happens no more often with
environmental litigation than in other kinds of cases.
My Republican colleagues need to make up their minds: are judges
power-mad, judicial activists, or are they defenseless victims being
abused by environmental lawyers? The truth is, they are neither.
You will hear no evidence today that environmental plaintiffs are
subject to more fines or punishments than any other kinds of
plaintiffs.
This is not a real problem.
The irony is, courts have strict standards requiring honesty and
evidence in pleadings and rulings, and those are standards that most
hearings in this Congress, including this one, could never meet.
Why does the Interior Department get sued?
Because it fails to live up to the standards set by this Congress
for managing our natural, cultural, and historic resources.
Who sues the Interior Department?
Non-profit organizations seeking to uphold the standards we set,
average citizens who want their government to be more accountable, and
industry when they think they are getting a raw deal.
Why does the Interior Department lose when they get sued?
Often, it's because this Congress has failed to give agencies the
people and money they need to meet the demands we have placed on them.
House Republicans set out to cripple these agencies, to prevent
NEPA, or ESA, or the Clean Water Act from being enforced, and then hold
hearings bemoaning the fact that there is so much litigation.
Too often, is seems like my Republican colleagues are arsonists one
day, and firefighters the next.
The ability to sue the government and win leads to better policy
outcomes, more faith in government, more stable and predictable
regulations over time, and can save enormous amounts of money compared
to big government schemes that are put in place and never challenged,
no matter how ill-conceived or unfair they turn out to be.
This litigation is not ``excessive'' and the doors to the
courthouse don't need to be slammed shut in the name of ``efficiency.''
If House Republicans think we should no longer enforce the
Endangered Species Act or NEPA, they should have the courage to go
before the voters with plans to repeal those laws.
What they should NOT do is attack the citizens and businesses who
seek help from the courts to enforce those laws as a back-door way to
undermine statutes they don't like. That is exactly the kind of
misleading and unfair tactic a responsible judge would throw out of
court.
I yield back.

______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I will now introduce today's
witnesses.
Mr. Daniel Jorjani is the Principal Deputy Solicitor within
the Office of the Solicitor at the Department of the Interior.
Mr. Mark Barron is a partner at BakerHostetler in Denver,
Colorado, and is also a former trial attorney at the Department
of Justice's Environment and Natural Resources Division.
Ms. Lois Schiffer is the former General Counsel of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, as well as
former Assistant Attorney General for the Department of
Justice's Environment and Natural Resources Division.
Ms. Caroline Lobdell is the Executive Director and
Supervising Attorney at the Western Resources Legal Center in
Portland, Oregon, in addition to being a faculty member at
Lewis and Clark Law School.
Thank you all again for being here.
Let me remind the witnesses that under the Committee Rules,
oral statements must be limited to 5 minutes, but your entire
written statement will appear in the hearing record.
In regards to testimony and questions, our microphones are
not automatic, so you need to press the talk button in front of
you before speaking into the microphone. When you begin, the
lights on the witness table will turn green. When you have 1
minute remaining, the yellow light will come on. Your time will
have expired when the red light comes on, and I may ask you to
please conclude your statement.
I will also allow the entire panel to testify before we
begin questioning the witnesses.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Jorjani for his testimony
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL JORJANI, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY SOLICITOR, OFFICE
OF THE SOLICITOR, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON,
DC

Mr. Jorjani. Vice-Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Grijalva, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the impacts
of excessive litigation against the U.S. Department of the
Interior.
My name is Daniel Jorjani. I serve as both the Principal
Deputy Solicitor and Acting Solicitor at DOI, where I have the
privilege of leading the Nation's premier team of natural
resource lawyers. I am also proud to be part of the Department-
wide team led by Secretary of the Interior, Ryan Zinke.
DOI plays an important role in advancing President Trump's
domestic policy vision for our Nation, including advancing the
American First energy policy, reducing regulatory burdens, and
rebuilding our Nation's infrastructure, while at the same time
protecting the environment.
Interior oversees the responsible, onshore and offshore
development of 20 percent of U.S. energy supplies, stewards 20
percent of the Nation's land, including national parks and
wildlife refuges, and serves as the largest water provider in
the 17 western states.
Interior also works with federally recognized tribes,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, and insular communities, such
as American Samoa, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the
Northern Marianas.
As would be expected for an agency with such a diverse
mission, the legal work carried out in the Solicitor's Office
is equally diverse, providing legal advice to client bureaus,
including on both judicial and administrative matters.
While the mission of the Department is great, and while our
lawyers always seek to conduct themselves with humility,
integrity, and professionalism, our work is often
controversial, and we are frequently sued in Federal court.
DOJ handles litigation in which DOI is a party. DOI,
therefore, does not have the legal authority to litigate or
settle cases on our own. We work very, very closely with DOJ to
defend the lawful actions of DOI, and follow long-standing DOJ
policies that restrict settlements from converting
discretionary authorities into mandatory duties.
Any proposal to settle litigation receives a careful legal
assessment by DOI counsel, is reviewed, and if appropriate,
approved at DOJ in accordance with DOJ protocols and policies.
In doing so, we work with DOJ to prepare legal defenses of
agency action, support litigation through discovery or the
preparation of administrative records, and assess litigation
risk and the effect of continued litigation on the operations
of the Department.
As employees of the Federal Government, attorneys in the
Solicitor's Office have a professional responsibility to serve
the Secretary of the Interior and the officials to whom he has
delegated his authority. Attorneys are also bound by the rules
of professional conduct. This means we must represent our
clients, rather than external interests.
Many settlements, such as those resolving class actions or
requiring consent decrees, are also reviewed and approved by
the presiding judges in the matter. These reviews by the
Federal judiciary ensure that the settlements are consistent
with the law, and are in the public interest.
When appropriately utilized, settlements can create value
by allowing for amicable resolution of disputes on terms
acceptable to all stakeholders, eliminating the risk of adverse
decisions that could impact future agency operations, saving
taxpayer dollars by reducing the amount paid in litigation, and
including terms to minimize, effectively and efficiently, the
risk of future litigation.
While the system is certainly not perfect, under our watch,
there will be no collusive settlements.
Ultimately, the Department has a duty to uphold the highest
standards on behalf of the taxpayers we serve. Moving forward,
Secretary Zinke signed Secretary's Order 3349, which revoked
the compensatory mitigation policies of the previous
administration, and directed a robust and thorough review, so
that we can shift to a more accountable process. This is just
one example of the work we are doing, but we appreciate the
opportunity to work with you and the members of this Committee
to create value on this important issue.
I look forward to answering any questions that you might
have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jorjani follows:]
Prepared Statement of Daniel Jorjani, Principal Deputy Solicitor,
Department of the Interior
Chairman Labrador, Ranking Member McEachin, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the impacts of excessive litigation against the Department
of the Interior. My name is Dan Jorjani and I was recently appointed to
be the Principal Deputy Solicitor at the Department.
The Office of the Solicitor is responsible for providing legal
services for all programs, operations, and activities of the
Department. As the Principal Deputy Solicitor, I oversee the work of
the attorneys in the Solicitor's Office, who provide advice, counsel,
and legal representation to the Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries,
and the bureaus and offices overseen by the Secretary. As would be
expected by such a large agency with diverse missions, the legal work
carried out in the Solicitor's Office is equally as diverse, including
both judicial and administrative matters.
While the mission of the Department is great, our work is also
often controversial and we are often sued in Federal court. The
Department of Justice handles litigation in which the Department of the
Interior is a party. The Department of the Interior's policy decision
makers and lawyers therefore do not have the legal authority to
litigate or settle cases on our own.
However, the Solicitor's Office performs an important service to
the Department in providing legal advice to client bureaus and,
ultimately, the Department of Justice on whether to litigate or settle
cases. In doing so, Solicitor's Office attorneys work with Department
of Justice attorneys to prepare legal defenses of agency action,
support litigation through discovery or the preparation of
administrative records, assess litigation risk and the effect of
continued litigation on the operations of the Department, and work with
the affected client bureaus and Department officials to determine
whether settlement is in the best interests of the agency and the
United States.
As employees of the Federal Government, attorneys in the
Solicitor's Office have a professional responsibility to serve the
Secretary of the Interior and the officials to whom he has delegated
his authority. Attorneys are also bound to the rules of professional
conduct, which means we must represent our clients rather than external
interests.
Any proposal to settle litigation receives a careful legal
assessment by agency counsel and is assessed and, if appropriate,
approved by attorneys and officials at the Department of Justice, in
accordance with its regulations and policies.
Many settlements, such as those resolving class actions or
requiring consent decrees, are also reviewed and approved by the
presiding judges in the matter. These reviews by the Federal judiciary
ensure that the settlements are consistent with the law and are in the
public interest. Courts can and have refused to approve consent decrees
or other settlements that are not consistent with the law.
When appropriately utilized, settlements can be useful and
beneficial: they can allow for amicable resolution of disputes on terms
acceptable to all stakeholders; save taxpayer dollars by reducing the
amount paid in litigation and associated attorneys' fees; eliminate the
risk of adverse decisions that could impact future agency operations;
include terms to minimize the risk of future litigation; and conserve
judicial, agency, and private party resources.
However, the system certainly is not perfect.
Ultimately, the Department and the rest of the Federal Government
has a duty to uphold the highest standards on behalf of the taxpayers
we serve. For example, Secretary Zinke signed S.O. 3349 which revoked
the compensatory mitigation policies of the previous administration and
directed a thorough review so we can shift to a more fair and
accessible process. This is just one example of the work we are doing,
but we appreciate the opportunity to work with you and the members of
this Committee to increase transparency and accountability at all
levels.

I look forward to answering any questions you might have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. McEachin to Daniel Jorjani,
Principal Deputy Solicitor, Office of the Solicitor, U.S. Department of
the Interior

Question 1. Deeply troubling cases of sexual harassment at the Park
Service have come to light in recent years. The previous administration
at the Department of the Interior left a transition briefing book which
revealed that the high profile sexual harassment cases at the Park
Service have spurred about 120 new sexual harassment and related
reprisal allegations at the Department of the Interior that need to be
resolved. The brief went on to say ``Because the Employment and Labor
Law Unit's existing resources were inadequate to manage and litigate
these cases, as well as to undertake efforts necessary to ensure such
cases do not recur in the future, the Division of General Law requested
client funding to hire six new experienced employment and labor law
attorneys . . .'' These attorneys don't just litigate cases; they also
provide guidance to supervisors who have to investigate allegations
themselves. When I checked 3 weeks ago to see whether the attorneys
were hired, I learned that all six had not been hired; Secretary
Zinke's hiring freeze prevented the rest from moving forward.

a.   Have you been briefed on the sexual harassment issue at NPS as
well as the rest of the Department? When were you briefed?
Who briefed you?

b.   Have you read the brief from the previous administration?

c.   Have you taken any action(s) recommended in the brief? If yes,
what actions have you taken?

d.   At the time of the writing of the briefing transition book,
there was a backlog of approximately 120 potential sexual
harassment cases that awaited action from the Department of
the Solicitor's Office. What is the size of that backlog
now? When you expect the backlog to be eliminated?

e.   Of the six attorneys, how many have you hired? Of those, please
list their first day of work.

f.   Have you requested of the Secretary that he hire some or all of
these attorneys? What response did you get and from whom?

g.   Have you discussed with your staff the need to fill these
positions?

h.   Have you proposed making an exception to the hiring freeze to
fill the six attorney positions that were recommended in
the brief?

i.   Has Secretary Zinke instructed you to treat sexual harassment as
a high priority in the Office of the Solicitor? If so,
when?

j.   If the Office of the Solicitor does not hire all six attorneys,
what is the plan for addressing the backlog of potential
sexual harassment cases?

Answer. Secretary Zinke said at his confirmation hearing that he
takes issues of sexual assault and harassment seriously and that there
will be zero tolerance for it at the Department under his leadership.
The entire transition team was briefed on these allegations, and we
continue to monitor the progress of the National Park Service's
implementation of a variety of initiatives to address these issues. To
date, the NPS has:

Hired a Sexual Harassment Prevention and Response
Coordinator to help develop and coordinate a strategic
response and began tracking statistics related to employee
misconduct;

Realigned the NPS Equal Employment Opportunity Office to
report to the Director of the NPS;

Implemented online sexual harassment awareness training
for employees and issued a Harassment Prevalence Survey, in
which almost 50 percent of employees responded. That survey
will be given to the seasonal workforce this summer. The
survey results will provide information about the extent
and nature of the problem and will inform design of
additional anti-harassment initiatives.

Trained 24 employees to instruct Civil Treatment for
Leaders , which seeks to prevent harassment and improve
civility in the NPS. All supervisory employees are required
to take the 4-hour in-person training in 2017 and 2018.

Established the NPS Ombuds program, which explores the
confidential resolution of workforce problems. The Ombuds
will visit 24 parks, park clusters, or regional offices to
gather input and feedback by the end of 2017.

In addition, a culture change team with representatives from the
Equal Employment Opportunity Program, the NPS Office of Relevancy,
Diversity and Inclusion, and field representatives are assessing
structural issues related to information sharing, communication, trust,
employee support resources and training, and policies and procedures
for reporting, tracking, investigating and disciplining harassment are
being revised to ensure transparency and accountability. In the
Solicitor's Office, the Employment Law and Litigation Group has in the
past 6 months increased its staffing and we continue to closely monitor
the Group's caseload to ensure that the Department's legal needs are
met and that managers have the tools and support they need to create a
positive work environment free from discrimination and harassment.

______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Jorjani.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Barron for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARK S. BARRON, PARTNER, BAKERHOSTETLER, DENVER,
COLORADO

Mr. Barron. Good morning. I would like to thank the Vice
Chair, the Ranking Member, and the Committee for the
opportunity to testify this morning. My name is Mark Barron. I
am a partner in the BakerHostetler law firm in Denver,
Colorado. Today, I speak on my own behalf.
I would like to preface my statement with a few
clarifications regarding my testimony.
First, it is not my opinion that excessive litigation is
the sole reason that the Department of the Interior is
frequently unable to execute its mission consistent with the
statutory parameters that define the agency's obligations.
Interior is the custodian of much of our Nation's natural
resources wealth, particularly the Federal mineral estate and
many of our most treasured landscapes.
Earlier in my career, I had the opportunity to serve in the
Environment and Natural Resources Division at the Department of
Justice. During that time, I represented many of the agencies
whose work is implicated in this hearing today, including BLM,
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the National Park Service, the
Forest Service, the Corps of Engineers, the Mineral Management
Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation. These agencies are
staffed by hard-working and well-meaning public servants. Their
job is difficult and complex, and the resources with which they
are asked to perform their tasks are almost always scarce.
Nor am I suggesting that litigation challenges to
government conduct are improper, per se. The fact that citizens
have the ability to hold the government accountable when it
acts in error is one of the hallmarks of our democracy.
But with this as background, my experience and the
experience of our clients suggest that certain parties have
abused aspects of the current system to exacerbate the
challenges that the agencies face under the best of
circumstances. The result is policy being driven by
ideologically motivated litigants who choose cases not based on
legal merits, but on what makes the biggest political splash.
In my personal practice, I am more often than not working
with independent energy companies seeking to develop energy
projects on Federal lands. When counseling these companies, the
likelihood, if not certainty, of litigation features
prominently in project planning and the advice that we provide.
In my written testimony, I detailed the cycle of an oil and
gas project and some of the deadlines that apply to those
projects. Under the Mineral Leasing Act, the Department of the
Interior is mandated to offer leases quarterly in all states in
which eligible parcels are available for leasing. That deadline
is almost never met. Over the last several years, most of the
large public land states have offered leasing, at most, two to
three times per year.
In a lawsuit pending currently in the District of New
Mexico, environmental groups who are attempting to intervene in
that lawsuit have acknowledged that those lease sales have been
canceled, based on administrative protests that environmental
groups have filed.
When lease sales are conducted, the Mineral Leasing Act
requires that leases are issued to the successful bidders
within 60 days from payment for the bonus bids. Again, a
Federal judge in the District of Wyoming has found that that
obligation is mandated by statute. That is another deadline
that is almost never met.
Once leases are issued, the Mineral Leasing Act requires
that within 10 days of an application for a permit to drill,
the Interior Department--or BLM, specifically--identify to the
operator whether or not the application is complete. And if it
is not complete, what is missing.
Once an application is complete, BLM has 30 days under
statute to either issue the permit or explain why the permit is
not being issued, and provide estimates of the amount of time
it will require to process the permit. Again, this deadline is
virtually never met in the field.
Our clients report that oftentimes, when they interact with
field offices and ask why these deadlines are not met, it is
reported to them that it is because field office personnel is
being used to respond to and support efforts to defend
lawsuits.
I want to talk briefly before my time runs out on the
parties that are involved in these lawsuits. The public
perception is that these cases are driven by big oil and big
energy. The reality is drastically different.
Most of American energy production is driven by small,
independent, family-owned companies. The median size of a
member of the Independent Petroleum Association of America is
12 people--a 12-member company. These people compete in court
against, essentially, law firms and lobbying groups who use
litigation to raise money, and then rely on the fee transfer
provisions in the statutes to fund their next litigation.
Recently, in the press, these organizations have
acknowledged that their current initiatives are politically
driven. The result is, beyond delays, land management policy
being crafted not by this body or even the agencies themselves,
but by Federal judges.
I thank the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barron follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark S. Barron, Partner, BakerHostetler Law Firm,
Denver, Colorado
Mark S. Barron is a partner in the national energy practice group
of the BakerHostetler law firm. Mr. Barron's practice is focused on
natural resources litigation and environmental law, with special
emphasis on the administration of Federal public lands (including
tribal lands) and energy production. The majority of Mr. Barron's work
is comprised of litigation and regulatory matters, with a smaller
percentage involving corporate transactions between energy companies.

Mr. Barron's work touches on most aspects of environmental and
natural resources law--particularly as that law is applied to
commercial activity on public lands. Mr. Barron is a leading national
practitioner with extensive experience related to onshore and offshore
oil and gas operations and regulation, including matters involving
leasing and permitting delays and suspensions. He is counsel to both
individual companies and national trade associations on issues
concerning the regulation of hydraulic fracturing, the administration
of the Federal oil and gas leasing program, Federal royalty calculation
and reporting, and the environmental impact of energy projects.

Before entering private practice, Mr. Barron served as a trial
attorney for the U.S. Department of Justice in the Environment &
Natural Resources Division. As a member of the Natural Resources
Section, Mark's practice focused on environmental takings claims,
administrative challenges to mineral and resource development on
Federal public lands, and Federal management of natural resources on
tribal lands. In that capacity, Mr. Barron represented numerous
components of the Department of the Interior as well as other Federal
land management agencies in Federal litigation. Mr. Barron has
represented, among other agencies: the Bureau of Land Management, the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Fish & Wildlife Service, the National
Park Service, the U.S. Forest Service, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the Minerals Management Service, the Bureau of Reclamation,
and the Surface Transportation Board.

Mr. Barron is a graduate of Cornell University and a magna cum
laude graduate of the University of New Mexico School of Law where he
earned membership to the Order of the Coif and served on the New Mexico
Law Review. A prolific author and speaker on topics affecting energy
producers, Mr. Barron has been featured or quoted in dozens of industry
and mainstream media outlets on topics related to energy policy,
hydraulic fracturing, and commercial development on public lands. In
2016, Law360 selected Mr. Barron as a national ``Energy MVP.'' In 2015,
Law360 named Mr. Barron one of five national ``Rising Stars'' in
Energy--a designation given to the best attorneys in America under 40
years of age.

i. introduction

The Department of the Interior serves a critical function as the
custodian of much of the Nation's natural resources wealth. In this
role, the Department's agencies are required to perform daily a myriad
of tasks to ensure the prudent and efficient development of resources
in a manner that optimizes public benefits, promotes national security,
and protects treasured landscapes. Under the best circumstances,
meeting each of these objectives is a complex and onerous task. And
Interior rarely, if ever, works under ``the best circumstances.'' Too
often, special interest groups intent on preventing Interior from
accomplishing its statutorily imposed mission are able to delay,
compromise, or defeat the Department's ability to complete essential
functions through the use (and abuse) of administrative and judicial
litigation tactics.

The best example of how Interior's agencies struggle to accomplish
their mission is the administration of the Federal oil and gas leasing
program. Since the turn of the new century, technical advancements that
allow producers to identify promising sources of oil and gas and to
extract hydrocarbons from previously inaccessible geologic formations,
combined with the entrepreneurial ingenuity of American industry, have
resulted in American energy companies reaching production levels once
thought impossible. The accessibility of abundant oil and gas resources
has transformed conventional understandings of the energy landscape,
leading some to predict millions of new jobs and the
reindustrialization of America as well as imminent American energy
independence. But while domestic production has grown in recent years,
the percentage of that production that is extracted from Federal lands
has declined in the same period.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Congressional Research Serv., U.S. Crude Oil & Natural Gas
Prod. in Fed. & Nonfed. Areas, Figs. 1-2, at 3, 5 (June 22, 2016).

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe reasons for this divergence are not open to reasonable
dispute. Under President Obama, executive agencies undertook an
unprecedented campaign to expand the regulatory burdens imposed on oil
and gas producers operating on Federal lands. These regulatory
initiatives touched every component of oil and gas development,
impacting, among other aspects: (i) the manner in which operators
construct and complete wells; (ii) the requirements for maintenance and
repair of wells; (iii) the methods by which produced oil and gas is
transported to market; (iv) the value of production for royalty
reporting; and (v) the contractual terms of Federal leases. These
regulatory requirements--along with logistical efficiencies inherent in
the Federal Government's management of the Nation's public lands--
represent an enormous incentive for operators to focus their efforts on
state and private lands.
There are signs that the current Administration intends to
alleviate some of the more egregious administrative obstacles that
domestic energy producers face. Both the President and the Secretary of
the Interior have recently directed executive agencies to evaluate
whether existing rules and policies impose unreasonable burdens on the
production of Federal minerals. On March 28, 2017, President Trump
signed an Executive Order directing all Federal agencies to enact
policies ``to promote clean and safe development of our Nation's vast
energy resources'' and to avoid ``burdens that unnecessarily encumber
energy production, constrain economic growth, and prevent job
creation.'' \2\ On the next day, March 29, 2017, Secretary Zinke issued
Secretary's Order No. 3349. Order No. 3349 states that the Department
of the Interior's objective ``is to identify agency actions that
unnecessarily burden the development or utilization of the Nation's
energy resources and support action to appropriately and lawfully
suspend, revise, or rescind such agency actions as soon as
practicable.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Exec. Order 13,783, Promoting Energy Independence & Econ.
Growth (Mar. 28, 2017).

But whereas the need to curtail excessive regulation has received
attention from industry groups, media, and political figures, there is
a second, less discussed complication for operators who wish to produce
Federal minerals--the prolific amount of litigation that special
interest groups initiate to slow or prevent development of Federal
minerals. While the prospect of litigation is a burden often attendant
to oil and gas development, that prospect has become a virtual
certainty when working on Federal lands. And because the United States
wears several hats in oil and gas exploration and development--
administrator, regulator, and market participant--there are numerous
possible situations in which operators may find their projects enmeshed
in challenges to how the United States has exercised its
responsibilities and balanced its various roles.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Sometimes, of course, it is the operator itself that is
compelled to sue to enforce its rights under the public land laws. But
more often than not, it is third parties that attempt to use the courts
to block or delay land use decisions of which they disapprove.

Nor do these challenges represent ordinary lawsuits. Once a dispute
arises and a legal challenge is filed, the burden litigation imposes on
an operator is often more onerous when the United States is involved.
First, a lack of understanding regarding how the Federal Government and
its agencies are organized can make developing a legal strategy more
difficult than it might otherwise be in a case involving only private
litigants. Second, the effectively unlimited extent of the legal
resources that both the Federal Government and special interest groups
can wield makes prosecuting or defending a public lands case time
consuming and prohibitively expensive. Third, jurisdictional
limitations applicable to suits involving the government may confine
litigation to specialty courts or administrative settings that require
proceedings be conducted in locations far from the community in which
the dispute is actually taking place and that apply unfamiliar and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
idiosyncratic rules.

ii. the litigation burden

Given the attendant challenges, it is natural to question why an
operator would ever choose to develop minerals on Federal lands. The
reality is that, for most operators, the sheer scope of the
government's landholdings make at least some involvement on Federal
lands unavoidable. The Federal Government controls approximately one-
third of the Nation's surface area--nearly 650 million acres--and over
700 million acres of Federal mineral estate.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6166.003

.epsParticularly for those operators who explore for and develop
oil and gas in the western United States, avoiding Federal lands is
essentially impossible. With the exception of fields in Texas, Federal
lands dominate virtually all of the important fields being actively
developed today west of the Mississippi River. Examples include, but
are not limited to: the Permian and San Juan Basins in New Mexico; the
Piceance Basin in Colorado; the Uinta Basin in Utah; the Green River,
Wind River, and Powder River Basins in Wyoming; and to a lesser extent,
the Bakken Shale in North Dakota.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The Federal Government controls more than 54 percent of the
land in the 11 contiguous states west of the 100th Meridian: Arizona,
48.06 percent; California, 45.3 percent; Colorado, 36.63 percent;
Idaho, 50.19 percent; Montana, 29.92 percent; Nevada, 84.48 percent;
New Mexico, 41.77 percent; Oregon, 53.11 percent; Utah, 57.45 percent;
Washington, 30.33 percent; and Wyoming, 42.33 percent. See U.S. Gen.
Serv. Admin., Fed. Real Prop. Profile at 18 & Table 16 (Sept. 30,
2004). The Federal Government also controls more than 69 percent of the
surface acreage in Alaska. See id.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6166.004

.epsExacerbating the challenges that operating on Federal lands
present, special interest groups have not confined litigation
challenges to those projects that fall within the boundaries of Federal
lands. Several environmental statutes have provisions that apply--and
can therefore be theoretically enforced--beyond the Federal property
line. Special interest groups frequently attempt to manipulate the
provisions of the Endangered Species Act, the Clean Water Act, the
Clean Air Act, and the National Historic Preservation Act, among
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
others, to disrupt development on and off Federal lands.

And even where statutes don't reach beyond Federal boundaries
expressly, a recent trend has been for special interest groups to bring
challenges to projects based on allegations that, while not located on
Federal property, the projects have the potential to affect
environmental or cultural values on Federal property. Such is the case
with the ongoing challenge to development in northwestern New Mexico,
where special interest groups have requested a moratorium on drilling
permits in an area well beyond the boundaries of Chaco Canyon National
Park. Challenges to pipeline and infrastructure projects across the
country are likewise based on a similar theory that, while the pipeline
may not traverse Federal property, the project may have collateral
consequences for Federal or tribal assets. This incorporation of
artificial boundaries and reliance on a liberal interpretation of
``impacts'' allows special interest groups to justify challenges to
projects anywhere in the country, notwithstanding that many of the
challenges are premised on questionable legal arguments.
A. Interior Routinely Fails to Meet Statutorily Imposed Deadlines
The Property Clause of the United States Constitution affords
Congress ``Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and
Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the
United States.'' \5\ It is undisputed that the Property Clause grants
Congress broad, if not plenary, authority to regulate the manner in
which Federal property is managed and developed. Like all executive
branch components, Interior and its agencies possesses only the power
that Congress has delegated and must fulfill their land management
duties in the manner Congress has prescribed. Yet Interior routinely
fails to meet some of its most essential statutorily imposed
obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Const. art. IV, Sec. 3, cl. 2.

The first step in the development of onshore Federal oil and gas
resources is land use planning. During this phase, BLM prepares
resource management plans to determine which lands should be open to
oil and gas leasing and to prescribe necessary lease stipulations to
protect various resources in the event of future leasing. Once land use
planning is completed, parcels in areas identified as open for oil and
gas leasing in a resource management plan may be nominated for leasing.
Anyone can nominate lands by sending a written expression of interest
to the BLM State Office with jurisdiction over the parcel.\6\ BLM
reviews each nomination to ensure that the parcels are, in fact,
available under the resource management plan and that ``environmental
concerns'' are addressed before a nominated parcel is offered for
sale.\7\ Dozens, if not hundreds, of nominations are pending at any
given time in each BLM State Office.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Bureau of Land Mgmt., Guidelines for Submitting an
Expression of Interest (EOI)     (``EOI Guidelines''):   https: / /
www.blm.gov / nm / st / en / prog / energy / oil_and_gas/
guidelines_for_ submitting.html.
\7\ See id.

The Mineral Leasing Act imposes a discrete, ministerial obligation
with which the Secretary ``shall'' abide: ``Lease sales shall be held
for each state where eligible lands are available at least quarterly
and more frequently if the Secretary of the Interior determines such
sales are necessary.'' \8\ Consistent with that obligation, BLM's
regulations require that ``each proper BLM Sate [sic] office shall hold
sales at least quarterly if lands are available for competitive
leasing.'' \9\ BLM's regulations also articulate specific categories of
``Lands available for competitive leasing.'' \10\ These categories
include, but are not limited to, ``Lands included in any expression of
interest.'' \11\ The Mineral Leasing Act's implementing regulations
specify that ``all lands available for leasing shall be offered for
competitive leasing.'' \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 226(b)(1)(A).
\9\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 3120.1-2.
\10\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 3120.1-1.
\11\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 3120.1-1(e).
\12\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 3120.1-1.

BLM regularly fails to comply with the obligation to conduct
quarterly lease sales in each of the states where eligible lands are
available. Over the last 2 years, none of the major oil and gas
producing states have conducted quarterly lease sales in each state
under the Office's jurisdiction: the New Mexico State Office conducted
two sales in 2015 and two sales in 2016; the Montana/Dakotas State
Office allowed more than 6 months to pass in between sales of leases in
North Dakota and Montana; the Wyoming State Office conducted only three
lease sales in 2016; the Utah State Office conducted two sales in 2015
and two sales in 2016; and the Colorado State Office conducted three
sales in 2015 and two sales in 2016.\13\ Not surprising, many of the
cancellations and deferrals are in response to suits and legal
challenges that special interest groups brought in opposition to fossil
fuel leasing on Federal lands.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Bureau of Land Mgmt., Reg'l Oil & Gas Lease Sales: https:/
/www.blm.gov/programs/energy-and-minerals/oil-and-gas/leasing.
\14\ W. Energy Alliance v. Jewell, No. 1:16-CV-912-LF-KBM (D.N.M.),
Conservation Groups' Mot. to Intervene at 16 (Oct. 19, 2016)
(explaining that the New Mexico State Office canceled a January 2015
lease sale in response to an administrative appeal that special
interest groups filed).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Once a sale is conducted, a second set of deadlines is triggered.
The Mineral Leasing Act provides that ``[l]eases shall be issued within
60 days following payment by the successful bidder.'' \15\ Federal
courts have interpreted this provision to mean that ``energy companies
are entitled to a final decision on whether the lands are or are not to
be leased within 60 days of the dates the leases were paid for by the
top qualified competitive bidders under the Mineral Leasing Act.'' \16\
Like the leasing obligation, BLM routinely fails to meet this
obligation to timely issue leases that companies have won at auction
and paid for. In almost every circumstance, this failure is the result
of BLM's inability to resolve administrative protests that special
interest groups file in opposition to virtually every parcel that is
offered for lease.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 226(b)(1)(A).
\16\ W. Energy Alliance v. Salazar, No. 10-CV-0226, 2011 WL
3737520, at *7 (D. Wyo. 2011).
\17\ Id. at *2 (``Although BLM strives to review and resolve
protests in a timely manner, the number, timing and complexity of
protests typically cause BLM to fail to issue the protested leases
within the 60-day window specified in the MLA.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And even when leases are issued, BLM consistently fails to meet its
obligations to timely process operational permits. The Mineral Leasing
Act requires that, no later than 10 days after the date on which BLM
receives an APD, BLM shall: (i) notify the applicant that the
application is complete; or (ii) notify the applicant that information
is missing and specify any information that is required to be submitted
for the application to be complete.\18\ BLM almost never meets this
deadline and, indeed, rarely if ever prepares and transmits any formal
notice that an application is complete.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See 30 U.S.C. Sec. 226(p)(1)(A)-(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Then, not later than 30 days after the applicant for a permit has
submitted a complete application, BLM must issue the permit, if the
requirements under the National Environmental Policy Act and other
applicable law have been completed.\19\ As with the deadline to issue
leases, Federal courts have held that processing permits consistent
with this timeline is statutorily required.\20\ But again, BLM almost
never meets this controlling 30-day deadline. To the contrary, the
former BLM Director has testified that, even after improvements in
BLM's efficiency, the average processing time for a drilling permit on
Federal lands is approximately 200 days.\21\ Our clients report that
BLM field offices frequently identify obligations associated with
responding to lawsuits as a significant drain on agency resources that
prevents the field offices from processing permits more efficiently.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See 30 U.S.C. Sec. 226(p)(2)(A).
\20\ See EnerVest, Ltd. v. Jewell, No. 2:16-cv-01256-DN, 2016 WL
7496116 (D. Utah Dec. 30, 2016).
\21\ Breaking the Logjam at BLM: Hearing on S. 279 and S. 2440
Before the S. Comm. on Energy & Natural Resources, 113th Cong. 491 at
20 (July 29, 2014) (testimony of Neil Kornze) (explaining that since
2011, average processing times have ranged between 196 and 300 days).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Special Interest Groups' Litigation Advantage
Special interest groups have acknowledged expressly that litigation
is an essential tool in their politicized efforts to oppose the Trump
administration's economic and energy agenda. And it is no secret that
lawsuits are piling up. Dozens of suits have been filed challenging
numerous aspects of the President's Executive Orders, rulemaking
activities, project approvals, and other manifestations of executive
policy. Donations to special interest groups have grown exponentially
since the November 2016 Presidential election and numerous groups have
promised to fight each of the Trump administration's initiatives in the
courts.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Ben Wolfgang, Trump helps drive donations to environmental
groups, Wash. Times (Feb. 9, 2017) (``[V]irtually all prominent
environmental groups say donations are pouring in at unprecedented
rates.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These lawsuits divert already limited resources away from the core
functions of the agency. But they also have significant implications
for energy producers and the communities in which the producers
operate. Oil and gas producers are unable to rely on statutorily
prescribed timelines when planning projects and committing investment
capital. Projects instead are held in limbo for indeterminate amounts
of time until BLM can commit the necessary personnel and resources
required to perform essential functions. In the interim, energy
producers are forced to cut staff, prohibited from realizing returns on
investment, and have their ability to finance projects restricted.
And the impact of these delays extends well beyond individual
companies. Particularly for the western public lands states, the stakes
of Federal oil and gas activity are high. A state receives 50 percent
of all monies received in the form of sales, bonuses, and royalties
(including interest charges) derived from oil and gas production on
Federal lands within a state's borders.\23\ Litigation that frustrates
or delays development and incentivizes operators to move development
activity off of Federal lands and on to private lands actively harms
states and taxpayers.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 191(a).
\24\ The sums involved are significant. In Fiscal Year 2014, for
example, Federal oil and gas royalties totaled almost $3.1 billion. See
80 Fed. Reg. 22,148, 22,150 (Apr. 21, 2015). Of that amount, $112.6
million was distributed to Colorado; $16.2 million to Montana; $546.4
million to New Mexico; $191.5 million to Utah; and $542.7 to Wyoming.
See Center for Western Priorities, A Fair Share: The Case for Updating
Oil and Gas Royalty Rates on Our Public Lands at 5 (June 18, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impacts of litigation on private companies and local
communities is especially pronounced because the special interest
groups that frequently sue to block development projects have two
important inherent advantages. The first and most important advantage
is a virtually unlimited access to litigation funding. Contrary to
common perception, small family companies--not vertically integrated
international conglomerates--are responsible for the overwhelming
majority of domestic oil and gas production. Independent producers
develop 90 percent of the wells in the United States, producing 54
percent of the Nation's oil and 85 percent of the Nation's natural
gas.\25\ The median size of these companies is 12 people.\26\ These
small companies cannot realistically compete in high stakes litigation
with well-heeled advocacy groups that: (i) can tap into funding across
the entire country; (ii) use litigation itself as a fundraising tool;
(iii) do not depend on the ebbs and flows of global commodity prices;
and (iv) take advantage of fee shifting provisions in environmental
statutes that frequently result in taxpayers reimbursing the advocacy
groups for their legal fees.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See Indep. Petroleum Ass'n of Am., Who Are America's
Independent Producers?, available at: http://www.ipaa.org/independent-
producers/.
\26\ See id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The special interest groups' second advantage is that their
relationship with government agencies is much less transactional than
the relationship between energy producers and the regulators that
oversee operations. When taking a position in a suit concerning a
project on public lands, private companies must consider not only the
project that is the subject to the challenge, but the company's ongoing
working relationship with the agency that the company will undoubtedly
need to work with again on other projects in the future. Unlike special
interest groups that sue whenever dissatisfied with any agency
decision, operators frequently choose not to challenge adverse
decisions on individual permits and projects in the interest of
preserving the operator's overall working relationship with local
regulators.\27\ Large, national political advocacy organizations do not
have their strategic flexibility confined in this same way. Special
interest groups based in Washington, DC or San Francisco have much less
need to maintain a working relationship with local field offices in
Price, Utah or Carlsbad, New Mexico than do the small companies that
work daily with the agencies' field office personnel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ The need to protect a company's relationship with regulators
is why, when energy companies choose to initiate their own lawsuits,
they frequently prefer to litigate through trade associations. But
while the trade association vehicle may be useful, it still requires
consensus among members and deprives any individual company of total
control over litigation that may affect the company's operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. summation
History demonstrates that constant litigation is a significant
contributor to the Interior's consistent failure to meet statutorily
imposed obligations attendant to Interior's management of the public
lands. Now politically motivated special interest groups have stated
expressly that the groups intend to increase the amount of litigation
they initiate specifically to frustrate Interior's ability to execute
the new Administration's policy choices. Without structural changes,
this litigation will serve as an obstacle depriving private companies
and taxpayers of the important benefits of responsible commercial
development on our Nation's public lands.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mark Barron, Partner,
BakerHostetler Law Firm

Questions Submitted by Rep. Grijalva
Question 1. You testified about delay caused by litigation, but did
not propose another way to assure that the views of all interested
citizens are taken into account when the agency considers whether to
grant a permit or right-of-way. What alternative means to do you
propose for taking views of all stakeholders into account and assuring
that Federal agencies meet the important principles in all of our laws?

Answer. The question appears to be premised on a misrepresentation
of my testimony. In my opening statement, I emphasized that I do not
hold the opinion that excessive litigation is the exclusive reason that
Federal agencies are frequently unable to execute their mission
consistent with the statutory parameters that define the agencies'
obligation. Nor have I suggested that challenging government conduct
through litigation is per se improper.
What I have emphasized is that there is evidence that certain
special interest groups use litigation as a tool not to overturn
illegal agency action, but to advance preferred policies, regardless of
the merits of the groups' legal actions. The following example is
illustrative: a Westlaw search for all Federal court decisions in the
last 3 years in which the Center for Biological Diversity was a party
returns 117 results. By comparison, the same search for decisions in
which the Independent Petroleum Association of America was a party
return two results.
This data suggests that special interest groups are choosing to sue
not just when agency action is arbitrary and capricious or contrary to
law, but whenever the action is inconsistent with the groups' policy
preferences. Almost without exception, there have been ample
opportunities for special interest groups to advance their views before
final agency action--virtually all meaningful environmental review
requirements involve processes for public notice and comment. The
administrative process, not the courtroom, is the appropriate forum for
these groups to advance their policy concerns and objectives.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Johnson
Question 1. Do unsuccessful legal or administrative challenges
against an agency, such as those involving the leasing and permitting
process you discussed, or suits that are dismissed still affect the
agency and require time and resources to address?

Answer. There is no direct relationship between the merits of a
legal challenge and the time and resources necessary to defend against
that challenge. Every case that is properly filed requires a response
under the applicable administrative or court rules. So, even when a
legal challenge is ultimately unsuccessful, it still requires the
agency use resources to review the complaint, gather facts to dispute
or refute the allegations made in the complaint, and take action to
defend the agency as may be appropriate based on whether an
administrative body or court will adjudicate the dispute.
Even simple and frivolous challenges impact agency resources. Based
on my experience representing Federal agencies while a Trial Attorney
at the Department of Justice, I am familiar with the procedures that
Federal land management agencies undertake when served with a legal
challenge. At a minimum, that process typically involves: (i)
correspondence and/or in person meetings with agency counsel and, in
lawsuits filed in Federal court, with DOJ counsel; (ii) factual
investigation into the allegations presented in the challenge,
including, but not limited to, interviews with involved personnel and
collection of relevant documentary materials; (iii) review of existing
and ongoing programs or actions to ensure that the agency does not have
additional legal exposure; and (iv) review of legal filings that
counsel draft to ensure technical accuracy and completeness.
Because Federal agencies are at all times accountable to Congress
and the public, agencies face the additional complexity of requiring
documentation to support the litigation choices that the agency makes.
Unlike private litigants, the strategic rationale for an agency's
litigation choices must be documented in the filings the agency submits
to the adjudicator or--particularly in cases that are resolved through
settlement--in internal memoranda that support the agency's choices.
The obligation to document the rationale for its litigation choices is
not conditional on the strength or validity of the legal challenges to
which an agency must respond.

______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much.
And the Chair now recognizes Ms. Schiffer for her
testimony.

STATEMENT OF LOIS SCHIFFER, FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL, NATIONAL
OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Schiffer. Chairman Labrador, Ranking Member Grijalva,
and members of the Subcommittee and the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today about settlements in
Federal agency litigation, with particular attention to the
Department of the Interior.
I speak today on my own behalf, based on years of
experience as a Federal Government lawyer over the course of
almost 40 years. I had two stints at the U.S. Department of
Justice, from 1978 to 1984, 7 years as Assistant Attorney
General in the Environment Division, and 7 years as General
Counsel at NOAA, ending last January. So, I have had
significant experience handling, supervising, and being a
client for litigation and settlements on behalf of the United
States and its Federal agencies.
The gist of my testimony is that settlements serve
important public interests when used appropriately. I will
summarize five points briefly.
First, lawsuits are a toolkit that our constitutionally
established, three-branch system of government makes available
through the Constitution and Federal statutes to help assure
that agencies comply with the laws that Congress passes. It
provides an orderly means of dispute resolution among the
government and others with a wide range of interests. It is
part of our democracy.
Settlement is one tool in this toolkit. Citizens, states,
and organizations bring lawsuits against Federal agencies to
challenge agency action or failure to act to carry out
requirements of specific statutes or regulations.
A plaintiff has a legal burden in bringing a lawsuit
against the Interior Department. He or she must establish
standing, show injury, that the agency action or failure caused
the injury, and that the court may redress the injury. They
must have a claim under specific provisions of a Federal
statute. In effect, those bringing lawsuits are seeking to
assure that the agency carries out what Congress and the
Constitution require.
Moreover, in filing a lawsuit in Federal court, the lawyer
must, under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,
warrant, subject to sanction, that claims, defenses, and other
legal contentions are non-frivolous. So, before there is a
possibility of settlement, there has to be a notice or a filing
of a non-frivolous lawsuit against the agency meeting key legal
requirements.
Second, settlement may be useful to litigation. Settlement
may give better results than either a win or a loss by a court
order. An assessment of possible settlement will take into
account the costs, work involved, delay, and uncertainty of
preparing the case and having the court decide.
The advantages of settlement are often money and time
savings, pragmatism, certainty, and control. In cases seeking
money, settlement may protect public funds by leading to more
reasonable results. Adjustments can be made in settlement
amounts that are not available in litigation. Money cases are
more likely to require trials, and settlements may avoid the
expense and time that trials take.
Third, agency requirements and procedures mean that a
lawyer for the Federal Government cannot ``give away the
store.'' Settlements require significant internal review at
Interior and Justice, so the public interest is taken into
account. By regulation and policy, settlements require approval
of persons with appropriate authority at both Interior and
Justice. Monetary settlements are reviewed carefully with an
eye to sensible limit on costs to the public. Our attorneys are
mindful that claims on the Federal Judgment Fund should be made
wisely.
Fourth, money claims for attorney's fees are strictly
regulated by specific provisions in the governing statutes,
including the Equal Access to Justice Act. Indeed, Congress
enacted EAJA, which requires that attorney's fees be paid from
the agency budget, rather than the Judgment Fund, to encourage
lawful agency conduct and deter agency decisions that skirt the
law.
Attorney's fees claims are evaluated carefully before
payment is made, and payment of EAJA fees is a sobering message
for agency officials. Settlement of attorney's fees claims
generally limits the amounts paid by the Federal Government,
including avoiding fees on fees.
Fifth, settlements are public. People on all sides of
issues have raised concerns over the years about secret
settlements or sue-and-settle--and I mean on all sides. While
settlement discussions of necessity are confidential,
settlements themselves are quite public. I cannot recall a
settlement I worked on for a Federal agency, with the exception
of personnel actions, that did not have a public document as
the outcome.
In sum, the practical benefits of settling cases are well
recognized by the Federal courts, virtually all of which have
put in place alternative dispute resolution programs,
procedures, and requirements to encourage settlements.
I am finishing.
The practical benefits are also well recognized by
litigants against the government of every interest and by
Federal agencies. If a more manageable result can be achieved
with less time for briefing, assembling a record, working with
witnesses, trying cases, that serves everyone's interest.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about this
important subject.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schiffer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lois Schiffer, Retired General Counsel of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Chairman Labrador, Ranking Member McEachin, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today about
settlements in Federal agency litigation, with particular attention to
the Department of the Interior.
With intermittent Federal agency service of 25 years through
several positions at the U.S. Department of Justice, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the National Capital
Planning Commission, and as an adjunct professor of environmental law
at Georgetown University Law Center for 30 years, I have had
significant experience handling litigation and reaching and approving
settlements of Federal agency cases. I began work at the U.S.
Department of Justice in 1978 as Chief of the General Litigation
Section (now the Natural Resources Section) in the Land and Natural
Resources Division, with responsibility for public land and water
cases, surface mining, some cases related to Indians, and litigation
generally under numerous Federal statutes. In 1981, I became a Senior
Litigation Counsel in the Lands Division, a position I held until 1984.
I returned to the U.S. Department of Justice Department in 1993, first
as Deputy Assistant Attorney General, then as Acting Assistant Attorney
General, and from 1994 through January 2001, as Assistant Attorney
General for the (renamed) Environment and Natural Resources Division. I
have also served at General Counsel at the National Capital Planning
Commission (2005-2010) and at NOAA (2010 through January 2017). I have
worked in private practice at law firms and as a lawyer at non-profit
organizations as well. I am also a trained mediator with the Federal
courts in the District of Columbia, and established a mediation program
in the Environment Division in the 1990s. In these roles I have
litigated and supervised thousands of cases, and have over many years
been involved in settlements large and small. My remarks today are
based on my own experience and are on my own behalf; I am not speaking
for any Federal agency or private group.
Today I will describe how several different types of lawsuits
against the Department of the Interior are handled--cases where the
plaintiff seeks injunctive relief, either against an agency rule or an
individual action such as issuance or denial of a lease or permit; or
seeks to compel the agency to comply with a mandatory duty under a
statute; and cases where the plaintiff seeks monetary relief.
Overall, litigation is a means that our constitutionally
established three-branch system of government makes available through
the U.S. Constitution and Federal statutes to help assure that agencies
comply with congressional statutes, agency regulations, the U.S.
Constitution, and other laws. Courts decide disputes among parties with
differing interests. It is an orderly and effective means of dispute
resolution among the government and other parties, including state and
local governments, citizens, and companies and organizations supporting
a wide range of interests. Settlement is one tool in this toolkit, and
certainly a tool used--outside of government cases--by businesses as
well as governments. Indeed many approaches to alternative dispute
resolution are designed to identify common interests of disputing
parties in lawsuits so that they can achieve a settlement. Those who
seek to have the government run more like a business must be aware that
full use of settlement authority in appropriate circumstances is one
way to do that.

A word of background about lawsuits against the Federal Government:
they are brought to challenge agency action or failure to act under
specific statutes or regulations. They reflect the fact that in its
actions under Federal laws agencies are taking into account a broad
range of legal requirements and public interests, often expressed
through public comment or communicated to the agency through other
means. Under Federal law, the party bringing the lawsuit must establish
standing--showing injury in fact, that the action or failure to act
caused the injury, and that it may be redressed by the court. If the
defendant does not object to an assertion that a plaintiff has
standing, the Court on its own may determine that the plaintiff has not
met this burden. In addition, the party suing must demonstrate that the
case falls within the zone of interests protected by the statute or law
at issue; that a statute provides a ``cause of action,'' and that the
agency either acted under the statute or regulation in an arbitrary and
capricious manner or otherwise contrary to law, or that it failed to
perform a mandatory duty. In effect, those bringing lawsuits are
seeking to hold the agency to the requirements that Congress and the
U.S. Constitution establish for agency action. Lawsuits are brought
either under the Administrative Procedure Act, or under specific
provisions of the substantive law.
Moreover, in filing a lawsuit in Federal court, where most actions
against Federal agencies are brought, the lawyer must meet the
requirements of Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, by
which s/he must warrant, inter alia, that ``the claims, defenses, and
other legal contentions are warranted by existing law, or by a
nonfrivolous argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing
law or for establishing new law''.\1\ So before there is a possibility
of settlement, there has to be a notice of or a filing of a non-
frivolous lawsuit against the agency based on a statute, regulation, or
the Constitution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Rule 11(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides:

``(b) Representations to the Court. By presenting to the court a
pleading, written motion, or other paper--whether by signing, filing,
submitting, or later advocating it--an attorney or unrepresented party
certifies that to the best of the person's knowledge, information, and
belief, formed after an inquiry reasonable under the circumstances:

(1) it is not being presented for any improper purpose, such as
to harass, cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly increase the cost of
litigation;

(2) the claims, defenses, and other legal contentions are
warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for extending,
modifying, or reversing existing law or for establishing new law;

(3) the factual contentions have evidentiary support or, if
specifically so identified, will likely have evidentiary support after
a reasonable opportunity for further investigation or discovery; and

(4) the denials of factual contentions are warranted on the
evidence or, if specifically so identified, are reasonably based on
belief or a lack of information.''

Litigation or settlement of cases seeking injunctive relief. Once a
suit is filed, both the party bringing the case and the government
agency, represented in Court in most instances by the U.S. Department
of Justice, assess the nature and the merits of their case. Settlement
is often considered as a possibility. Without invading any client
confidences, I may say that it is useful for each party to assess what
happens if s/he wins, what happens if s/he loses and what happens if s/
he settles.
It is useful to make this assessment against the costs, delay, and
uncertainty of the court deciding, either by summary judgment on a
record and the pleadings, or after trial (depending on the type of
case). At a minimum, the agency will be required to assemble an
administrative record, and to work with the Justice Department on
writing briefs and often, presenting argument to a judge. In cases
seeking injunctive relief, the advantages of settlement are often time-
savings, pragmatism, and control. As a specific example, under express
provisions of the Endangered Species Act, the agency must take certain
actions within specified time frames (e.g. within 12 months of
receiving a petition to list or de-list a species that the agency has
found has sufficient information that action may be warranted). These
schedules do not dictate particular outcomes, but do require action. If
the agency misses the time frame, and a petitioner sues to enforce the
time frame, the court may hold the agency to short and firm dates that
the agency does not have resources to meet. That represents a loss for
the agency and for the petitioner--seeking either listing or de-
listing--because a court victory may not get results. Alternatively a
settlement for a schedule taking into account both the petitioner's
interest and the agency's resources, may result in more practical dates
without the need for full briefing to the Court.
The practical benefits of settling cases is well-recognized by the
Federal courts, virtually all of which have put in place alternative
dispute resolution programs, procedures and requirements to encourage
settlements.
The practical benefits are also well recognized by litigants
against the government of every interest, and by Federal agencies. If a
more manageable result can be achieved with less time for briefing and
assembling a record, that serves everyone's interest.
For settlements seeking injunctive relief--for example, the agency
failed to meet a mandatory duty, the regulation should be set aside,
the lease should be issued rather than denied based on the record
before the agency--the settlement will require approval of both the
Department of the Interior by a person with appropriate authority, and
by the Department of Justice by a person of appropriate authority. In
my experience, at the Department of Justice, the approval of a Section
Chief or Assistant Chief, and possibly an even higher official, will be
required for a significant non-monetary settlement. See generally 28
C.F.R. 0.160, the Justice Department regulation that specifies what
settlements must be elevated beyond the Assistant Attorney General.
Within each Division at Justice, provisions are set forth as to what
levels of approval are required for settlement.
Settlements may be reflected in Consent Decrees--an order approved
by the Court, or by settlement agreement--in effect contracts between
the parties setting forth what each party will do. Another benefit of
settlements, rather than litigated judgments,, is that the option of a
contract-like settlement agreement, rather than a court order, is
available In fact, the Federal Government usually settles cases against
it by settlement agreement rather than consent decree, so that any
failure to comply is addressed in the first instance by further
proceedings before the court as a failure to meet a contract term
rather than as a contempt proceeding.
Under several statutes, including the Endangered Species Act and
some of the pollution protection statutes like the Clean Air Act and
Clean Water Act, Congress may be seen to contemplate settlements--a
party may be required to give notice (for example, of 60 days) before a
suit may be filed. The intention of such notice periods is to permit
the agency to correct the problem or resolve the issue before a lawsuit
is filed. A settlement agreement is one means for such resolution.

Suits against the Federal Government for money. In a suit against a
Federal agency or the United States for a monetary claim, once the
claim is made (for example a tort claim) or the suit is filed (for
example, a takings claim), a similar assessment by each party of
strengths and weaknesses of its claims and arguments is a useful
internal process. Claims for money occur under specific statutes where
Congress has waived the sovereign immunity of the United States. Claims
against the United States, such a takings claims, may directly relate
to actions of a particular agency, including the Department of the
Interior. Claims for money are more likely to be addressed in court
through an evidentiary trial, rather than on an administrative record
through summary judgment. That makes the cost and time of going to
trial an additional factor. It is also useful to note that the Justice
Department, which generally handles litigation of monetary claims, is
governed by Justice Department regulations that require the approval of
the Associate Attorney General or Deputy Attorney General for payments
of claims against the United States where the payment is in excess of
$4 million. Other factors also require approval above the Assistant
Attorney General level. See generally 28 C.F.R. 0.160 (the Justice
Department regulation on settlement authority).
In my experience, in the Environment and Natural Resources Division
at Justice, monetary settlements are reviewed carefully, with an eye to
limiting costs to the public. Attorneys are mindful that they have
responsibility to see that claims on the Federal Judgment Fund are made
wisely.
Money claims for attorneys' fees are strictly regulated by the
governing statutes, including the Equal Access to Justice Act and
attorneys' fees provisions in other statutes. These statutes, which are
waivers of sovereign immunity, have specific standards for payment.
Indeed, Congress enacted the Equal Access to Justice Act, which
requires that attorneys' fees be paid from the agency budget rather
than the Judgment Fund, to encourage lawful agency conduct and deter
agency decisions that skirted the law. From my experience at both NOAA
and the Justice Department I note that claims for attorneys' fees under
EAJA and other statutes are evaluated carefully before payment is made.
Settlement generally has the effect of limiting the amounts paid by the
Federal Government, in part because Courts may be less flexible, and in
part because litigation over the fees generates ``fees on fees''--fees
go the plaintiff to litigate the claim if the government does not
prevail, or does not (under EAJA) have a substantial basis for its
position.

Concerns that settlements aren't transparent. Some have raised
concerns about ``secret settlements,'' and I have heard these concerns
about settlements from a full range of parties. A few points: while
settlement discussions of necessity are confidential to get results--a
party cannot easily take a position in court and publicly undercut it
in a public settlement discussion, but can in a private discussion--the
settlements themselves are quite public--I cannot recall being involved
in a settlement on behalf of a Federal agency (with the exception of
personnel actions, where Privacy Act concerns may pertain) that did not
have a public document as the outcome.
In conclusion, Congress and the Constitution provide citizens and
organizations with the right to bring lawsuits against Federal agencies
and the United States as one means to assure that the agencies are
meeting the requirements of the laws. Those seeking to sue must meet a
set of requirements including establishing standing and making non-
frivolous claims. Once notice is given or a suit is filed, evaluating
whether a consensual resolution through settlement, rather than
litigation and a court order, is an important and useful tool for both
plaintiffs and the government in some cases. Many requirements within
the government help assure that the tool is used appropriately.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about this important
subject.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Grijalva to Lois Schiffer,
Former General Counsel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 1. In your experience, do environmental groups bring a
series of frivolous lawsuits against a particular project in order to
delay it?

Answer. In my experience, environmental groups do not bring a
series of frivolous lawsuits against a particular project in order to
delay it. First, to file a Federal lawsuit, a lawyer has to sign the
Complaint in compliance with Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, which requires under penalty of sanctions that the facts and
law set forth are not frivolous. Further, there are legal requirements
that claims related to the same matter have to be brought at the same
time, not sequentially. Finally, someone challenging an agency action
has a set of requirements to meet including standing, a cause of action
under a statute, that the case is ripe. These requirements are not easy
to meet, and deter frivolous suits.

Question 2. Are deadline suits caused by excessive litigation or by
inadequate funding for agencies?

Answer. A number of statutes require agency action by a deadline
and those deadlines may be difficult to meet. In the case of the
Department of the Interior regarding Endangered Species Act deadlines,
inadequate resources have long been a reason for missing the deadlines.
As to deadlines in laws enacted by Congress, for example, some of the
pollution prevention statutes require that EPA issue regulations within
certain time frames. Another example, the Endangered Species Act
provides that people may petition the agency for action, and then
specifies time frames by which the agency must act on those petitions.
The Freedom of Information Act also has deadlines, and they are
deadlines that Congress continues to make stricter. If the agency
misses these legislated deadlines, the person or organization seeking
action may bring a lawsuit to compel the agency to take the action it
was supposed to take by the deadline. The legal name for this suing to
enforce a ``mandatory duty.'' In general, agencies miss these deadlines
because they do not have adequate resources--staff, technology, and
money--to take all the actions by deadlines that these statutes
require. More staffing, better technology, more resources in general
would help agencies meet the established deadlines.

Question 3. The Multi District Litigation provided a single
schedule for the Department of the Interior to handle a large number of
petitions for listing of species under the Endangered Species Act,
rather than many spate lawsuits with no coordinate schedule. Was that
approach helpful or frivolous?

Answer. While I have not had personal involvement with this ESA
multi-district litigation, I am sufficiently familiar with it to know
that it establishes a single, unified and prioritized schedule for the
Department of the Interior to evaluate a large number of listing
petitions--petitions for considering whether a species of plants or
animals should be listed as threatened or endangered--and that approach
is clearly preferable to a scattershot of responding to petitions
without adequate resources whenever they come in the door. Department
officials have testified about the importance of this approach to the
effective work of the agency. https://www.doi.gov/ocl/hearings/112/
EndangeredSpeciesAct_120611.
An illustration may be helpful: If a student has 10 homework
assignments, and teachers kept assigning more, we would all counsel
that student to make a list and set priorities instead of panicking
about each new assignment because of the overload. The Multi-District
approach was a good one to enable the Department of the Interior to
approach the deadlines set by Congress in a more sensible way with its
limited resources.

Question 4. Ms. Lobdell raised questions about small companies that
are intervenors in a case not being able to take appeals. Could you
address that concern?

Answer. As I understand it, Ms. Lobdell's concern arises under the
following circumstance: Her clients think the government has acted
properly, and that the plaintiffs who challenge that action in a
lawsuit are wrong; her clients intervene in the case on the side of the
government; and the trial court then rules that the government failed
to handle the matter properly under the law and remands (sends back)
the case to the agency for further consideration. If the government
decides it will comply with the trial court's order, and conduct
further proceedings rather than appealing the ruling, then under the
current law the Court has ruled that Ms. Lobdell's clients may get
relief from the agency proceeding and therefore cannot at that time
appeal. As a matter of the law, there is no ``final order'' from the
court because the matter is back at the agency for consideration. Ms.
Lobdell's concern would arise in any case where the government decided
to comply rather than seek appeal. While the agency could decide to
appeal rather than comply with the trial court ruling, if the agency
decides to comply with the trial court ruling, under a principle called
``the final order doctrine'' that is established by a statute--28
U.S.C. 1291--there is no final order for the intervenor, because s/he
can go back to the agency to seek relief. In the cases Ms. Lobdell has
provided (Pit River Tribe and Alsea), the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals has said that the intervenor has the opportunity to protect its
interests before the agency in that instance, and can appeal to the
court after the agency takes further action if the intervenor does not
get relief from the agency, but cannot appeal until the agency acts.
That Ninth Circuit principle would apply in any case where these
circumstances pertain.
Ms. Lobdell's approach that her clients could appeal even if the
agency wanted to act further, if put into a statute, would create an
exception to the well-established and sensible ``final order
doctrine,'' and would discourage the government from deciding to comply
with a court order rather than challenge it further. In effect, Ms.
Lobdell would prefer that the agency not comply with the court order,
or comply and let her take an appeal in the meantime. Either approach
would cause additional and possibly unnecessary litigation, and be
contrary to the sensible usual approach of giving the parties to the
lawsuit one forum at a time (court or agency) and not two. If the
agency prefers to comply, long-standing ``final order'' requirements
set the rules. In effect, the Court is ruling that an agency may choose
to comply rather than be drawn into an appeal. That is generally a
sound approach. If Congress were to consider legislating an exception
to the final order doctrine--an approach that would upset long-standing
court precedent--then it should create that exception for any
intervenor, not just small companies.
Question 5. What are your views about allowing affected companies
to intervene in lawsuits?

Answer. Anyone--individuals, companies, non-profit groups, others,
directly affected by a lawsuit, should be able make their views known
in compliance with the approaches and procedures in the law, which
generally work well. There are legal standards about when someone may
intervene in a suit, either as of right or permissively, set forth in
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure; sometimes additional rules are
set forth in statutes. Courts are familiar with the rules and apply
them. If someone meets the legal standard to intervene, and the Court
does not permit it, s/he may appeal the Court's ruling. Courts may also
allow participation as an amicus instead of as a party to hear views of
the person or company. Changing the law to provide special rights of
intervention for small companies when they do not meet the current
standards--that include an analysis of whether the parties in the case
already are sufficiently protecting the views of the proposed
intervenor--would cause unnecessary delay in cases for little benefit.

Question 6. Does any study analyze the kinds of cases where EAJA is
used most?

Answer. A helpful analysis is in a report of the Chairman of the
Administrative Conference of the United States (2013), which analyzes
2010 data for the amounts that agencies paid under the Equal Access to
Justice Act. That report on the tables at pages 8-9 shows that in that
year the Veterans Administration and the Social Security Administration
EAJA payments totaled about $38 million, while Department of the
Interior paid approximately $1.2 million. The report is attached here.

Question 7. Is alternative dispute resolution (e.g. mediation)
helpful in resolving the kinds of lawsuits raised in the hearing?

Answer. Alternative dispute resolution, including mediation and
other approaches, can definitely help agencies and those who sue them
reach settlements in the right circumstances. A settlement generally
gives an agency more control over the outcome and its work going
forward--with a court decision, the agency may win or lose, and if it
loses may face orders that are not practical to implement. An outside
facilitator like a mediator may well help the parties find common
ground and reach a settlement. Courts are generally enthusiastic about
alternative dispute resolution and most Federal courts have programs
for alternative dispute resolution to facilitate settlements.

Question 8. One witness testified that agencies spend time
complying with the environmental group request under FOIA instead of
doing other work. Do you think agencies should be given additional
staff and resources to comply with FOIA?

Answer. The Freedom of Information Act is an important law that
gives the public information about how the government operates. Going
through the many agency records that FOIA requestors seek takes time
and resources, including effective electronic resources. Because of
deadlines that Congress has established in the FOIA statute, responding
may have priority in an agency. Agencies should certainly be given
adequate resources--staff, electronics, and other resources, to do
their jobs effectively, including adequate resources for responding to
FOIA requests and doing other work at the same time.

Question 9. Were any points raised in the hearing--about collusion
or any other topic--to which you would like to respond?

Answer. I note that it has been my experience in many years of
working with Federal agency lawyers that in general these public
servants are able, hardworking, and conscientious. As lawyers they are
bound by standards of professional conduct administered by state bars.
In my experience these lawyers do not ``collude'' with lawyers on the
other side of a case.

Thank you for the opportunity to answer these questions.

*****

The following document was submitted as an attachment to Ms. Schiffer's
responses. This document is part of the hearing record and is being
retained in the Committee's official files:

--Administrative Conference of the United States, January 9, 2013,
Report of the Chairman on Agency and Court Awards in FY
2010 Under the Equal Access to Justice Act.

______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much.
And the Chair now recognizes Ms. Lobdell for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF CAROLINE LOBDELL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND
SUPERVISING ATTORNEY, WESTERN RESOURCES LEGAL CENTER, PORTLAND,
OREGON

Ms. Lobdell. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and members of the Subcommittee. It is an honor to be here
today.
I am Caroline Lobdell, the Executive Director and
Supervising Attorney for the Western Resources Legal Center. We
are a non-profit legal education program out of Portland,
Oregon that provides clinical education to law students who are
interested in resource use, such as livestock grazing, timber
harvesting, oil and gas exploration and production, and mining.
I am here today on my own behalf.
Today, I will address three topics: concerns over recovery
of attorney's fees under the Equal Access to Justice Act,
otherwise known as EAJA; the marginalization of resource users
as limited interveners that want to help defend the
Department's resource use decisions in court; and steps that
the Department of the Interior can take to avoid litigation and
streamline the challenges to its resource projects, so that
projects benefiting natural resources and projects benefiting
our rural communities are not delayed by years by the agency's
own appeal process.
EAJA is a taxpayer-funded meal ticket for environmental
groups to collect attorney's fees at enhanced rates, even if
the non-profit net assets exceeds the $2 million limit that
precludes attorney's fees recoveries for individuals. EAJA is
an incentive to sue the Department of the Interior and other
agencies, and is a funding source for expansion of the staff
and offices of groups that want to halt environmentally and
economically beneficial natural resource projects.
The taxpayers lose all around. They pay plaintiffs, and
they lose revenues from the projects that have come to a halt.
Congress should consider three reforms that will bring some
sanity to stop the EAJA gravy train for plaintiff groups.
First, a non-profit should be subject to the same net worth
limit that precludes recovery for other plaintiffs.
Second, there should be no enhanced rate for environmental
litigation. Decades ago, environmental law was considered a
specialty area with few lawyers practicing in the fields, and
the courts concluded that enhanced rates were then justified.
However, today, almost every law school has an environmental
law clinic. Environmental law simply is no longer a specialty
justifying enhanced rates.
And third, a plaintiff should not be considered a
prevailing party if it only obtains a favorable ruling on a few
or limited claims.
State and local governments, potential purchases of timber
sales, and grazing allotments and existing contract and permit
holders are allies of the Department of the Interior to defend
lawsuits filed to halt resource projects. These third parties
can help demonstrate the economic impacts and the negative
environmental consequences from halting a resource project.
Unfortunately, there is no comparable legislation that
provides a right for these third parties to intervene in a
lawsuit that seeks to halt a departmental project.
For example, on the Point Reyes National Seashore north of
San Francisco, families engaged in ranching and dairy moved to
intervene in a lawsuit that challenges the Park Service's over-
delayed revision of the seashore's general management plan and
the authorization of long-term leases for ranches. These multi-
generational ranch and dairy families were land stewards before
Point Reyes was even created, and they are a significant part
of the agricultural base of Marin County.
The Park Service acquired these private lands under threat
of condemnation, and the court, urged by plaintiffs, limited
the ranchers and counties' participation. The Park Service has
capitulated to plaintiffs and provided only short-term leases.
When the government loses a case, the Ninth Circuit has
held that interveners have no right to appeal if the government
does not appeal. So, bad precedent is established by one-sided
settlements.
Finally, there are at least two actions the Department can
implement to avoid litigation and streamline challenges.
First, the Department needs to build flexibility into the
resource management plans when the plans are amended and
revised. Plaintiffs love to plumb the depths of the luminous
management plans to find inflexible standards and required
procedures to serve as foundation for lawsuits. Every word
``shall'' in a management plan lifts a plaintiff's heart, and
provides another arrow to shoot down a resource project. A plan
full of discretionary standards defeats an agency's ability to
engage in adaptive management.
Second, the Department of the Interior's administrative
review process is far more extensive than that of the Forest
Service or USDA. The Forest Service has one objection process.
In stark contrast, Interior has a three-level review process.
For example, I represent Caroline and Manuel Manuz from
Clifton, Arizona, who are seeking to build a solar-powered
well. There is no reason for three levels of review to make a
decision to drill a modest well on a grazing allotment in an
area far from surface water and that will benefit wildlife and
cattle. This is only one of countless examples where simple
decisions that benefit all become paralyzed by the litigation
process.
Thank you for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lobdell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Caroline Lobdell, Executive Director, Western
Resources Legal Center, Portland, Oregon
Good morning Chairman Labrador, Ranking Member McEachin, and
members of the Subcommittee. I am Caroline Lobdell the Executive
Director of the Western Resources Legal Center (WRLC). WRLC is a
nonprofit organization that provides clinical education at Lewis and
Clark Law School in Portland, Oregon for those students interested in
resource use such as livestock grazing, timber harvest, mining, and oil
and gas exploration and production. My remarks are based on my
experience as an educator and litigator and do not represent the
position of the Law School. Today I will address three topics: concerns
over recovery of attorney's fees under the Equal Access to Justice Act
(EAJA); the marginalization of resource users as limited intervenors
that want to help defend the Department's resource use decisions in
court; and steps that the Department of the Interior can take to avoid
litigation and streamline the challenges to its resource projects so
that projects benefiting natural resources and rural communities are
not delayed for years by its own appeals process.
equal access to justice act reforms
EAJA is a taxpayer funded meal ticket for environmental groups to
collect attorney's fees at enhanced rates even if the non-profit's net
assets exceed the $2 million limit that precludes attorney's fees
recovery for individuals. EAJA is an incentive to sue the Department of
the Interior and other agencies and is a funding source for expansion
of the staff and offices of groups that want to halt environmentally
and economically beneficial natural resource projects. The taxpayers
lose all around. They pay plaintiffs and they lose revenue from the
projects that are halted.
Congress should consider three reforms that will bring some sanity
to stop the EAJA gravy train for plaintiff groups. First, a nonprofit
should be subject to the same net worth limit that precludes recovery
for other plaintiffs. If the nonprofit's net assets exceed $2 million,
then there should be no recovery of attorney's fees. Second, there
should be no enhanced rates for environmental litigation. Decades ago
environmental law was considered a specialty area with few lawyers
practicing in the field and the courts concluded that enhanced rates
were justified for environmental plaintiffs. However, today almost
every law school has an environmental law clinic. A multitude of newly
minted lawyers challenge BLM, Fish and Wildlife Service, and other
Department of the Interior actions to get experience straight out of
law school and hope for a big EAJA payday. Environmental law simply is
no longer a specialty justifying enhanced rates. We have seen cases
where law students used on the cases are awarded rates of $150 an hour
and they are not even admitted to practice law. Third, a plaintiff
should not be considered a ``prevailing party'' entitled to EAJA fees
if it only obtains a favorable ruling on a few claims. A plaintiff
should be required to prevail on all, or at least half, of its claims
before it can recover under EAJA.
level the litigation playing field for those who support department of
the interior decisions
State and local governments, potential purchasers of timber sales
and grazing allotments, and existing contract and permit holders are
allies of the Department of the Interior to defend lawsuits filed to
halt resource projects. These third parties can help demonstrate to the
court the adverse economic impacts and negative environmental
consequences from halting a resource project. Unfortunately, there is
no legislation that provides a right for a state or local government,
contractor, or permit holder to intervene in a lawsuit that seeks to
halt a Departmental project. For example, on the Point Reyes National
Seashore north of San Francisco, families engaged in ranching and
dairying moved to intervene in a lawsuit that challenges the Park
Service over delayed revision of the Seashore's General Management Plan
and the authorizations of long-term leases for the ranches. These
multi-generational ranch and dairy families were land stewards before
the National Seashore was created. The Park Service acquired these
private lands under threat of condemnation. Congress recognizes the
importance of the ranches and provided for continuation of ranching and
dairying in the pastoral zone of the Seashore. These families have been
caring for the land and provide locally grown, organic, and grass-fed
cattle, sheep, and dairy products and are a major part of the
agricultural base of Marin County. The ranchers and Marin County moved
to intervene in a lawsuit. The court, at the urging of plaintiffs,
limited the ranchers' and County's participation to the point where
they are not considered full parties to the settlement negotiations.
Secretary Ken Salazar directed that 10-year ranching leases be issued,
but the Park Service has capitulated to plaintiffs and only provided 1-
year leases. The short-term leases make it hard for the ranchers to
justify investments in water distribution, pond improvements, and range
rejuvenation that will benefit wildlife and water quality.
Finally, when the government loses a case, the Ninth Circuit has
held that intervenors have no right to appeal if the government does
not appeal. So, bad legal precedent is established by one-sided
settlements. Furthermore, when the Department is prevented by the
Solicitor General from appealing an adverse decision, which an
intervenor cannot appeal, because of bad Ninth Circuit law.
actions within the control of the department of the interior to avoid
litigation and streamline administrative review
Finally, there are at least two actions that the Department of the
Interior can implement to avoid litigation and streamline the
challenges to resource projects. First, Department of the Interior
agencies need to build flexibility into their Resource Management Plans
when the plans are amended and revised. Plaintiffs love to plumb the
depths of voluminous Management Plans to find inflexible standards and
required procedures to serve as a foundation for lawsuits to stop
agency projects. Every use of the word ``shall'' in a management plan
lifts a plaintiff lawyer's heart and provides another arrow to shoot
down a resource project. Not surprisingly, courts have held that an
agency must follow the nondiscretionary mandates in its management
plan. A plan full of nondiscretionary standards defeats an agency's
ability to engage in adaptive management during a given year and over
the life of the plan. For example, a provision in a plan that BLM
``shall retain 500 pounds of residual dry matter per acre'' after the
grazing season does not account for the annual variation in weather or
site conditions that could allow greater forge utilization while
maintaining the health of the range.
Second, the Department of the Interior's administrative review
process is vastly more cumbersome and lengthy than the administrative
review of the Forest Service and the Department of Agriculture. The
Forest Service has an objection process that provides one level of
administrative challenge to a resource project such as a timber sale.
In stark contrast, the Department of the Interior has a three-level
review process. A protest before the Bureau of Land Management, then an
appeal to the Department of the Interior Office of Hearings and Appeals
administrative law judge, and then another appeal to a three-judge
panel of the Interior Board of Land Appeals (IBLA). IBLA itself is not
a creature of statute but is one of two Boards in the Office of
Hearings and Appeals that the Secretary of the Interior created in
1970. The Secretary has the power to shape and modify the
administrative appeals process and define which decisions are subject
to administrative appeal and whether there is one level of challenge
instead of three. For example, under the Department of the Interior
Manual there is no appeal of a biological opinion issued by the Fish
and Wildlife Service. Certain decisions could have one level of protest
just like Forest Service decisions. For example, I represent Carolyn
and Manuel Manuz from Clifton, Arizona, who are seeking to build a
solar powered well. There is no reason for three levels of review of
the decision to drill a modest well on the Twin C Grazing Allotment in
Arizona far from any surface water source, that will benefit wildlife
and cattle with a new water source, and reduce water withdrawals from a
well on the Gila River. Decisions to maintain the status quo, such as
renewal of a grazing permit at the same level of livestock use, are
another class of decisions that could be subject to only one level of
administrative challenge.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer
any questions.

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplements to Ms. Lobdell's
testimony. These documents are part of the hearing record and are being
retained in the Committee's official files:

--Resource Renewal Institute, et al. v. National Park Service, et
al., U.S. District Court, Northern District of California
(Oakland Division), Case No.: 4:16-cv-00688-SBA: Doc. 103-
36 Declaration of Amy Meyer, Doc. 103-37 Declaration of
Brigitte Moran, Doc. 103-38 Declaration of Jamison Watts.

--The Mercury News: Point Reyes: Lawsuit challenges historic
ranching operations at iconic park, by Paul Rogers,
February 10, 2016.

--Twin C Grazing Permit Renewal and Goat Camp Well: Figure 3--
Proposed Goat Camp Well looking south; Figure 4--Proposed
Goat Camp Well capped.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Johnson to Caroline Lobdell,
Executive Director, Western Resources Legal Center
Question 1. The question period of the hearing generated some
confusion regarding the Equal Access to Justice Act and the statute's
limitations on which parties are eligible to be awarded attorney's fees
in actions against the United States. Can you clarify the limits the
statute sets on party's eligibility to be awarded attorney's fees and
whether any organizations are exempt from these limits?

Answer. The limitations as to the parties that can recover
attorney's fees under the Equal Access to Justice Act (``EAJA'') are
clearly defined in the statute under 5 U.S.C. Sec. 504(b)(1)(B).
Individuals whose net worth does not exceed $2 million and businesses
whose net worth does not exceed $7 million can pursue attorney's fees
under EAJA.
There was some suggestion during the hearing that 501(c)(3) tax-
exempt nonprofit organizations are without exception, and therefore,
subject to the same net worth limitations. That is, however, in direct
conflict with the plain language of 5 U.S.C. Sec. 504(b)(1)(B), which
states in pertinent part:

except that an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)) exempt
from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code, or a
cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the
Agricultural Marketing Act (12 U.S.C. 1141j(a)), may be a party
regardless of the net worth of such organization or cooperative
association . . . .

Thus, while there are caps for business and individuals, EAJA
creates a specific exception for nonprofit organizations and they are
not subject to any limitations on net worth and can pursue attorney's
fees no matter how much the organization is worth.

Question 2. How has the litigation against the National Park
Service regarding ranching at the Point Reyes National Seashore
interfered with the Park Service's ability to manage that area
properly?

Answer. The litigation on the Point Reyes National Seashore has
paralyzed and completely halted the Parks Service's completion of a
National Environmental Policy Act Comprehensive Ranch Management Plan.
Completion of a Ranch Management Plan was stopped in its tracks when
the Park Service stipulated with plaintiffs to stay any work on the
Ranch Management Plan, effectively conceding to a de facto preliminary
injunction.
Second, the Park Service, prior to the litigation, had provided
ranch leases exceeding 1 year. However, after commencement of
litigation, the Park Service has provided only 1-year lease extensions.
These year-to-year lease extensions discourage investments in
improvements to the land and long-term environmentally beneficial
conservation projects in cooperation with the Natural Resource
Conservation Service. The Park Service was paralyzed when the
plaintiffs filed a Motion for Preliminary Injunction. That injunction
sought a complete halt to the Ranch Management Planning NEPA process
and the issuance of leases longer than 1 year.
Ongoing settlement discussions have stayed further action on the
Motion for Preliminary Injunction. However, by halting the work on the
Ranch Management Plan and issuing only 1-year short term leases, the
Park Service capitulated to plaintiffs and basically acceded to their
demands in the Motion for Preliminary Injunction.
The Committee should also note that the severe restrictions on
intervenors' participation in this litigation have been appealed to the
9th Circuit Court of Appeals. That appeal is also currently stayed
given ongoing settlement discussions.
I would be happy to answer any further questions that the Committee
may have.

______

Mr. Johnson. Thanks so much, Ms. Lobdell. And thanks again
to all the witnesses for your testimony today.
I would like to remind the Members that Committee Rule 3(d)
imposes a 5-minute limit on our questions. To begin
questioning, I will recognize myself as the Chair for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barron, last Thursday, Secretary Zinke testified before
our Full Committee. At that hearing, we heard some strong
viewpoints from both sides of the aisle, as well as from the
Secretary himself, regarding the Department's budgetary
priorities.
As you know, payments are made under the Equal Access to
Justice Act, they come directly from the agency's budget in
most cases. Given the exorbitant attorney's fees that we have
heard about that are paid to environmental lawyers under the
EAJA, sometimes at enhanced rates as high as $750 an hour, in
what ways does constant litigation further strain the
Department's budget, and ultimately hinder its ability to
fulfill its core missions?
Mr. Barron. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson. Hit your button for me, the talk button, yes.
Mr. Barron. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think, in all ways, as
I mentioned in my opening statement, the Department is
initially burdened by a lack of resources, so it is already
starting from behind the eight ball. And then, this constant
litigation exacerbates that existing problem.
I think what is notable is that this body has acted in the
past to try to address some of those concerns, and the
litigation has continued to undermine those efforts. For
example, in the last several years, there have been pilot
projects to fund field offices with particularly large permit
demands. The cost of a drilling permit on Federal lands has
been increased over the last several years, and yet those steps
have not resulted in any benefits in the field. The field
offices are still under stress.
As I mentioned in my testimony, we have received anecdotal
evidence that one of the real troubling issues for some of
these field offices is responding to FOIA requests from these
environmental groups, that resources that would be allocated to
permitting, permit processing, and managing the lands is being
used to respond to FOIA requests and to support litigation
efforts.
Mr. Johnson. That is good. Would you describe this as a
vicious cycle? Is that a fair characterization of it? And does
the current system, do you think, incentivize more lawsuits
being brought against the Department?
Mr. Barron. What I would say, Mr. Chair, is that when we
counsel clients who are planning projects on Federal lands,
that we encourage them to incorporate in their timelines the
virtual certainty of litigation delaying the project.
I can use as an example a master development plan that was
recently approved for a client in the Permian Basin in New
Mexico. Master development plans are a tool that BLM emphasizes
as streamlining the permitting and environmental review
process. Several years of environmental review went into
approving the master development plan. Within days of the plan
being approved and posted on the Carlsbad field office's
website, there was an environmental challenge to a plan that
was subject to public participation for several years.
So, in our view, people operating on public lands should
expect litigation. It is part of operating in that sphere.
Mr. Johnson. I appreciate that. We know that advocacy
groups benefit from the receipt of taxpayer dollars through
government grants. And then, of course, they are also receiving
uncapped attorney's fees in these lawsuits against the
government.
In your testimony, you explain that advocacy groups also
use litigation as a fundraising tool, which further cements the
fact that they have a built-in sort of cottage industry, money-
making industry around litigation. Can you elaborate on that
just a little more?
Mr. Barron. Sure. I think you will note, if you look at the
publicly available websites for most of the major environmental
groups, they issue a press release and a fundraising request
every time that a lawsuit is filed. And I don't think that it
is a controversial opinion. I mean it has been prevalent in the
media that they have acknowledged that they intend to challenge
every approval, every permit processing, and every
implementation of environmental policy under the new
Administration.
I think that part of that is, as you can also see from
their public releases and from their websites, that has driven
fundraising, particularly in the last quarter, but that's a
consistent pattern that we have seen.
Mr. Johnson. It says something about their motives, I
think.
Mr. Jorjani, there are concerns about frequent repeat
litigants here. And, as a matter of fact, our Ranking Member,
Mr. Grijalva, requested a report from the Government
Accountability Office that was just released this February. The
report, which addresses so-called deadline suits under the
Endangered Species Act, found a total of 141 of these suits
against the Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine
Fisheries Service over a 10-year period.
Most shockingly, the data revealed that just two
environmental groups alone were responsible for half of those
suits. It took a GAO study on just these types of suits to
discover how often these repeat litigants sue.
It seems that special interest plaintiffs have developed a
strategy around exploiting the Endangered Species Act's
vulnerability to litigation, and environmental groups will file
an overwhelming number of petitions to review a species for
listing, knowing that Fish and Wildlife and National Marine
Fisheries cannot possibly complete the finding in time, giving
them an opportunity to sue the agency when the deadline is
missed.
The same report found that Fish and Wildlife prioritizes
completing actions under Section 4 of ESA mandated by
settlement agreements resulting from lawsuits.
So, basically, are Federal agencies tasked with protecting
our most vulnerable species, or prioritizing which species gain
protections first because of lawsuits brought on by the same
environmental groups that claim to want to protect these
species? This not only devalues the integrity of the ESA, but
science in general. A more centralized case information system
might help us better identify these patterns.
The question is--I am out of time, but would this be
something you are willing to continue a conversation with the
Committee on?
Mr. Jorjani. I am not familiar with that specific report,
but yes, we welcome the opportunity to continue working with
this Committee on this very important issue.
Mr. Johnson. I appreciate that. I am out of time for my
questions, and I am going to recognize Mr. Clay first for
questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
coming to the hearing today.
Ms. Schiffer, Mr. Barron claimed in his testimony that
special interest groups have virtually unlimited access to
litigation funding. He says the oil and gas companies are small
companies that cannot realistically compete in high-stakes
litigation with well-heeled advocacy groups. But he is a high-
priced lawyer from a major law firm representing their
interests. In fact, he represented their interests well when he
killed the fracking rule, which would have protected drinking
water sources.
In your experience, did you find that oil companies were
unable to find enough money to bring cases against Interior or
anyone else, for that matter?
Ms. Schiffer. Congressman Clay, thank you for your
question. In my experience, what I see is the lawsuits that the
government gets, either when I was at NOAA or when I was at the
Justice Department. And basically, Congress has appropriately
recognized that there are many different interests, and the
Department of the Interior is one of the agencies that really
has to take into account, under statutes, a very wide range of
interests.
And part of how people assert those interests is when it
thinks the agency has done something wrong or has failed to
act, it brings a lawsuit. So, in my experience, there are
lawsuits by oil and gas companies, big and small, by
environmental groups, and by individual citizens and local
citizens groups. And the fact that the groups may or may not be
well funded seems to go across the board of types of interest
that are expressed.
I would also note, because there has been some suggestion
that the Equal Access to Justice Act provides sort of a big
pocket of money, that the standards for getting attorney's fees
under the Equal Access to Justice Act are pretty clearly set
forth in the statute.
It has one financial standard for an individual, a person
who has a net worth of less than $2 million, and a separate
standard for every other kind of group. It makes no distinction
between non-profits, unincorporated businesses, corporations,
associations, or units of local government. They are all
together with $7 million, they have to have less than $7
million.
Once they meet that threshold, then the group has to show
that they prevailed in the lawsuit. And that is a standard that
courts have interpreted in rather complicated ways to determine
what prevailing in a lawsuit is. But a version, they have to
win it.
And then, when they win it, the government can show that
its position was substantially justified. And if the government
took a substantially justified--that is, a reasonable--
position, then the people do not get attorney's fees. And even
then, there is an hourly rate, which is relatively low, in the
statute, and with limited exceptions for going above it. So, it
is a heavy burden, and it happens only after the lawsuit is
over.
As a practical matter--I am not in any groups, and I don't
know their motives, but it would appear that that would not be
the basis for suing.
And I will say, if you look on the websites of some of
these groups, they have pretty broad purposes and policies
that, assuring statutes are implemented, do not relate to
having funding.
Mr. Clay. Sure. Thank you for that response. Ms. Schiffer,
Mr. Barron claims that oil and gas operators frequently choose
not to challenge adverse decisions on individual permits and
projects in the interest of preserving the operator's overall
working relationship with local regulators.
In your experience, when oil companies sue BLM, do the
regulators at the local level care so much about the cases that
it affects their relationship with the oil companies? If so, is
that a deterrent to filing lawsuits for oil companies?
Ms. Schiffer. Well, I certainly don't know the specific
facts of Mr. Barron's clients. I do know that everybody worries
about how they are going to get along with the local
regulators. That includes people who work on environmental
protection, as well as oil and gas companies, and everybody
else who deals with the regulators, and that interest is
widespread.
It is a little bit of--you can disagree without being
disagreeable. And I will say that I have spent certain amounts
of time explaining to really terrific Federal employees, people
who work for all of us, as employees of the Federal Government,
that the fact that somebody sues you does not mean you are a
bad person or that you have done something wrong.
Mr. Clay. Sure.
Ms. Schiffer. It means that they have a disagreement with
the agency.
So, I cannot address Mr. Barron's clients. I can say that
there is an interest in working at the local level in a
cooperative way, but there is also the capacity--as Congress
has recognized and the courts have recognized--to go ahead and
bring lawsuits when it is necessary, when people believe it is
necessary to assure that the agency is carrying out what
Congress specified.
Mr. Clay. Yes, thank you for your response. My time is up,
but I am sure we have to protect those small little oil and gas
companies from litigation. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mrs.
Radewagen for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. [Speaking native language]. Good morning.
Thank you, Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Grijalva, for
holding this hearing. And thank you all for testifying today. I
have a question here for Mr. Barron.
In regards to an earlier question regarding the Bureau of
Land Management's hydraulic fracturing rule, do you draw a
distinction between a group of stakeholders directly impacted
by a rule, which multiple states and tribes also challenged and
a district court judge ruled was outside the scope of the
Bureau's congressionally delegated authority, and advocacy
organizations indiscriminately challenging individual projects
and agency decisions as a part of a larger strategy to
eliminate oil and gas resource development on Federal land?
Mr. Barron. Yes, I would draw that distinction. The
particular rule in question, I think that the premise of the
Congressman's question may have been flawed. In addition to the
statutory authority arguments that the Federal judge ruled on,
the judge had also found during the preliminary injunction
stage that the rule was not adequately justified and was flawed
under several aspects of administrative law, and would not have
provided any additional environmental protection beyond what
the states and the oil and gas are already providing.
Mrs. Radewagen. Ms. Lobdell, in discussing the Point Reyes
National Seashore litigation, you mentioned Marin County and
the ranchers, whose leases are affected by the litigation, are
not full participants to the settlement negotiations between
the plaintiffs and the National Park Service.
Do you believe that it results in sound policy making when
special interest group plaintiffs are able to influence the
terms of agreements to a greater degree than the local
government and affected leaseholders actually conducting the
activities being challenged?
Ms. Lobdell. Thank you for your question. I do not believe
that is sound policy. I think that we are taking well-intended
laws to an extreme here. And the result is an incentive
structure that encourages constant lawsuits at the expense of
the benefits of commercial management, of natural resources,
and of rural communities.
Mrs. Radewagen. Ms. Lobdell, what sort of value can state
and local governments' potential timber sales purchaser and
permit holders provide to the litigation and settlement process
when the Department of the Interior is involved? And how does
this assist the Department in its cases?
Ms. Lobdell. These resource users are on the ground. They
know the nuances of the landscape, they know their own personal
histories, and they have localized knowledge on a fluency level
that is localized, both for the facts and the economic impacts
to the communities. And they can help the Department of the
Interior bring to light those facts to a judge.
They are also, when they are involved in litigation, there
to help influence and work with the Department of the Interior
in order to move the litigation along, so to speak.
Mrs. Radewagen. So, would you suggest that we improve the
process for greater stakeholder involvement in settlement
negotiations?
Ms. Lobdell. I believe there is a fundamental question at
root there, and it is involving stakeholders by giving them a
right to intervene in lawsuits, so that they can have a seat to
the settlement negotiations. So, I don't think we jump straight
to the settlement negotiation. That question has a sub-layer,
which is, what is their right to participate in a lawsuit?
In the Point Reyes case, they begged and banged at the
door, and they are still not considered full parties.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, and the Chair recognizes Mr. Soto
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Having served in state
government for 10 years, we constantly had to balance between
the rights of litigants to move our government along with the
costs associated with that.
My first question is for Ms. Schiffer. We have the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and Endangered Species Act, and we
have these specific sections that provide for the ability to
have lawsuits. Would you agree it has been, for many years,
congressional intent for these private parties to have a say in
this process?
Ms. Schiffer. I would certainly say that the statutes that
Congress has passed are very clear direction to the agency. If
a citizen or if somebody petitions, for example, to have a
species listed, and there is a specific provision in the
statute for that, then the agency is on a strict time schedule
that is set out by the statute, 90 days, to evaluate if the
science supports going further. Then there is another year to
take action.
And Congress put those provisions in for a reason. We are
talking about species, critters and species protection, and
there is an interest in making a decision about whether they
need to be protected.
It is also true that, under the Administrative Procedure
Act, and specific provisions of the Endangered Species Act, if
the agency is not doing what it is supposed to do--that is, the
duty that Congress has given it to do--people can sue to say,
``Do what you are supposed to do.'' And that is what a lot of
the lawsuits are.
The root problem is not the lawsuits. The root problem is
that the people and the agencies do not have adequate resources
to do everything that they are supposed to do. So, they can
tell you at the front end that they are not going to make that
deadline, and that putting them under a settlement agreement to
meet the deadline helps to give it some priority.
Mr. Soto. So, Congress underfunds the agencies, then the
agencies are not able to do their due diligence and be as
efficient in naming some of these species and making some of
the other decisions that they need to make. And therefore,
these lawsuits are there to hold the agency accountable. Is
that fair to say?
Ms. Schiffer. That is exactly right. And that really is our
checks and balances, three-branch system of government, that if
Congress passes a law, the executive branch implements it. If
the citizens think it is not being implemented in the way
Congress intended, they can go to the courts to get the courts
to say, ``Agency, you need to implement it, and we are going to
hold you accountable for that.''
I will say that sometimes what the settlements have the
effect of doing is enabling the citizens and the agency to work
out a schedule that is more pragmatic than if the court just
says, ``We're going to set the standards.'' But it is all
carrying out what Congress has specified in the statutes,
including the deadlines that Congress has set.
Mr. Soto. Ms. Lobdell made a good point about local
stakeholders who may be affected by it. Maybe they should have
an intervening right. What would be the positives and negatives
of having some of the local businesses affected by these
lawsuits being able to intervene?
Ms. Schiffer. Well, there really are two questions that are
a part of what you are asking. I am all for having a broad
range of interests being able to be taken into account, and the
people who are affected having a seat at the table, in general,
when agencies are considering action to take.
In terms of when people go to court, can they intervene?
The rules for who can intervene are set as part of what are
called the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which is a rule
that the courts make. But my recollection is that that set of
rules lays before Congress for a period of time before it goes
into place. And then the courts implement those rules.
And they have been in place for a while. The Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure are periodically amended, and there is a
specific rule providing for intervention of right. And, if not
a right, then intervention----
Mr. Soto. So, you wouldn't have an opposition to
intervening, and it is arguably substantive, so it could be in
the purview of Congress, in addition to the rules of procedure.
There is some common ground on how we could tweak the process a
little bit, while still making sure that citizens have the
right to push the agencies along to do what they need to do,
right?
Ms. Schiffer. I think what the Rules of Civil Procedures
show is that it is a case-by-case decision based on a set of
standards and the rules, and how the courts apply the facts.
Mr. Soto. So, they have the ability to intervene right now,
under the rules?
Ms. Schiffer. They have a standard that, if they need it,
they may intervene of right as a voluntary, discretionary
matter, or to be amicus participants, but it is up to the judge
implementing that set of rules. But there is a standard by
which citizens now can seek to intervene.
Mr. Johnson. Objection, leading the witness. No, I am just
kidding.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. The Chair now recognizes General Bergman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to all of
you for being here today.
In my district, which includes the Upper Peninsula of
Michigan and northern lower Michigan, we have difficulty in
getting affordable and reliable energy to our entire region. It
has been my experience that oil and gas operators either cannot
build the necessary infrastructure because it is too expensive
to comply with both Federal and state regulations, or the ones
who can afford to have to charge potentially higher prices just
to stay in business.
So, Mr. Barron, can you describe what effect that over-
litigation, that we are discussing here today, would have on
the potential to a smaller oil and gas operator to come to a
rural, less-populated region like the Upper Peninsula?
Mr. Barron. Thank you for that question, Congressman. Many
of the challenges that we have been discussing would apply
particularly to that project. Rights-of-way projects are among
the most difficult and frustrating projects for operators
developing both on and off public lands. When they are on
public lands, they are, of course, dealing with the NEPA
process that is attendant to any sort of construction project
analysis.
But also, for rights-of-way projects, some of these groups
have an opportunity to resort to suits under other statutes,
including the Endangered Species Act, the Clean Water Act, and
those sorts of statutes are applicable, not just on Federal
lands, but in the scenario that you are describing, in a rural
area where you will find deposits of what might be ephemeral
waters, where you will find critters, as Ms. Schiffer mentioned
earlier, that potentially could be subject to endangered
species challenges.
So, you can develop and manifest a lawsuit over a rights-
of-way project pretty much in every single situation. And
particularly when those projects involve fossil fuels, they
become the preferred challenges for special interest groups.
Mr. Bergman. OK. Do you think that if Congress could
actually ease this atmosphere of over-litigation, that
business, both large and small, but especially small, would be
more apt to operate in regions like ours?
Mr. Barron. I do believe that, yes.
Mr. Bergman. OK. This is for all the panel members, and you
can either choose to or not choose to answer this. But what, in
your opinion, is the next step that this Committee should take
to reverse this injuriously negative trend of using--my word,
now--frivolous litigation, mean-spirited, in some cases, to
delay good policy from being implemented?
Ms. Schiffer. Congressman, with all respect, I have issue
with the assumptions that you are making, that it is litigation
that is delaying, and to me, what would be most effective is to
get together the people who have an interest and a stake in
what is going on, and to have them talk to each other and see
if a policy can be developed that takes into account the full
range of interest that Congress has told the Department of the
Interior to take into account.
Mr. Bergman. Would that include or exclude all the lawyers
in the discussion?
Ms. Schiffer. Well, I am a lawyer, so you know that I am
going to say I think the lawyers help in the decision making.
Mr. Bergman. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, General. The Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, Mr. Grijalva, has requested that Ms. Barragan
go next. So, I now recognize Ms. Barragan for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And by the way, Mr.
Bergman, I am a lawyer. We are good people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know this was covered a little
bit earlier, but I want to go back to some of the EAJA issues.
Signed by President Carter and permanently funded by President
Reagan, the Equal Access to Justice Act, or EAJA, was enacted
to give citizens the ability to challenge the government,
regardless of their social economic status.
Far from being the taxpayer-funded meal ticket or gravy
train, as one of our panelists calls it in her testimony, EAJA
employs built-in safeguards, along with others that have
evolved through case law, to effectively prevent abuse. In
fact, under EAJA, parties can recover attorney's fees up to
$125 an hour, but there have to be two conditions met.
One is that, first, the party must have won the lawsuit.
Second, the party must prove that the government's position was
not substantially justified. This is not an easy standard to
meet. There are no exceptions to this rule, and many plaintiffs
do not recover attorney's fees, even when they win their cases.
The law also restricts who can recover fees under EAJA.
Individuals with a net worth of more than $2 million or
organizations worth more than $7 million, or with more than 500
employees, cannot recover fees.
Further, there is no evidence that EAJA has fueled
environmental litigation, although I know there has been some
testimony that that could be the case. Both industry and non-
governmental organizations have been the recipients of EAJA
awards.
And, simply put, I think EAJA provides an essential avenue
for American taxpayers to use if they have been wronged by the
Federal Government, and ensures that our civil justice system
does not exclude the most vulnerable among us.
My question, and let me start with the testimony, Ms.
Lobdell argued that EAJA is used as an incentive to sue the
Department of the Interior and other agencies by individuals
who would not have sued otherwise.
Ms. Schiffer, in your experience, have you seen this to be
the case?
Ms. Schiffer. Congresswoman, I have not seen that to be the
case, that EAJA is the reason why people bring lawsuits against
the government.
I have two additional observations. There is a Supreme
Court case called Scarborough v. Principi, where Justice
Ginsburg quoted congressional legislative history about the
purposes of EAJA. It said it is to eliminate the barriers that
prohibit small businesses and individuals from securing
vindication of their rights in civil actions and administrative
proceedings brought by or against the Federal Government.
So, that was clearly what was motivating Congress, it was
to enable people to vindicate their rights. It was not to
somehow create a fund. And, in my experience, that is how it
has worked.
I would also note that it is my understanding--though I
can't put my finger on the GAO report right now--that the
report is that the significant users of the EAJA, people who
get funds under it, are people who bring cases against the
Veterans Administration and the Social Security Administration.
And it really bears paying attention to, that that statute
serves important purposes for these citizens who have concerns
about what the government is doing.
Ms. Barragan. And would you agree that the two standards
that are met are there to be somewhat of a safeguard against
frivolous lawsuits because it is so hard to sometimes meet
these two requirements?
Ms. Schiffer. Yes, I would definitely agree with that, that
there are high burdens under EAJA, and not easy to meet. And I
would also note that, under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of
Procedure, people cannot make frivolous claims about it,
either.
But it is a significant burden, to show that the government
was not substantially justified, and that the person has
prevailed.
Ms. Barragan. And last, would you be able to explain why it
is important that the net worth limit makes a distinction
between non-profits and individuals?
Ms. Schiffer. It makes the distinction between individuals
and every other kind of entity. And I am not familiar with how
Congress came up with those amounts, but it doesn't make
anything special for non-profits. They are just with every
other kind of entity, different from individuals.
I think the thinking was we don't want very rich
individuals using it, and we don't want rich entities using it,
either.
Ms. Barragan. Great, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. McClintock
for 5 minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jorjani, what is meant by the term ``sue and settle''?
Mr. Jorjani. I believe those who use the term ``sue and
settle,'' it is the idea that certain groups seek to advance
policy initiatives by litigating and then settling to achieve
that policy initiative. Beyond that, I don't have a----
Mr. McClintock. So, an objective would be, essentially,
collusion between litigants and ideological zealots in the
bureaucracies to achieve a fore-ordained conclusion by court
order that they know they could not get by regulation or by
law.
Mr. Jorjani. I wouldn't want to assume certain intentions
or characterize others as zealots in this. I think it varies
from case to case and matter to matter.
Mr. McClintock. Well, is that the practice? Do we end up
getting actions by court order that would not have been
obtained by regulation or statutory change?
Mr. Jorjani. I would like to thank you for the question. It
is an incredibly important issue. We look forward to learning
more about this matter, or the issue, generally. But, in
theory, if groups are engaging in suing and settling, they are
holding different agencies to the terms of specific statutes.
And to the extent those deadlines are in the statutes, we look
forward to working with this Committee to reform the statutes.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Barron, how much of our regulatory cost
delays would you say are caused not by the litigation itself,
but by agencies bulletproofing studies to avoid any pretext for
litigation?
Mr. Barron. I would certainly say that that is an issue,
that agencies often are so concerned about the potential of
being sued in the future, that studies take considerably
longer, analysis is delayed in order to try to sure up the
paper trail because they know lawsuits are coming, once the
final decision is issued.
Mr. McClintock. Ms. Lobdell, we were told at this hearing,
and we have been told at previous hearings, this is no big
deal, there is really not that much litigation that goes on,
that attorney's fees are very limited and very reasonable. That
is the theory, anyway. Is that the practice?
Ms. Lobdell. In reality, that is not the practice. A
Congresswoman over here had mentioned $125 an hour under EAJA.
When EAJA was enacted, that was the standard rate, which is
adjusted for inflation. Last I checked it was $180; that was
some time ago.
But the reality is that is not the rate that we are dealing
with here. We are dealing with an enhanced rate because of the
specialty of environmental law.
Mr. McClintock. How much is that enhanced rate, typically?
Ms. Lobdell. It varies, based on the particular specialty
and the resume, for shorthand, of the environmental lawyer
seeking it.
Recently, our firm was involved in a case on a timber sale,
and the rate for the attorney was $450 an hour, and I think
that increased at some point during the case, and the law
student's rate was $139 an hour. And these are folks not even
admitted to practice law.
Mr. McClintock. I had one little community in my old
district before reapportionment called Colfax. They were sued
by a group of San Francisco environmental law firms, and the
legal costs of those San Francisco law firms actually exceeded
the budget of this little community.
Is that typical, or at least--let me put it another way. Is
that an isolated incident?
Ms. Lobdell. Is the case I am referencing, those rates, an
isolated incident? In my practice, no. These rates are standard
from what I usually see and request for attorney's fees.
Mr. McClintock. In order to get an award for an attorney's
fee, does the plaintiff have to prevail on all of the claims
they bring in their lawsuit?
Ms. Lobdell. No, and to answer the other question asked
earlier, what should our first step be? Our first step is to
take an honest look at what EAJA incentivizes, and be honest
about what the rates are that we are playing with here, how
many lawsuits there are, and what the incentive structure is.
The incentive structure is to throw the widest net possible
against an agency, and to prevail on any of those ``thou-
shalts'' that I mentioned, which otherwise may or may not exist
under the statute, and to do it frequently, so that you can
increase your odds of accessing these fees. So, even if you had
10 claims, and you prevailed on 1, in many instances, the
environmental plaintiffs argue that claim is so inextricably
intertwined with the lawsuit as a whole that we cannot really
separate it out.
Mr. McClintock. You could sue on 100 different points, win
on 1, and get an award?
Ms. Lobdell. You can get an award. And the question there
is the nature and extent of the award. And the argument that
comes up is that claim was so connected to the whole, we should
get more than just that piece of it.
Mr. McClintock. At these hearings, I have often been
reminded of Eric Hoffer's line that every great cause becomes a
movement that becomes a business that becomes a racket. And
that might be making the environmental attorneys rich, but it
is killing our forests.
Ms. Lobdell. It is a well-intended law that, in my opinion,
has become the primary fundraiser for many non-profit groups
seeking to halt projects and sue the government.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the
witnesses.
Ms. Lobdell, I would like to pick up with you, if I could,
please. I noticed in your testimony that you made reference to
the Point Reyes National Seashore, a ranching community. I
represent those folks.
Ms. Lobdell. Yes, you do.
Mr. Huffman. And I realize that there is a narrative in
this Committee, in this hearing, which is to criticize
environmental litigation. There is a similar narrative to
pretty much bash the Park Service wherever possible, but it
gets a little more complicated when it comes to ranching at
Point Reyes. That is a vexing situation.
I was struck that your testimony criticized both things
that that narrative, the Majority, is calling for, you
criticized the environmental litigants, but you also said that
the Park Service had capitulated to them by granting only 1-
year leases, instead of doing what Ken Salazar promised back
in, before 2013. I think it was before I got to Congress.
Ken Salazar, though, you and I both recall, promised that
there would be 20-year leases. I think you said 10 years in
your testimony, but he actually promised 20 years.
Here is where I want to take issue with you a little bit.
The idea that the Park Service had somehow capitulated to the
environmental litigants is not true. In fact, the reason this
environmental lawsuit was brought--and I have been critical of
this environmental lawsuit, so in some ways I find myself a bit
on your side of this story, in this case. But the reason that
it was brought was the Park Service was moving methodically to
keep Ken Salazar's promise of granting 20-year leases. In fact,
there was a 2013 memo from Director Jarvis specifically
delegating authority to move forward with the granting of 20-
year leases.
Without objection, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter that
memorandum into the record, just so we can kind of get the
facts straight.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
United States Department of the Interior
National Park Service
1849 C Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20240
JAN 31 2013

Memorandum

To:     Regional Director, Pacific West Region

From:  Director Jonathan Jarvis

Subject:  Delegation of Authority for Point Reyes National Seashore
Agricultural Leases and Directions to Implemennt the
Secretary's Memorandum of November 29, 2012

In accordance with 200 D.M. Sec. 2.2 and 245 D.M. 1.1.A., I hereby
delegate to you the park-specific authority provided by 16 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 459c-5 and 460bb-2(j) in order to issue agricultural leases/
special use permits (``lease/permits'') as provided herein. This
authority may not be re-delegated.

This delegation authorizes the issuance of lease/permits for the
purpose of grazing cattle and operating beef and dairy ranches, along
with associated residential uses by the lessees and their immediate
families and their employees, and their employees' immediate families,
within the pastoral zone of Point Reyes National Seashore and the
northern District of Golden Gate National Recreation Area administered
by Point Reyes National Seashore. Under this delegation, you may issue
lease/permits with terms of up to twenty years. These long-term lease/
permits will provide greater certainty for the ranches operating within
the national park's pastoral zone and demonstrate the support of the
National Park Service (NPS) and the Department of the Interior for the
continued presence of dairy and beef ranching operations.

This delegation supersedes and replaces the delegation of authority
issued by the Acting Director on February 23, 2009, and it supersedes
any general provision of D.O. 53 or R.M. 53 which would otherwise limit
the authority of a Regional Director to issue special use permits for
terms of up to twenty years. The Solicitor's Office has also advised
that the issuance of such lease/permits under the cited provisions of
the park's enabling legislation is not subject to the requirements set
forth under the general NPS leasing authority found at 16 U.S.C. 1a-
2(k) nor the implementing regulations at 36 C.F.R. Part 18.

In his November 29, 2012, memorandum announcing his decision on the
Drakes Bay Oyster Company, the Secretary of the Interior observed that
ranching operations have ``a long and important history on the Point
Reyes peninsula. . . . These working ranches are a vibrant and
compatible part of Point Reyes National Seashore, and both now and in
the future represent an important contribution to the Point Reyes'
superlative natural and cultural resources.''

Preservation of cultural and natural resources within the pastoral zone
is an important responsibility shared by the NPS and the park ranchers.

This delegation of authority is supportive of multi-generational
ranching and dairying within the pastoral zone and is consistent with
the above-referenced provisions of the park's enabling legislation. In
his November 29, 2012, memorandum, the Secretary directed the NPS to
``pursue extending permits for the ranchers within [the] pastoral lands
to 20-year terms.'' This delegation of authority is intended as an
initial step to implement the Secretary's directive in a timely and
efficient manner.

In order to assure clarity and consistency for all permits, to clarify
expectations and commitments, and to allow for operational flexibility
inherent to the long-term beef and dairy operations, I direct the park
superintendent to review the permit structure to assure that it
reflects and protects the interests of ranch operators while meeting
NPS responsibilities to protect natural and cultural resources. In the
interim, I further direct the park superintendent and her staff to work
with the ranchers to assure that current authorizations are continued
while the new permit structure is developed and implemented.

______

Mr. Huffman. So, the Park Service was specifically
authorized from the top down to move forward with this, and
then they actually began a NEPA process, the Ranch
Comprehensive Management Plan, to make good on that promise.
The environmental plaintiffs, in their litigation, actually
said, and I will quote them, ``The Park Service is now
proceeding with the ranch plan process to consider issuing of
ranching authorizations up to 20-year terms.''
So, this was not a Park Service that had capitulated to
environmental plaintiffs to grant only 1-year extensions. And I
think this may seem like a nuance to many of the folks
following this hearing, but to me and the communities I
represent, it is a big, big deal.
The Park Service was doing the right thing. And that is one
of the reasons this litigation was so frustrating for me, and
where I found myself actually in sympathy to those who have
criticized it, because environmental plaintiffs were suing the
Park Service because they were doing the right thing. I did not
agree with that litigation. But I think it is very important
that we get our facts straight about it.
Do you want to respond?
Ms. Lobdell. Thank you for the opportunity to respond. I
think we have a fundamental disagreement about the Park
Service's role historically here.
Without going into information or attorney-client nuances
that I may not be able to share and, as you know, some of the
other confidentiality orders that are in place, leave it to say
that the pleadings and the briefs on the court record may be
able to express where we feel like the Park Service could have
been better.
I don't know if you had a question about--saying let's get
the facts straight, so are you asking me if I agree with your
version? The answer is I think that you and I agree on a lot. I
know that this is a case that--you have been so supportive of
the ranchers, and there is a large constituent group of the
environmental community, as you know----
Mr. Huffman. It is not a large one, it is a couple of
groups. And this is another nuance that is very significant.
Most of the environmental community, actually, was on my side
of this, and was critical of the lawsuit.
Ms. Lobdell. Well, the reason I brought this case,
Congressman, with all due respect, is because the sides collide
here. A large part of the environmental community and your
constituents, even yourself, and the ranchers--that is why this
case is important. Whether we disagree on what the Park
Service's role was or not, what this case shows is the
inequities.
Even in a case where we have a portion of the environmental
community supporting the agricultural use, this case still
highlights the inequities and the incentives to sue, and the
inertia and paralysis that happens----
Mr. Huffman. In the limited time left, I appreciate that,
but just for the record, the capitulation to the plaintiffs,
the 1-year--these are factual inaccuracies that I hope you will
be a little more careful about, going forward. There will
always be lawsuits that we disagree with. But I think it is a
bridge too far to say that all environmental groups have this
agenda.
The environmental community, for the most part, was
critical of this lawsuit. And it is an outlier in many ways,
and that is an important point as we think about the broader
narrative.
Ms. Lobdell. It is a case that I have used to illustrate
what the inequities are. Thank you for the disagreement on the
factual circumstances. With all due respect, I disagree with
your version.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you both. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Pearce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Continuing in this
whole discussion of whether or not the environmental groups
willingly participate, I would like to listen to the organizers
of the groups themselves.
I happen to have here a quote from the guy that founded the
Tucson-based Center for Biological Diversity, Mr. Suckling. He
says in the August 31, 2013 Legal News, ``We realize that we
can bypass the officials and sue, and that we can get things
done in court. Psychological warfare is a very under-
appreciated aspect of environmental campaigning. The core
talent of successful environmental activists is not science and
law, it is campaigning instinct.''
CBD has participated in well over 800 lawsuits with
purported environmental claims, so I always really appreciate
when people are very honest about their intentions coming to
court.
Now, to continue the discussion, my friend on the other
side of the aisle says that the lawyers are limited to $125 an
hour. That is very practical. Ms. Lobdell, you mentioned $450
an hour. We have had evidence that it is sometimes $750 an
hour. So, we are taking money from people who make $31,000 a
year average in New Mexico, and paying lawyers to sue our
government.
That played out in New Mexico just last September. There
was a lease sale--oil and gas is prevalent in New Mexico. The
lease sale occurred last September, $145 million on Federal
leases. Of that, the state was supposed to get $70 million.
This same Center for Biological Diversity, Wild Earth
Guardians, both filed protests. The protests were summarily
thrown out. But for a time, $70 million was withheld from New
Mexico. And before you think that that is just a number, New
Mexico is, at the point, running about $500 million short on
the budget.
So, more than 10 percent of the shortfall is being held up
by something that ended up being a frivolous claim, and
sometimes our critics on the other side think that we are too
harsh. Myself, I don't think so; 70 million is 1 percent, 1.1
percent of New Mexico's annual budget. This is what we get to
face by these groups who understand the political aims they can
achieve by just bypassing the process: ``We will sue and we
will stop as much of the process as possible.''
Ms. Lobdell, you seem to be somewhat familiar with the
process. We have seen in New Mexico where one environmental
group will bring the lawsuit and the judge will kick it out.
Another one will have the same lawsuit, they will scratch off
the name of the first litigant, and they will put their name in
there. And it will be tossed out, so they are able to delay,
say, harvesting timber after a fire. If you delay more than
about 10 months, previous testimony in this Committee says you
have lost the value.
Do you ever run across that kind of serial lawsuit
business?
Ms. Lobdell. We do. In my practice, there has been a--if
one lawsuit does not succeed, there is another outfit right
around the corner to bring a similar one.
Mr. Pearce. OK, so that is good enough.
Ms. Lobdell. They are not identical lawsuits, so to speak.
Just because we have terms----
Mr. Pearce. OK, that is clear enough. We will get there. I
have 25 seconds.
Ms. Lobdell. But the systematic delay, it happens, and it
hurts resource use, and it hurts the agency's ability to get on
the ground and manage the land.
Mr. Pearce. Yes, so this idea that the law, the EAJA law,
is to protect the people with no resources--how much do some of
these non-profits have, as actual net worth?
Ms. Lobdell. I have not done the specific studies on that,
so----
Mr. Pearce. Hundreds of millions, though.
Ms. Lobdell [continuing]. I would be hesitant. But my
understanding is it is well over the millions, and there are
multiple outfits.
Mr. Pearce. Yes, so they are able to skirt around the law,
and they still get their settlements, they get their $450-an-
hour settlements, even though it is not supposed to happen,
according to the underlying law. But like my friend from
California said, it has become a little bit of a racket here.
Mr. Barron, you mentioned that the BLM is not complying
with the quarterly lease sales. In 2016, for example, New
Mexico had two lease sales, not four. How much do we lose out
on when we cut down the number of sales, states like mine?
Mr. Barron. Thank you, Congressman. In New Mexico,
specifically, you are aware that oil and gas revenue represents
about a third of the state's----
Mr. Pearce. It is 40 percent, actually.
Mr. Barron. Right. And in Fiscal Year 2014, which is the
last year that I have the numbers in my head, New Mexico
received over $550 million in Federal royalties. So, it is a--
--
Mr. Pearce. Yes, so if you can stop two of those, you can,
say roughly $250 million would be--the amount is half, and then
we get half of that, basically, so significant, again, well up
into the----
Mr. Barron. Precisely.
Mr. Pearce. I see my time has expired, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Grijalva, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Schiffer, we have heard plenty of complaints about
litigation against Interior by environmental and public
interest groups. We have not heard too much or anything at all
about the litigation against Interior filed by, let's say,
ExxonMobil, the Western Energy Alliance, Statoil, Koch Brothers
Industries, and affiliated funded groups.
From your experience defending the Federal Government, do
you think we should change the rules of engagement, legally
speaking, so that some have access to the courts and others
not?
Ms. Schiffer. I do not, Congressman Grijalva. I think that
the laws that Congress has passed, and the constitutional
system that we have that enabled people to go to court if they
think agencies are not complying with the law, helps to give
everybody a voice, and that the laws that assure that everybody
has a seat at the table really means that we have a much better
country. We make much better policy.
It certainly means that it is a challenge for the Interior
Department to take into account all of those voices----
Mr. Grijalva. Yes.
Ms. Schiffer [continuing]. But that is really our
democratic system, is that everybody could do it.
I would also like to make one brief point. When there was a
discussion about government lawyers being collusive in their
lawsuits, and I will say I have fairly substantial experience
with quite a wide range of very good public and Federal
Government employee lawyers, and they take very seriously their
obligations under the Rules of Professional Responsibility to
act as lawyers for their clients. And they do not collude.
Mr. Grijalva. I am sure, Ms. Schiffer, that the industry
would love unfettered, unregulated, full access to whatever
extraction, whatever permit they needed, in order to increase
their net worth, which is huge, as it is.
But public access to the courts for all is important. I
think it is important to the effectiveness of conservation laws
and our democracy, in general. And litigation sometimes rights
the ship, in terms of where a decision is going, how a statute
is being interpreted, how a regulation is being applied.
Could you respond to that, those comments, if you don't
mind?
Ms. Schiffer. I agree with that. I taught environmental law
at Georgetown Law School for quite some time. And what we used
to tell our students is that what our system of laws does is
patrol the borders of what the Federal agencies do. The
agencies have discretion. They have to take into account a lot
of interests under the statutes that Congress passes, and that
going to court makes sure that that range of discretion that
they exercise is within the framework and borders that Congress
has set in those statutes.
And enabling a full gamut of interests and citizens to have
access to the courts, to patrol the borders that Congress has
set, is a very important part of our constitutional system.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you.
Mr. Barron, in your testimony you mentioned, on several
occasions, special interests. Define special interests for me,
your definition for us to see--and I don't think that
definition at this point includes your clients. So, would you
define special interests?
Mr. Barron. Yes. In my testimony, I was specifically
referring to, I guess, groups that would classify or
characterize themselves as either environmental or conservation
groups. I hesitate to apply those adjectives to those groups,
because, in my experience, most of these groups act as either
specialized law firms or specialized lobbying groups, where, to
the extent there is an environmental or conservation program
associated with their activities, it is a tangential or a very
minor part of their activity.
Mr. Grijalva. And because your client base is heavily
focused on their industry, and I said to create a more
comfortable environmental climate for their business, they
don't fit that definition.
Mr. Barron. Well, certainly, our client base represents
mostly a particular industry. Our practice group represents a
wide range of folks. It is not just oil and gas operators. We
represent a lot of renewable operators. We are an energy-
focused practice, not necessarily an oil-and-gas-focused
practice.
I kind of disagree with the assessment earlier that we are
looking for an unregulated Utopia. Our clients support
practical regulation that makes a difference and actually has a
commensurate environmental benefit associated with the cost
that those regulations impose.
Mr. Grijalva. Well, it is good to hear that, because so far
the tone and tenor has been what I described. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Gosar for
5 minutes.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much.
Ms. Schiffer, since it is taxpayer money going out, don't
you think it should be disclosed publicly, what the settlements
are, and the attorney's fees?
Ms. Schiffer. Yes, I do, and I believe it is.
Dr. Gosar. Well, it has been very tough for Congress to get
the awards.
You made another comment that government attorneys do not
collude. For a future question that you can answer to this
Committee, I want you to explain the sale of Uranium One. That
would be very interesting to see collusive bodies working in
the interest against the United States.
I think a blanket statement that government attorneys do
not collude is a false statement, because they are humans, as
well. And I think making that assertion is just flabbergasting.
Ms. Schiffer. I am not familiar with----
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Barron----
Ms. Schiffer. Excuse me.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I will let you answer that one, because it
is a perplexing question, now that everybody wants to talk
about it in regards to how did we sell our uranium to the
Russians. It is pretty interesting, and have some complicit
acknowledgment from attorneys that had better things on the
books to do than to collude. They should have upheld the law.
Mr. Barron, I know we have been talking about this exercise
of litigation. This has a prohibitive cost, so as a percentage
and dollar amounts, how much do you have to anticipate your
industry has to look forward to for excess cost to a project?
Mr. Barron. I mean that is very difficult to--it really
depends on the project.
As I referenced earlier, a situation where we had a master
development plan that was challenged in the New Mexico side of
the Permian Basin, and there were projects there that were
deferred, where the operator had allocated over $160 million
for that project.
I worked on another case in December, where we are talking
about delays in permitting in the Uintah Basin in Utah, delays
in permitting that would have pushed operations into a non-
drilling time period because of endangered species, migratory
bird issues. And there were about $50 million in allocated
resources for that particular project.
Developing oil and gas wells is an expensive proposition.
When those companies allocate money far in advance for long
periods of time, and when projects are delayed, it is not
necessarily easy because of equipment and contracting to
reallocate it to another project. Sometimes it delays return on
investment for significant amounts of money.
Dr. Gosar. Time is money, right?
Mr. Barron. Absolutely.
Dr. Gosar. So, utilizing the passage of time, you cannot
measure that.
Mr. Barron. One of the real difficulties for delays that
are caused by litigation is not necessarily that the project
will not get to take place at some point in the future, but the
actual delay makes investment and financing very difficult.
Dr. Gosar. How does that apply to the BLM and their
statutory applications on timetables? How does that apply
there, and how does it delay that?
Mr. Barron. Well, we have had rulings within the last
several months, actually, that those timetables can be, are
judicially enforceable, and should be mandated--that the
statute actually mandates those timetables, but I can tell you
that those timetables are almost never complied with.
Dr. Gosar. Can you give an example of one that actually
was?
Mr. Barron. I am not familiar--well, for example, under the
Mineral Leasing Act, as I mentioned earlier, once a permit
application is complete, BLM must act on it within 30 days--not
necessarily grant it, but either say we are going to grant it,
or here is why, and here is our estimated timetable.
Right now, the former BLM Director, Mr. Kornze, had
testified before this Committee that average processing time
for an APD on Federal lands is approximately 200 days.
Dr. Gosar. So, looking at that application, it doesn't
suffice to follow the statute.
Mr. Barron. They are not following the statute.
Dr. Gosar. And when you look at the prohibitive aspect of
the litigation, it is better to go somewhere else than, in many
cases, some of these areas, right?
Mr. Barron. Absolutely. I think it is undisputed that over
the last certainly decade to decade and a half, Federal energy
production has grown significantly. But the percentage of that
production that occurs on Federal lands has remained the same
or diminished during the same time period.
Dr. Gosar. Got you.
Ms. Lobdell, you are familiar with CBD, I am sure, and some
of the wood harvesting down in the Arizona way?
Ms. Lobdell. I am very vaguely familiar.
Dr. Gosar. Well, they made the comment that they did not
have to do any lawsuits recently, and that is because they did
all the lawsuits in the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s, to put
almost every business out of business. And that is why we have
the catastrophic fires that we have today. And that is why,
ecologically, we have huge problems, that when crown fires
actually burn they incinerate the soil. And what ends up
happening is you have an ecological catastrophe, where nothing
grows back in those areas. Some of that mitigation also has to
be looked at, don't you think?
Ms. Lobdell. I absolutely agree, and our water supply is a
threat with those fires, as well.
Dr. Gosar. I ran out of time. Thank you very much.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
We thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony, and
the Members for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask them to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3(o), members of the
Committee must submit witness questions within 3 business days
following this hearing, and the hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for the responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:38 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Rep. Grijalva Submission

Western Watersheds Project,
Arizona Office,
Tucson, Arizona

July 3, 2017

House Committee on Natural Resources,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Re: Oversight Hearing on ``Examining Policy Impacts of Excessive
Litigation Against the Department of the Interior''

Dear Honorable Committee Members:

I watched the June 28, 2017 hearing, ``Oversight Hearing Examining
Policy Impacts of Excessive Litigation Against the Department of the
Interior'' with great interest and I was particularly struck by the
inflammatory testimony of the witness, Ms. Caroline Lobdell, regarding
the use of the Equal Access to Justice Act (EAJA).
Ms. Lobdell testified to the committee, ``EAJA is a taxpayer funded
meal ticket for environmental groups'' and that it serves as a ``gravy
train.'' She fails to mention that EAJA is also available to compensate
industry, a fact with which she should be intimately familiar.
On June 19, 2017, Ms. Lobdell and Western Resources Legal Center
(WRLC) filed Cahill Ranches, Inc. v. Bureau of Land Management in the
United States District Court of Oregon, Medford Division. This case
challenges the federal authority to impose grazing restrictions on a
public lands grazing allotment and is brought by Ms. Lobdell and WRLC
on behalf of private ranchers. The filed complaint concludes with Ms.
Lobdell's request that the court, ``Award plaintiff its reasonable
costs, litigation expenses, and attorney fees associated with this
litigation pursuant to the Equal Access to Justice Act, 28 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 2412 et seq. and/or all other applicable authorities.'' That
is, Ms. Lobdell is seeking to avail herself of the same compensation
she derides in her testimony.
Western Watersheds Project greatly appreciates the comments of
Congressman Raul Grijalva regarding the reality that courts are the
remedy of last resort when the agencies are underfunded to carry out
their environmental mandates. Ms. Lois Schiffer also added important
fact-based testimony. Litigation ``rights the ship,'' as Mr. Grijalva
said, and it's a critically important part of our constitutional
system. It is a tool that Western Watersheds Project uses when its
administrative attempts have failed to halt a dangerous or
unsustainable project.
Additionally, environmental litigation is only successful when the
government has broken the law, and to the extent that the Trump
Administration ``is bracing for an influx of litigation,'' per Mr.
Johnson's opening statement, it speaks to its own intention to push
through major energy projects that skirt compliance with our bedrock
environmental laws.
Thank you for adding this letter to the hearing record.

Sincerely,

Greta Anderson,
Deputy Director.

______

[LIST OF DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
OFFICIAL FILES]

--  Rep. Johnson Submission: Statement on the Hearing from
William L. Kovacs, Senior Vice President,
Environment, Technology & Regulatory Affairs at the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, dated June 28, 2017.

[all]
