- OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND
REGULATORY AFFAIRS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
REGULATORY REFORM,
COMMERCIAL AND ANTITRUST LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 15, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-483 PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law

TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania, Chairman

BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice-Chairman

DARRELL E. ISSA, California          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                  Georgia
MIMI WALTERS, California             SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
DAVE TROTT, Michigan                 DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan                SCOTT PETERS, California

Daniel Flores, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

JULY 15, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Tom Marino, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Regulatory
Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law...........................     1
The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the State of Georgia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Howard A. Shelanski, Administrator, Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs
Oral Testimony.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Ph.D., President, American Action Forum
Oral Testimony.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Karen R. Harned, Esq., Executive Director, National Federation of
Independent Business, Small Business Legal Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    52
Prepared Statement.............................................    54
Richard Williams, Ph.D., Director of Regulatory Studies Program,
Mercatus Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    62
Prepared Statement.............................................    64
Noah M. Sachs, Professor, and Director, Robert R. Merhige Center
for Environmental Studies, University of Richmond School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    73
Prepared Statement.............................................    75

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................     5
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Virginia, and
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary...........................    13
Material submitted by the Honorable Doug Collins, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia, and
Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and
Antitrust Law..................................................    33

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Jr., a Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia,
and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law...................................    96
Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Howard A.
Shelanski, Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs........................................................   100
Response to Question for the Record from Noah M. Sachs,
Professor, University of Richmond School of Law, Member
Scholar, Center for Progressive Reform, and Director, Robert R.
Merhige Center for Environmental Studies.......................   108

OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND
REGULATORY AFFAIRS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law

Committee on the Judiciary,

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:05 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Tom
Marino (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Marino, Goodlatte, Farethold,
Collins, Ratcliffe, Trott, Bishop, Johnson, and Peters.
Staff Present: (Majority) Dan Huff, Counsel; Andrea
Lindsey, Clerk; and (Minority) Slade Bond, Counsel.
Mr. Marino. The Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law will come to order. In the
interest of our people that are testifying, we are going to get
started.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Committee at any time. And I think that will
happen, because we have our last series of votes coming up
maybe in an hour or so.
We welcome everyone to today's oversight hearing on the
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. And I will begin
by recognizing myself for my opening statement.
Congress has an ally in the fight against overregulation.
The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, known as
OIRA, is charged with ensuring that agency regulations are the
least burdensome possible and that their benefits justify their
cost.
Accordingly, I asked Administrator Shelanski, how can
Congress help you? I understand your staffing levels are near
historic lows and that your team has been moved out of the
Executive Office complex. I know that resources and proximity
matter.
How can we help you combat the scourge of midnight rules,
in which Presidential administrations issue a heightened number
of new regulations as their terms reach a close? The George W.
Bush administration took steps to prevent the practice. What
steps do you plan to take?
I am also concerned that the agencies are failing to comply
with important procedures designed to improve the quality of
rulemaking. For example, a 2008 study found that required
regulatory impact analyses have become perfunctory, rather than
real inquiries into the necessity of new regulations.
Similarly, agencies make the questionable claim that their
rules will not have a significant impact on a substantial
number of small businesses in order to skirt Federal
requirements designed to limit regulatory burdens. The EPA made
just such a certification for its controversial waters of the
United States regulation, despite the obvious potential
consequences for impacts on small businesses. What can be done?
Does OIRA need additional enforcement powers?
There also seems to be a wide disparity in the seriousness
with which agencies are taking their obligations to perform
regulatory lookbacks. A number of articles in academic journals
suggest ways to improve the regulatory lookback process. I am
curious if you have been able to incorporate any of them.
Former OIRA Administrator Cass Sunstein wrote recently
that, ``Many independent agency regulations, including very
expensive ones, have not been accompanied by careful cost-
benefit analysis.'' This suggests that Executive orders from
President Obama urging independent agencies to conduct cost-
benefit analysis have been inadequate. Is there anything more
OIRA can do, or is congressional action mandating OIRA review
in order?
While I support OIRA, I have concerns. These include a
potentially flawed cost-benefit methodology and the
controversial update to the social cost of carbon. We are also
missing OIRA's required annual report to Congress on the cost
and benefits of the previous year's Federal regulations. By
law, it is to be submitted ``with the budget.'' This timing--as
Congress is determining how much money to allocate to each
agency--helps ensure agency accountability for is regulatory
determinations. That report needs to be delivered on time.
My overall message to Administrator Shelanski is this: Help
us help you stand up to the Sdministration pressure,
particularly as the midnight regulation period commences.
I thank all of our witnesses and look forward to the
discussion.
And I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee,
the gentleman from Georgia, Congressman Johnson, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Johnson. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Impeccable timing, if I must say, on my part. Sorry for
being late, though, and thank you for forbearing.
Established by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 and
empowered with centralized regulatory review responsibilities
under President Reagan, the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs, or OIRA, functions as the gatekeeper of the
regulatory system for the most important Federal rules.
Issued by President Clinton in 1993, September, Executive
Order 12866 requires that OIRA review all significant
regulatory actions, between 500 and 700 a year. It additionally
requires that Federal agencies prepare a cost-benefit analysis
for economically significant rules.
In January 2011, President Obama issued Executive Order
13563, which reaffirmed the principles of Executive Order 12866
but also requires that agencies develop plans for a
retrospective review of existing regulations to determine
whether any should be modified, streamlined, expanded, or
repealed.
Finally, the Obama administration issued Executive Order
13610 in May 2012 to further increase public participation in
retrospective reviews.
According to Mr. Shelanski's predecessor, Cass Sunstein,
these orders have energized agencies to identify hundreds of
outdated rules for elimination, and many agencies have already
finalized or formally proposed over 100 of these reforms. For
instance, the Department of Health and Human Services has
finalized several rules to remove hospital and healthcare
reporting requirements, saving $5 billion over 5 years.
These efforts have continued under Mr. Shelanski and, thus
far, appear to be working. As Mr. Shelanski noted in March, the
retrospective review process is expected to achieve $20 billion
in savings over 5 years and is on track to eliminate over 100
million paperwork burden reduction hours. Combined, it is clear
that these initiatives have already resulted in hundreds of
formal proposals to eliminate rules, representing billions of
dollars in savings over the next several years and
substantially more in eventual savings.
I look forward to learning about the continuing efforts, to
date, of the President's push to have agencies improve and
modernize the existing regulatory system.
In addition to conducting oversight of OIRA, witnesses on
our second panel will also discuss larger concerns with our
Nation's regulatory system.
I would note that the most pressing issue facing our
regulatory system today is the timely response to public health
and safety crises through the expeditious promulgation of
Federal rules. But, sadly, it has become common for my
colleagues to assert that the same regulations that protect our
health, safety, environment, and financial system have
undermined the economic recovery and job growth. But this could
not be further from the truth.
The latest report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows
that unemployment has fallen to 5.3 percent. While there is
more work to do to grow the economy and help our Nation's
middle class, there have been 64 straight months of private-
sector job growth. That is 12.8 million private-sector jobs
created amidst a regulatory system that is pro-worker, pro-
environment, pro-public health and safety, and pro-innovation.
Furthermore, as I have noted on many occasions, there is
overwhelming consensus that the benefits of regulation vastly
exceed their costs. According to the Office of Management and
Budget's 2012 draft report on the benefits and costs of Federal
regulations, the net benefits of regulations in the first 3
years of this Administration totaled $91 billion, which is 25
times greater than during the comparable period under the Bush
administration.
Additionally, according to the 2014 benefits-costs report,
OMB estimates that the benefits of regulations are in the
aggregate between $217 billion and $863 billion, while the
estimated annual costs are in the aggregate of between $57
billion and $84 billion.
In closing, I thank Administrator Shelanski for taking the
time to appear before us today, and I thank our witnesses for
being here today. And I look forward to today's hearing.
And, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, if I might, I would like to
introduce the statement of the Ranking Member, Mr. Conyers,
into the record, without objection.
Mr. Marino. So ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. And the Chairman of the full Committee,
Congressman Goodlatte from Virginia, he is in a meeting also
and will not be here. Therefore, I will, without objection, ask
that his statement be entered into the record.
Seeing none, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goodlatte follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Without objection, other Members' opening
statements will be made part of the record.
Administrator, would you please stand and raise your right
hand to be sworn in?
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give
before this Committee is the whole truth and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
Mr. Shelanski. I do so swear.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Please be seated.
And let the record reflect that the witness has answered in
the affirmative.
Administrator Shelanski of the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs in the Office of Management and Budget, it
is an honor to have you here today.
The Administrator was previously Director of the Bureau of
Economics at the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and a professor
at Georgetown University Law Center. From 2011 to 2012, he was
of counsel at the firm of Davis and Polk. From 1999 to 2000,
Administrator Shelanski served as Chief Economist of the
Federal Communications Commission and, from 1998 to 1999, as
Senior Economist for the President's Council of Economic
Advisors at the White House.
Administrator Shelanski received his B.A. From Haverford
College and a J.D. and Ph.D. from the University of California
at Berkley. After law school, he clerked for Judge Williams on
the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals and Justice Antonin Scalia,
as the Justice referred to, on the U.S. Supreme Legislature,
just recently.
The witness' written statement will be entered into the
record in its entirety.
I ask that you would please summarize your statement in 5
minutes or less. And you see the lights in front of you. I am
color blind; I don't know what color they are. But I know when
the third one goes on your time is up.
And I will politely--and this seems to work, because I
focus on my statement as opposed to watching the light. I will
diplomatically just pick up the gavel and ask you to please,
when you see that, summarize.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE HOWARD A. SHELANSKI, ADMINISTRATOR,
OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS

Mr. Shelanski. Very good.
Thank you very much, Chairman Marino, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to appear before you today. I am pleased to have
this opportunity to discuss the role of the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs, OIRA, in regulatory review.
I would like to start by noting that OIRA has a broad
portfolio. For example, under the Paperwork Reduction Act, OIRA
is responsible for reviewing collections of information by the
Federal Government and ensures that those collections are not
unduly burdensome. OIRA also develops and oversees the
implementation of government-wide statistical standards and
policies. And we also, pursuant to Executive order, have a
fundamental role in international regulatory cooperation.
The largest area of OIRA's work, however, is the review of
regulations issued by executive branch departments and
agencies. Several Executive orders, as have been noted,
establish the principles and procedures for OIRA's regulatory
reviews. Executive Order 12866, implemented across
Administrations of both parties, sets forth standards and
analytic requirements for rulemaking by departments and
agencies and calls, to the extent permitted by law, for
agencies to regulate only when the benefits of a rule justify
its costs.
OIRA works with agencies to continually improve the review
process and the quality of government regulation. OIRA first
and foremost upholds the standards of review that the Executive
orders establish while remaining mindful that unnecessary
delays in reviews are harmful across the board--harmful to
those wishing to comment on proposed rules, to those who must
make plans to comply with rules, and to those denied the
benefits of regulation. Both rigor and efficiency in regulatory
review are essential to improving the clarity and quality of
our regulatory environment.
OIRA does not review all executive branch regulations, nor
would it make sense for the office to do so. OIRA review
applies only to significant regulatory actions. The most
fundamental category of significant regulations are those that
are economically significant, the threshold for which is an
annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more.
There are other factors that may lead to a rule to be
deemed significant beyond economic impact. Under Executive
Order 12866, rules are also potentially significant and subject
to interagency review if they create a serious inconsistency or
otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another
agency; if they materially alter the rights and obligations
related to entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs;
or if they raise novel legal or policy issues.
Once a rule is under review, OIRA plays two basic roles.
The first is to coordinate interagency review of regulations.
OIRA circulates the rule to other agencies around the Federal
Government whose own policies and responsibilities may in some
way interrelate with the rule under review.
The second main role that OIRA plays is to ensure that the
rule complies with the Executive order principles for sound
regulation and to review the analysis underlying the rule. OIRA
has longstanding guidelines for how agencies should analyze
economically significant rules, and OIRA reviews those analyses
for consistency with these guidelines as a standard part of our
review.
While reviewing a rule, OIRA's job is to review the
reasonableness of the underlying analysis and to identify areas
where the regulation potentially could be improved or be more
consistent with the principles set forth in the Executive
orders. Often, the focus of regulatory review is to help the
agency hone and sharpen its arguments and to identify areas
where more evidence or discussion will strengthen or clarify a
regulation.
Finally, another important objective of the Executive
orders under which OIRA operates is the introduction of
flexibility into and removal of unnecessary burdens from
Federal rules. Ensuring regulatory flexibility for small
businesses and reducing regulatory burdens for everyone through
the retrospective review process are high priorities for OIRA.
In conclusion, regulation can bring great benefits to
Americans but also carries costs. It is critical to ensure that
Federal agencies base their regulatory actions on high-quality
evidence and sound analysis. Beneficial regulation must remain
consistent with the overarching goals of job creation, economic
growth, and public safety. We look forward to continuing our
efforts to meet these challenges.
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to
answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shelanski follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Administrator.
I am going to begin with recognizing myself for my 5
minutes of questions for you.
Administrator, the Bush administration took steps to
prevent ``midnight rules,'' in which Presidential
administrations issue a heightened number of new regulations as
their term reaches a close.
What steps will you take to prevent the practice of this
``midnight rules'' situation?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you very much for that question, Mr.
Chairman.
We have been engaging with agencies now to set priorities
and to try to establish a smooth and orderly process for the
issuance of regulations over the remainder of this
Administration.
As I said in my statement, the most important thing to OIRA
is to ensure that there is high-quality review of the
significant regulations that the executive branch issues. We
cannot do high-quality review if we have a flood of last-minute
regulations.
So we are working closely and regularly with agencies to
ensure that they are continuing to move their priorities
forward in the chain so that we will have time to perform that
review.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
My concern is with apparent victories. The Supreme Court
recently remanded without vacating the EPA's Utility MACT rule
to regulate mercury emissions. The Justices found that the EPA
failed to appropriately consider costs when it promulgated the
rule.
This decision was an incomplete victory because this rule
has been in effect since 2012. For 3 years now, while
litigation was pursued, millions of dollars was spent to comply
with the rule, only for it to be found unlawful. This is a
major drain on our economy and costs jobs.
What can be done to ensure that OIRA better reviews these
regulations and that the effective date of major rules is
delayed until the judicial process has been exhausted?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, sir.
So, on the particular rule that you referenced, I think the
Supreme Court's decision is still being reviewed, and how that
will be handled in the context of this specific rule is not
something I am able to speak to today. But your general
question is an important one.
It is an uncommon situation for a fundamental legal
question of that magnitude to be raised in a rule. So,
typically, OIRA review can proceed because the agency has the
authority to issue the rule, and we are typically getting the
kinds of analysis that we require under the Executive orders.
There isn't a perceived statutory barrier to that analysis, and
we are able to perform our review.
Now, of course, the Administrative Procedure Act provides
for judicial review of final rules. In the normal case, where
an effective date might come into play prior to the end of the
judicial process, it is up to the courts to determine whether
or not there would be a sufficient prejudice to affected
parties by having the rule take effect pending the judicial
process.
So, fortunately, the judicial process affords a very good
forum in which the courts can decide should the rule be allowed
to take effect while we are reviewing it or not.
Mr. Marino. Administrator, does anything prevent you or
OIRA from suggesting to the courts that the issue be stayed,
pending litigation, because of the expense involved for
industry?
Mr. Shelanski. OIRA does not play a role in the judicial
process. That would be up to the Justice Department, typically.
What OIRA does is to ensure that the agency has done a
sufficient--if it is an economically significant rule, a
sufficient analysis that is part of the administrative record,
that the court can review the record and come to a
determination of precisely that kind of issue.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
My last question, it looks like. 98.98 percent of the
claimed benefits from EPA's mercury rule came from reducing
particles other than mercury. Chief Justice Roberts called such
a disproportionate reliance on co-benefits a potentially
illegitimate way of avoiding limits on agency power.
Will OIRA reevaluate the extent to which it permits
agencies to rely on secondary benefits?
Mr. Shelanski. When OIRA reviews a rule, we look at all the
costs and benefits, direct and indirect, that might come from a
rule. But one of the things that we try to do is to ensure that
a rule is well-tailored to its stated purposes. So OIRA does
try to make sure that a rule does achieve its stated purposes
and that its benefits come from the lawful purpose for which
the rule is being promulgated.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Administrator. My time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Georgia, Congressman Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Shelanski, bills have been proposed, such as
H.R. 427, the REINS Act of 2015, which would require both
houses of Congress and the President to approve all new major
rules--i.e., rules with an annual impact on the economy of at
least $100 million or having one of a number of economic
impacts--before they can take effect.
Are you familiar with the REINS Act?
Mr. Shelanski. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Johnson. And what do you think about that concept?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
The REINS Act is something on which the Administration has
spoken, at least in the last Congress and the Congress before
that. I understand the bill may come up again in this Congress,
and the Administration will have to determine its view at that
time on the current version. But the Administration has issued
a statement against this bill, and I certainly share that view.
The main concern with the REINS Act is that it introduces,
in my view, an unnecessary layer of review and delay in what
could be very important health, safety, and welfare
regulations. By requiring a joint resolution of Congress, the
authority of the executive branch agency to put forward its
policies is subject to potentially limitless delay or very long
delay.
And that seems to me, in the context of a regulatory system
with numerous checks and balances--internal review by OIRA
within the executive branch, public comment, and judicial
review under the Administrative Procedure Act--strikes me as an
unnecessary hurdle to getting the business of the country done.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Among other things, H.R. 1155, which is the SCRUB Act--are
you familiar with the SCRUB Act?
Mr. Shelanski. I have just learned about the SCRUB Act. I
don't have sufficient familiarity at this point to comment on
it.
Mr. Johnson. It would establish a regulatory CutGo process.
Are you familiar with the CutGo process?
Mr. Shelanski. I do understand what that refers to, yes.
Mr. Johnson. Yeah. Would you discuss the ramifications of a
mandatory CutGo process?
Mr. Shelanski. I think this is something I would really
like to engage with anybody in the Congress who would like to
talk about a CutGo process or some kind of regulatory review
commission.
The devil really is in the details on the kinds of
proposals that are in the SCRUB Act. The Administration has not
yet, I think, had a chance to formulate a view on this, and I
certainly can't speak for the Administration, but it is
something we are certainly interested in working with you on
and learning more about.
Mr. Johnson. Okay.
Other bills, such as H.R. 185, the Regulatory
Accountability Act, would give greater power to the courts and
the Administration to override congressional mandates. It does
this by requiring the courts to exercise their independent
judgment over that agency's experts.
What are your views regarding heightened judicial review of
agency rulemaking?
Mr. Shelanski. Mr. Johnson, we have grave concerns and I
have grave concerns about judicial review over the expert
processes within the agencies. There is no single, one-size-
fits-all type of analysis or type of process that is fit for
all the different kinds of agency processes that go on. So I
have concerns that this introduces judicial review at a far
more granular level, a very technical and detailed level, where
I think good decisionmaking by general courts will be extremely
difficult.
Moreover, we should keep in mind courts have the
opportunity to review the complete administrative record. So if
there is not sufficient evidence and basis for an agency's
decision, courts already get to review that. Agencies are
already held to a good standard of having record evidence for
their decisions. Further judicial review down to the expert
level within the agency strikes me as something that could
grind to a halt the deliberative process and good policy
development.
Mr. Johnson. And going back to regulatory CutGo, is it wise
to have a broad restriction on introduction of new regulations,
mandating that if one comes in you have to get rid of another?
Is that wise?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, sir.
As a general matter, I do not favor some kind of a cut-and-
go or, often called, regulatory PAYGO obligation. Sometimes a
rule needs to be issued to meet a vital public matter.
The United States Department of Transportation had to
engage in a very, I think, essential set of rules relating to
the transport of volatile crude oil by rail. This was something
that received, sort of, broad support across the spectrum from
many States. For the Department to have had to spend a lot of
time thinking about what rules it was going to have to cut
before it could go with its new vital health and safety
regulation, I think, could have been very harmful.
More to the point, we have a retrospective review process.
I would much prefer that we use the retrospective review
process to get rid of rules that should be cut, because that
way those rules could be considered on a full record. They
could be considered on an appropriate timeline. We at OIRA
would have the opportunity to review any rules that were
implementing retrospective review, either repeal or reform. And
that way we would be sure that the rules that are cut are rules
that we don't need. My concern is we lose that review in a kind
of process like cut-and-go, mandatory cut-and-go, as you
described.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Congressman.
The Chair now are recognizes the gentleman from Michigan,
Congressman Trott.
Mr. Trott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the witness testifying today.
One of the attributes of the REINS Act was it called for
more opportunities for industry experts to provide input into
the rulemaking process. Do you think there is a enough, or too
much, or need more input from industry experts when writing
rules?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, Mr. Trott.
I think, as a general matter--and then I will get
specifically to your question--as a general matter, I think
OIRA has the tools and the input that it needs to do good
regulatory review.
On the specific question of industry input, I think there
are numerous opportunities for industry in the system we have
today to have serious input into the process. It is extremely
rare, I mean, hard for me to think of a significant regulation
where industry has not actually been involved with the agency
as a stakeholder in the development of a rule.
Once the agency sends the rule to us at OIRA, that fact
that the rule is with us becomes public, and we are required
under our Executive orders to have meetings with anybody who
requests a meeting, under Executive Order 12866. As it so
happens, we have no control over this. Industry avails itself
quite heavily of that opportunity, so we are hearing a lot from
industry.
Now, typically, this just gets us to ask questions, and the
agency is often very familiar with the arguments that industry
is making. And then, of course, once the proposed rule is out
for public comment, industry has a great opportunity to get all
of the facts and issues into the public record--a record that
the agency is required by law to address in order to withstand
judicial review.
Of course, during the finalization process, there is
further interaction at the agency level and then back through
the 12866 process.
So it strikes me that industry has a wealth of opportunity,
as things currently stand, to be involved with the rulemaking
process.
Mr. Trott. I appreciate those comments. That is helpful. In
hindsight, maybe some of the feedback I am getting from
businesses is they have plenty of opportunity for input but
some of their input is not listened to or followed, so maybe
that is the real issue.
But, along those lines, one of the concerns I have heard
from a number of businesses is the timeframe when rules are
finalized and implemented is sometimes too short of a window
for them to properly respond and implement procedures and
software changes to adapt. Do you have any concerns in that
regard?
You know, when I was in the business sector for many years,
that was one of my biggest nightmares, was when a client or
customer would give us a short timeframe to implement
significant changes in operations, and we had no choice but to
make it happen. But I just worry sometimes that the rulemaking
undermines businesses because they don't have adequate time to
respond.
Mr. Shelanski. I fully agree that a realistic
implementation period is vital to a regulation. It is vital for
a number of reasons.
Stakeholders do need time to order their affairs. The
businesses that are being regulated are the engines of our
economy, they are engines of employment. And we need to ensure
that the timeframe in which a rule will be implemented and the
way it will be implemented is consistent with those vital
functions that industry plays.
We review implementation periods, typically, as part of our
review of a rule, because costs can change drastically
depending on what the ramp-up period is or the implementation
period is. Do agencies always get it right? My supposition is
occasionally they don't, but it is not for lack of trying. It
is part of our review, and it is something on which we
frequently take input.
Mr. Trott. Executive Order 12866 calls on agencies to bring
regulatory burdens to your attention and to give suggestions on
how they can be resolved. Is that being done, to your
knowledge? And do you get many suggestions on how we can
improve the regulatory burden on businesses? And if not, how
can we make sure they cooperate?
Mr. Shelanski. Yes, sir. We do have a lot of back-and-forth
with the agencies on precisely that point.
One of the things we are most concerned with at OIRA is to
make sure that rules achieve their goals but that, in doing so,
they don't take an unnecessarily high-cost path.
And so, during the course of review, we have a number of
sources of information that lead to almost a majority of our
exchanges with agencies are questions on this kind of topic,
whether they are brought to us by other agencies, which is
frequently the case through the interagency process, or the
Small Business Administration, which is a very effective
advocate for small businesses on business burdens, and also
through our obligation under the Regulatory Flexibility Act to
ask agencies to think about alternatives.
Mr. Trott. Great.
I see my time has expired. I thank you for your time and
your insight this afternoon, sir.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes another gentleman from
Michigan, Congressman Mike Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Administrator Shelanski, I appreciate your testimony today.
I would like to build on what my colleague from Michigan
was getting to, and I want to refer you to an event. At the end
of May, the Department of HHS and Treasury and Labor published
a rule announcing that, as of 2016, all plans would be required
to embed an individual cost-sharing limit in all options
offering family coverage.
This is a huge change in the plan for both the employee and
the employer, large and small, and their administrative vendors
and carriers, as Mr. Trott indicated, will not be able to
accommodate the rule by 2016.
I am wondering how it is possible that something of this
magnitude can be implemented by the government without any
statutory requirement and without any rules by way of the
Administrative Procedure Act?
Mr. Shelanski. There are a number of things that agencies
can do that don't have to be done by rule, whether explicitly
by statute or by precedent. I would have to go back and look
into the particular situation that you are raising, because I
can't explain under what authority they acted.
But, typically, there are many lawful authorities that do
allow agencies to proceed with administrative changes that
occur outside of the regulatory process and that are not
subject to OIRA jurisdiction.
Mr. Bishop. Okay.
I have a couple questions with regard to the process, as
well.
A recent analysis by the GAO found that, since 2011, 43
major or significant rules were not submitted to Congress, as
required by the Congressional Review Act. Without this
submission, Congress is, in effect, robbed of the opportunity
to introduce resolutions of disapproval.
I am wondering what OIRA can do to remind agencies of their
obligations according to this rule so we don't go through this
over and over again?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, Congressman. You raise a very
good point. The GAO pointed out something I think is very
important, and I absolutely agree that agencies should up hold
their obligations to report these rules.
After we received the GAO report, we contacted agencies to
remind them strongly that they have the obligation to report
these rules. Under the statute, under the law, this is an
agency obligation. It is not something OIRA can do for the
agencies. But we have reminded the agencies that they have this
obligation and should live up to it.
Mr. Bishop. So we know the agencies must submit rules to
OIRA for review, but what process do you use to ensure that the
agencies properly comply with the submission requirements?
Mr. Shelanski. The submission requirements to OIRA?
Mr. Bishop. Yes.
Mr. Shelanski. So we typically know what rules an agency
has on the agenda going forward because we publish twice a
year, or publish and then update, a regulatory plan and agenda.
It is very unusual for an agency to--in fact, I can almost not
think of an example in the 2 years that I have been in the job
where an agency has not submitted a rule to OIRA that should be
submitted to us. So we don't have a problem. Agencies comply
quite well with that.
We often will have differences of opinion about something
that is not a rule and whether OIRA should review it. And so we
have often called in things that the agencies have captioned as
guidances or notices because we believe they have regulatory
effect. But the agencies have been very cooperative when we
have identified such documents.
Furthermore, agencies will often have a difference of
opinion with OIRA over a significance determination and whether
we should review a rule. They have shown us the rule; we know
it exists. The significance determination is ultimately up to
us. So, while we have had agencies ask that rules not be deemed
significant, we make an independent judgment. Again, agencies
have been quite cooperative.
So we have not had a problem with the agencies' compliance
and cooperation with submissions.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, sir. I appreciate it.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Congressman Collins.
Mr. Collins. Mr. Chairman, I just have a unanimous-consent
request.
We had sent a letter to your department. We are working on
that. We have not received a response yet. This was from
several months ago. I just wanted to insert that into the
record and also just ask that you do everything in your power
to make sure that your office is complying with our office to
get the answers that are needed.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you, Mr. Collins.
I did just this morning receive your letter from our
Legislative Affairs Office. I assure you of a response.
I have also read the letter, and I found it extremely
interesting and look forward to reading the report you
reference in the letter and acting accordingly.
Mr. Collins. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes the Vice-Chairman of
the Regulatory Subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas,
Congressman Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. Administrator Shelanski, I
appreciate your being with us.
I want to start at a 30,000-foot view, and I wanted to get
your opinion on how you think the law of diminishing returns
applies in the regulatory context.
In other words, once basic safeguards are in place, will
further improvements often require spending increasingly more
money to achieve increasingly less results?
Mr. Shelanski. That is a great question, Congressman.
One of the things that we look at when we review a rule is
whether that rule, specifically that rule, building on the
baseline of the costs that exist in the industry and what the
state of play is in the industry as it stands when the rule is
brought to us, whether it will achieve benefits that justify
the costs.
Mr. Farenthold. At some point, we might just get the low-
hanging fruit and leave the rest for the plaintiffs' attorneys.
I want to get down into the weeds a little bit with some
specific regulations that directly affect folks in Texas and
throughout the country.
The EPA's controversial waters of the U.S. rule has obvious
potential consequences for small businesses, especially
agribusiness, our farmers and ranchers. Yet the EPA did not
convene a Small Business Advisory Panel, as required by the
Regulatory Flexibility Act.
Why didn't OIRA insist that the EPA follow the law?
Mr. Shelanski. The EPA's determination at the time that the
SBREFA issue, the Small Business Panel issue, came up was that
what they were doing in this rule was effectively codifying in
regulation what had been existing jurisdictional practice, just
trying to spell out more clearly what had been happening
through many, many years of practice, in which the courts,
indeed the Supreme Court, had found had not been sufficiently
spelled out.
So the----
Mr. Farenthold. I am going to take issue, and, certainly, I
think some of the farmers and ranchers, who feel like they are
directly affected by these rules. They hadn't had the EPA
crawling over their property, and this certainly seems to give
the EPA a whole lot more jurisdiction, down to stock tanks,
irrigation ditches, and, if we keep along this path, probably
swimming pools in people's backyards.
Mr. Shelanski. Well, I think I would have a different take
on what the possible reach of the rule is. But I think, as a
general matter, what the EPA was doing was simply spelling out
jurisdiction that it had previously under the Clean Water Act
and trying to make a little clearer when and where it would
exercise it.
At this point, for any given body of water, there is still
a determination to be made on whether permitting and whether
the Clean Water Act provisions would apply.
Mr. Farenthold. Well, OIRA approved these waters of the
U.S. Rules in just 2 months. That seems awful fast considering
that the final costs that showed up for the rule were triple
the original cost projections, and the final version further
extended the EPA's jurisdiction.
Was there any pressure that you all faced from the outside
to run this rule through? And what factors was your approval
and the speedy decision thereof based on?
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you very much.
Under the Executive orders, the normative time for review
of regulations is 90 days. Sometimes we are able to be much
faster.
By far, the biggest component in the timing of regulation
is the priority that the agency places on the rule. Very often,
OIRA conducts an interagency process rather quickly, gets
feedback from the agencies, passes its comments and the
interagency comments back to the agency, and, if an agency has
made a rule a high priority, the rule then comes back to us.
And when we have decided that the rule has sufficiently
addressed the concerns that were raised, we conclude review.
Mr. Farenthold. Well, generally, I am a supporter of the
government being more efficient, but I certainly don't think in
the rulemaking process there should be any incentive to cut
corners, especially considering the financial impact.
One last question on the EPA. Congress has long been
concerned about their evaluation of co-benefits from lowering
particulate matter emissions in the context of limiting other
air pollution.
What is your view of how the EPA accounts for co-benefits?
In particular, how robust is the science about the health
effect of additional marginal reductions in particulate matter
emissions?
Mr. Marino. Administrator, could you pull that microphone a
little closer to you? You are not coming over loud enough on
the TV.
Mr. Shelanski. Is that better?
Mr. Marino. That is better.
Mr. Shelanski. Okay. My teenage son tells me I am very
loud.
Mr. Farenthold. I am an old radio guy. You can't beat me in
loud.
Mr. Shelanski. In terms of co-benefits--and I believe I got
a similar question from Chairman Marino--what we try to do when
an agency comes to us with a rule is we look at what the rule
achieves. We try to make sure that the agency, although we do
not typically make independent legal determinations, has the
authority to achieve what it is trying to achieve. And then we
look at the costs and benefits to make sure that those costs
are justified by the benefits.
When it comes to the state of the science and the analysis
underneath the rule, OIRA does not do an independent scientific
evaluation. We are not scientists. What we do, however, is make
sure that the evidence that the agency relies on meets certain
requirements, that it meets the requirements of generally
accepted science to the extent it exists, that the agency
employs a generally accepted method, and that the quality of
data and evidence that the agency is relying on meets
sufficient data quality standards. And one of the things that
we are very mindful of is that the agency look at the full body
of evidence that is in the scientific record, does not choose
selectively things that cut only in favor of its rule.
So we do a pretty rigorous set of questioning of the
agency. And if an agency is basing its determination on
supposition rather than science, that will make it harder to
get a rule through us.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. I see my time is well-expired.
Mr. Marino. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Congressman John Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the Chairman for holding this
hearing, because the Texans that I represent certainly are
frustrated with what they see as an ever-expanding government
that invades so many aspects of their lives. And they are
certainly frustrated with unelected bureaucrats that sometimes
have the power to impose regulations that have the force of law
with little or no time for meaningful preparation.
So I think it is important that we, at a minimum, make sure
the folks do get the information they need to comply with new
regulations and to fully analyze the effects that these
regulations would have on their businesses.
Administrator Shelanski, I appreciate you being with us
today.
I am sure that it won't come as a surprise to you that some
of the concern that I am talking about does relate to OIRA's
tendency to have delayed informing the American people about
regulations developed by Federal regulations--the Unified
Agenda, as we call it. So I would like to ask you a couple of
questions about some of those factors that I hope that we are
able to agree on.
First of all, do you believe that getting this information
about agency regulations to the American people, particularly
the small businesses who are especially burdened by compliance
costs, that that is something that is vitally important?
Mr. Shelanski. I fully agree that getting the agenda and
plan is extremely important so that stakeholders can have
notice of the rules that are going to be forthcoming.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So, putting yourself in the place of a
small-business owner trying to prepare for impending
regulation, you would agree with me that getting that
information on time and in a streamlined manner is equally
important?
Mr. Shelanski. I think, to the extent at all possible,
getting information out in advance and in a timely fashion is
quite important.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay.
And I know you are relatively new to the position there at
OIRA, but I am hoping that you will agree with me that such
reports on upcoming Federal regulations should never be a
political exercise.
Mr. Shelanski. I would agree with that. Certainly, in the 2
years that I have been in the job, we have been able to get the
agenda and plan out each spring and fall, as required and on
time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. But, obviously, you are aware of the past
history at OIRA. And so, in that respect, do you find it
troubling that during the 2012 election year the Obama
administration refused to issue either a spring or a fall
Unified Agenda of planned rulemakings?
Mr. Shelanski. My understanding--and, of course, I wasn't
there, so I can't answer as to what happened or what the
reasons were--was that one plan and agenda did not get issued.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay.
Mr. Shelanski. Just one. I certainly----
Mr. Ratcliffe. But that one--we can try and minimize that,
but the fact is that one would be one violation of law.
Mr. Shelanski. Even apart from being a violation of law, I
think it is not good policy. Therefore, when I was having my
confirmation hearings a little over 2 years ago, one of the
things I pledged to do and that I have carried through on was
to ensure that each spring and fall that plan and agenda does
get published and, moreover, to work closely with the agencies
to try to improve the completeness and accuracy of that plan
and agenda.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So can I take it by your answer, then, that
you have just given me your assurance that in 2016, the next
election year, that the Unified Agenda will issue on time?
Mr. Shelanski. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. And you have taken steps to ensure that that
will be the case?
Mr. Shelanski. To the extent that it is within my power,
sir, those plans and agenda will be published on time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Very good.
I thank you for being here today, and I am going to yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
And this concludes today's first panel of our hearing. I
want to thank Administrator Shelanski for being here.
You are excused, sir.
Mr. Shelanski. Thank you.
Mr. Marino. And we have been called to vote. So we have
four votes, and it looks like it could be about 30 minutes
before we call the second panel. We will get back here as soon
as possible.
I declare a recess at this point.
[Recess.]
Mr. Marino. The Regulatory Reform Subcommittee will come to
order. And I will begin by swearing in our witnesses for our
second panel.
Would you please stand and raise your right hand?
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give
before this Committee is the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Please let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative.
And, yes, please be seated.
I am going to introduce all four members before we start
out with your opening statements, if you don't mind.
Dr. Douglas Holtz-Eakin--am I pronouncing that correctly?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. It is actually ``Holtz-Eakin.''
Mr. Marino. ``Holtz-Eakin.'' Okay. Thank you--is the
president of the American Action Forum.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin has served in numerous government and
policy positions, including as Director of the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office. During his time with the
President's Council of Economic Advisors, he helped to
formulate policies addressing the 2000-2001 recession in the
aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin received his B.A. From Denison University
in mathematics and his Ph.D. in economics from Princeton.
And welcome, Doctor.
Ms. Karen Harned--is that correct?
Ms. Harned. Yes.
Mr. Marino. Just want to make sure. Thank you--has served
as executive director of the National Federation of Independent
Business' Small Business Legal Center since April of 2002.
Prior to that, Ms. Harned was an attorney at a Washington, DC,
law firm specializing in food and drug law, where she
represented clients before Congress and Federal agencies.
Ms. Harned appears frequently in the national media to
discuss issues including regulations, health care, and other
issues important to small business. She is a graduate of the
University of Oklahoma and earned her J.D. From The George
Washington University Law Center.
Welcome.
Dr. Richard Williams is director of the Regulatory Studies
Program at George Mason University's Mercatus Center. Prior to
that, Mr. Williams served as Director for Social Sciences at
the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition in the Food
and Drug Administration.
Dr. Williams has appeared in national media outlets,
including NPR and The Wall Street Journal. He is a U.S. Army
veteran who served in Vietnam--and, sir, thank you for your
service.
Dr. Williams holds a B.S. in business administration from
Old Dominion University and earned his M.A. and Ph.D. in
economics from Virginia Tech.
Welcome.
Professor Noah Sachs is a professor at the University of
Richmond School of Law and Director of the school's Merhige
Center for Environmental Studies. He specializes in
environmental law, torts, and administrative law and has
written casebooks in those areas.
In 2014, Professor Sachs was awarded a Fulbright grant to
study challenges to market-oriented environmental reforms in
developing countries. Professor Sachs received his B.A. from
Brown University, his M.P.P. from Princeton, and his J.D. from
Stanford Law School.
Welcome, Professor.
Each of the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety.
I ask that each of you summarize your statements in 5
minutes or less. And you see the lights in front of you, and by
the time it gets to the last one, that pretty much means your 5
minutes is up. I know that people concentrate on their
statements, so I will just politely do this, and that will give
you an indication to please wrap your statement up.
And, with that, thank you all for being here.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin, please.

TESTIMONY OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, Ph.D., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
ACTION FORUM

Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Well, thank you, Chairman Marino, Ranking
Member Johnson, Congressman Bishop, for the privilege of being
here today.
Let me make three brief points and submit my written
statement for the record.
The first is that OIRA is doing a very important and
valuable job. And this is, I think, highlighted by the scale of
recent regulatory activity. There are a lot of details in the
written statement, but paperwork burdens have risen by 30
percent since the year 2000 to the present. That is an enormous
rise in the cost of regulation. The year 2010 alone saw 100
major rules finalized. OIRA has put in its data that 2012 is
probably the most expensive regulatory year in recent history.
And if you look at the success in taking costs off the
books, the retrospective reviews done under the Executive
orders that have been discussed have, on net, increased costs
and have often not even included retrospective review. It has
been new regulations and higher costs. So there is a
significant issue that needs to be addressed.
And OIRA itself could do a better job; there's no question.
There are issues in transparency that have been highlighted by
its history with the Unified Agenda in recent years--not
putting it out in some years in the spring, putting it out on
the 23rd of December or just before Thanksgiving, just before
Memorial Day, July 3. The tradition of waiting for a holiday
and doing it at 4 o'clock on a Friday or something is something
that is not exactly consistent with their mandate.
There is the failure to comply on a regular basis with the
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act and highlight mandates placed on
the private sector. There is the inconsistent performance on
the Congressional Review Act and reporting of regulations to
the House, the Senate, and the Government Accountability
Office.
In their annual report, there is a highly incomplete
accounting of the overall costs and benefits of regulatory
activity. And there is, as the Chairman noted in his opening
remarks, the failure to deliver it along with the budget each
year, as was originally intended.
But, more broadly, even if OIRA did a better job, it is our
belief that broader regulatory reform is needed in the United
States and that, in doing that, it would be important to codify
the benefit-cost principles that are in the various Executive
orders, to include judicial review, so that agencies face some
consequence for the failure to undertake a rigorous economic
analysis of the activities that they are about to impact; that
legislation should include some limits on the regulatory
activity under that legislation and maybe even a budget of some
sort to limit it; and that there needs to be a formal and
systematic retrospective review of existing rules in order to,
on a regular basis, answer the question, is this regulation
still a good idea, presuming it was done well at the time of
its initial enactment.
So I'm delighted for the chance to be here today to discuss
OIRA and regulation in general, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Doctor.
Ms. Harned?

TESTIMONY OF KAREN R. HARNED, ESQ., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS, SMALL BUSINESS
LEGAL CENTER

Ms. Harned. Thank you, Chairman Marino, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Congressman Bishop. On behalf of the proximately
350,000 small-business members of NFIB, I thank the
Subcommittee for its work to ensure that OIRA is effectively
carrying out its mission.
Overzealous regulation is a perennial cause of concern for
small business. Since January 2009, government requirements and
red tape have been listed as among the top three problems for
small-business owners. When it comes to regulations, small
businesses bear a disproportionate amount of the regulatory
burden. Regulatory costs are now nearly $12,000 per employee
per year, which is 30 percent higher than the regulatory-cost
burden that larger businesses face.
This is not surprising, that the small-business burden is
higher, since it's the small-business owner, not one of the
team of compliance officers, who is charged with understanding
new regulations, filling out required paperwork, and ensuring
that the business is in compliance with new Federal mandates.
When reflecting on her time as OIRA Administrator, Susan
Dudley stated that the first lesson she learned at OIRA was
that OIRA has no constituency. From the perspective of the
Administrator, that may indeed be true. OIRA is the proverbial
skunk at the picnic, keeping agencies wanting to do more in
check. I have great respect for Ms. Dudley, but, from NFIB's
perspective, OIRA does have a very important constituency:
small business.
During my 13 years at NFIB, I have heard countless stories
from small-business owners struggling with a new regulatory
requirement. To them, the requirement came out of nowhere, and
they are frustrated that they had no say in its development.
Small-business owners are not roaming the halls of
administrative agencies, reading the Federal Register, or even
inside EPA. Small-business owners rely heavily on SBA's Office
of Advocacy and OIRA to check agency power so they are doing
what the Regulatory Flexibility Act requires, which is ensuring
that agencies don't impose costly new mandates on small
businesses when viable and less expensive alternatives to
achieve regulatory objectives exist.
Recently, we have seen a number of costly rules and
proposals come out of Federal agencies despite stakeholders
raising significant cost concerns about them. NFIB is concerned
that OIRA is not performing the rigorous independent analysis
needed to ensure that the proposed benefits of a new rule truly
outweigh the negative economic impacts.
Two recent examples are of particular concern. On June 29,
the waters of the U.S. rule was issued. The rule radically
expands Federal jurisdiction and regulatory power over hundreds
of thousands of landowners, including small businesses. The
Administration has consistently touted this rule as one that
will give small businesses more certainly in determining
whether a Federal permit is going to be required, yet the only
certainty that small businesses will see from this rule is a
certainty of more costs in consulting and permitting fees, not
to mention the risk of 37,500-day penalties if they make the
wrong decision.
Remarkably, EPA had the audacity to certify the rule as not
having a significant economic impact on small business. Even
SBA's Office of Advocacy publically called on EPA to withdraw
the rule and perform an RFA analysis before moving forward. Yet
OIRA did not require the agencies to comply with the RFA.
OIRA's lack of engagement truly was astounding and begs the
question, is anyone minding the regulatory store?
On July 6, the Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division
published a proposed rule that would more than double the
salary threshold for white-collar employees who are eligible to
receive overtime pay. According to DOL's own estimates, under
the rule, small businesses would pay on average $100 to $600 in
direct costs and $320 to $2,700 in additional payroll costs to
employees in the first year after the proposed rule becomes
effective.
As the Obama administration is in its final stretch, OIRA
should be proactive in discouraging agencies from promulgating
midnight regulations. Administrator Shelanski and the White
House should establish and enforce firm deadlines for
regulatory actions in the Administration's final months. At a
minimum, all final rules should issue by November 1, 2016.
Finally, NFIB is very concerned about the efforts of
agencies to subvert OIRA in the rulemaking process altogether.
The Legal Center has conducted significant research and
analysis of several regulatory activities by Federal agencies
that harm small business, and we will be issuing a detailed
report in the coming weeks.
Small businesses are drowning in a sea of regulation. NFIB
is concerned that OIRA has given final approval to new
regulations that have significant costs and few benefits.
Thank you for holding this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harned follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Ms. Harned.
Dr. Williams?

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD WILLIAMS, Ph.D., DIRECTOR OF REGULATORY
STUDIES PROGRAM, MERCATUS CENTER

Mr. Williams. Yes. I thank you for the invitation, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member.
Mr. Marino. Doctor, is your microphone on?
Mr. Williams. Now it is.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Williams. Thirty-five years ago, President Carter began
an experiment based on the proposition that the best way to
ensure we have only those regulations that work would be to
require an economic analysis of those regulations and to have
them overseen by a centralized reviewer. Subsequent to
President Carter, every President has agreed with that goal.
In President Carter's words, he said we needed to
``regulate the regulators'' so that we could, again, in his
words, ``eliminate unnecessary Federal regulations.'' No doubt
he had looked at the nearly 85,000 pages of regulations in 1977
and thought something had to be done.
He said, going into office, he knew he was going to have
difficulty controlling the regulatory agencies, so at first he
tried a few internal committees to oversee them. But,
ultimately, in 1980, he settled on creating the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs in the President's Office of
Management and Budget, and he staffed it with about 80 people.
That was his experiment to control the regulatory state
from getting out of hand. But here we are, 35 years later, with
lots of evidence as to whether or not President Carter's
experiment, OIRA, is the only thing necessary to achieve his
goal. It is not.
That is not to say that OIRA has not been punching above
their weight and trying. They have. But they have not nor
cannot solve the problems alone. Even if we could solve the
internal problems of OIRA, such as having way too few people,
being constrained not to touch politically favored agencies,
and putting independent agencies under OIRA review, they would
still be, as many people call them, a speed bump.
The reason that is true is because they reside in the
executive branch, the same branch as the regulatory agencies.
The only way they can stop unnecessary rules is to use their
extremely limited political capital within the White House.
So what is the evidence that President Carter's experiment
has failed? I believe there are five pieces of evidence.
Number one, as I said, OIRA is too small relative to the
regulatory agencies to exercise effective oversight. OIRA now
has about 45 people, compared to several hundred thousand
regulators who are producing 3,000 to 4,000 rules per year.
Number two, agencies know and use lots of ways to get
around OIRA through what we call stealth regulation, things
like guidance, notices, sue and settle, and other tools that
get firms to comply, and OIRA plays no role in those. And
agencies use these despite the fact that OIRA examines so few
of their rules.
Number three, the regulatory state has grown to gigantic
proportions since OIRA's founding. In 1977, as I said, there
were 85,000 pages of rules; in 2014, there are now 175,000
pages of rules. And those rules contain over 1 million
requirements. These rules are cranked out by regulatory
agencies, and they almost never go away. This leaves firms and
small governments to attempt to comply with this staggering set
of commandments.
Number four, Presidents can't control the regulatory state,
as evidenced by, amongst other things, midnight rules--rules
that are rushed through at the end of an Administration. I will
get back to that.
Finally, number five, too many regulations don't have a
solid analytical foundation, the economic analysis that
President Carter insisted on, and, therefore, they don't
achieve the results that are promised.
So the evidence is that OIRA is too small, they are easy to
get around using stealth regulations, and both informal
regulations and stealth regulations continue to grow at a
fantastic rate, and there is very little quality analysis
accompanying the informal rules.
We also know that every President since President Carter
has complained about how hard it is to control the regulatory
agencies, and every one of them has supported OIRA and the
requirements to do economic analysis, in hopes of constraining
regulations to only those that are truly necessary. But every
President since 1980 has failed.
So the answer has to lie beyond the President. The answer
lies in getting both other branches of government, Congress and
the Judiciary, more involved in overseeing agencies. Congress
needs better information to help it exercise oversight, and
stakeholders need to be able to use the judicial system to
remedy missing, misleading, or ignored regulatory analysis.
We now appear to be entering a very strange period of
midnight rules. It appears as though agencies are rushing out
big rules to ensure that they are finalized well before the 60-
day period that a new Congress and a new President would have
to disapprove them under the Congressional Review Act. This
would ensure that no new President could come in and change the
rules that have been rushed through the process with very
little political accountability.
With all of the tools at their disposals, agencies are
masters at avoiding OIRA, and the evidence for President
Carter's failed experiment is clear after 35 years.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Doctor.
Professor Sachs?

TESTIMONY OF NOAH M. SACHS, PROFESSOR, AND DIRECTOR, ROBERT R.
MERHIGE CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES, UNIVERSITY OF
RICHMOND SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Sachs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Johnson, other Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting
me here today.
I am going to speak today about the need for both an
effective and an efficient regulatory system. Agency
regulations have been essential for carrying out congressional
mandates, and they have protected life, health, fair
competition, and property.
The focus of attacks on the regulatory system usually goes
to their costs, but numerous studies have found that the
benefits of Federal regulations vastly exceed the costs. OMB's
2014 report to Congress showed that the benefits of regulations
that were enacted between 2003 and 2013 exceeded their costs by
3 to 15 times. And I would say that is an excellent return on
investment by any measure.
There is no evidence that Federal regulations are
contributing to layoffs. In fact, a comprehensive book-length
investigation on this subject by scholars at the University of
Pennsylvania concluded, ``The empirical works suggests that
regulations plays relatively little role in affecting the
aggregate number of jobs in the United States.''
And there are a lot of myths about the costs of regulation.
There is a number that is frequently heard around this town,
that regulations from the Federal Government are costing over
$1.8 trillion per year. That is a number that was used in some
of the testimony submitted by others today. And that figure is
20 to 30 times the cost estimate provided by OMB itself. The
number comes from a report 3 years ago by two economists, Crain
and Crain. It was recirculated again last year by the
Competitive Enterprise Institute. And the number has been
thoroughly debunked by The Washington Post, by the
Congressional Research Service, and others.
Restoring efficiency to the system means, first and
foremost, that we have to reduce the delay that now occurs
between the time when agencies formulate policy and when
regulation goes final. The system is slow, cumbersome, complex,
and opaque, and OIRA contributes to all of that.
For an agency, the time from policy development to final
regulation is easily between 3 and 7 years. And what that means
for Congress is that it can often be a decade between the time
that Congress passes a law ordering the agency to do something
and the time when the agency actually enacts its implementing
regulations. So, rather than adding to the procedural
requirements that we have, Congress should be examining ways to
streamline it, including by reducing multiple levels of review,
reforming the OIRA process, and ensuring that agencies have
sufficient personnel.
If you recall the original APA, the Administrative
Procedure Act, it set out essentially a four-step process for
enacting rules. The agency issues a draft rule, it takes public
comment, it considers the comments, and then it enacts the
final regulation. And what we have done over the past 30 years
is we have added onto that a really dizzying array of
procedural requirements and complexity. And we can debate
whether any particular requirement is good or bad, but the
upshot of this is that the requirements have contributed to an
extraordinary delay in rulemaking.
OIRA is part of the problem here. First of all, OIRA
provides an opportunity for industry to raise arguments and to
scale back public health and safety protections, when those
same arguments were already made in the agency process itself
during public comment.
Second, OIRA has amassed a great deal of power over agency
priorities and rules. In fact, it has effective veto power over
which rules can go forward and which cannot, even though OIRA
itself is not staffed by scientific or technical experts, as
Administrator Shelanski said this morning.
Third, OIRA routinely delays rulemakings without
explanation, exceeding its own 90-day limit on reviews, and, in
many cases, that delay effectively kills the regulations.
Finally, transparency within OIRA remains low. It doesn't
disclose its internal deliberations. It doesn't disclose who
within the executive branch has requested changes to
regulations. And it doesn't explain to the agency itself why
regulations are being held up.
So reform of this process must begin with transparency, and
it must also begin with giving agencies the resources and the
personnel that they need.
Thank you for your attention.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sachs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Professor.
I will begin with my 5 minutes of questioning, and I will
start with Dr. Holtz-Eakin.
Doctor, some suggest that, since employment is improving,
whether that is marginally or not, concerns about
overregulation are overblown. How do you respond to that?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. To say something has no impact on the
level of employment is not the same thing as saying there is no
impact on the labor market or the welfare of employees.
So, if you look at the work that has been done at the
American Action Forum on the regulatory burden of finalized
rules since the beginning of the Obama administration, that is
about $650 billion, so about $100 billion a year.
That money has to come from somewhere. So businesses might
choose to pay their workers $650 billion less. That is about a
percentage point in wage growth every year. And that has been
the achilles heels of the labor market, no wage growth. It is
hardly surprising, because the resources have to come from
somewhere.
Or they can pass it along to their customers, who would
need to come up with another $650 billion in raises just to pay
the higher costs.
So you can keep employment fixed, but that doesn't mean
that regulations don't affect the labor market and that they
aren't very costly to the welfare of employees.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Ms. Harned, do you have anything to add to that?
Ms. Harned. Yes, I think that when you look at it from the
perspective of the small-business owners that we represent, you
see it daily. I hear it in anecdotes. They are very aware of
the regulatory requirements coming down the pike that they
might--whenever you ask them, how many employees do you have,
they say, well, we are trying--not everybody, but depending on
where their number is--let's say they are at 30--we are trying
to stay under, you know, 50, or we are trying to stay under--
there are certain members of the small-business community that
are very aware that when they hit that next level they are
going to have a whole new raft of regulatory requirements.
And so I do think that you see that inhibit growth. They
want to stay where they are comfortable, where they know they
are not going to have to hire that extra compliance officer. We
have definitely seen that in our dealings with our small-
business members.
Mr. Marino. Dr. Williams, should we be strengthening OIRA,
improving the regulation process? And if that is done, do you
see that as a partisan issue, or does everyone stand to gain in
the long run?
Mr. Williams. I don't believe that strengthening OIRA is a
partisan issue. Certainly, every President has agreed that OIRA
is necessary to try to control the executive branch, and every
President has agreed toward the end of their Administration
that they haven't been successful at doing that. As I said in
my testimony, I believe that OIRA can only be a part, and
perhaps a small part, of solving the problems of the regulatory
state.
Mr. Marino. Professor Sachs, does the law of diminishing
marginal returns apply in the regulatory context--i.e., once
basic safeguards are in place, does further improvement
required spending increasingly more to achieve increasingly
less? Do you understand my question?
Mr. Sachs. I do, yes.
I can imagine a situation where it is true, where there is
a remarkably effective regulation in place, and it makes little
sense to keep adding on to that. But that is certainly not the
case in a lot of areas of law. What I see in my work is there
are whole areas of law that are either uncovered by regulation
or that are covered by very weak regulations.
And one thing that I urge the Committee to look at is the
GAO's biannual report on high-risk Federal programs, those that
are in danger of failure or in need of transformation. And so,
in that report, it is a great example of how the law of
diminishing returns does not apply. These are broken
regulations that need fixing and need attention from Congress.
Mr. Marino. Professor, you said--I think it was in your
opening statement or even in a document that I read--you
referred to the regulatory agencies are being slowed by
``excessive procedural hurdles.''
Why is regulating regulators more bad but overregulating
small businesses appears to some regulatory agencies as good?
Mr. Sachs. Well, I mean, there are several costs to the way
that we conduct regulation in the U.S.--costs in terms of
delay, costs in terms of injuries that could have been avoided,
deaths that could have been avoided because of that delay. So
that is my big concern about the number of procedural hurdles
that we have put in front of the agencies.
Impacts on small business, I am concerned about that, as
well, and support the laws we have in place to make sure that
those are addressed.
Mr. Marino. Okay.
My time has expired. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member, Congressman Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Williams, would you agree with me that the 2008 Great
Recession was not caused by too much regulation?
Mr. Williams. Yes, I would absolutely agree with that.
Mr. Johnson. So, in other words, it is possible that too
little regulation was what caused the Great Recession of 2008,
correct?
Mr. Williams. Sir, I am not an expert in the regulation of
financial products, but I would have serious doubts that too
little regulation is what caused the financial crisis.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I will tell you, do you remember when
Alan Greenspan came to Congress after the onset of the Great
Recession and after he was finished with his chairmanship of
the Federal Reserve and he testified that he had made a mistake
in believing that banks operating in their own self-interest
would do what was necessary to protect their shareholders and
their institutions and that he recommended during his testimony
that the government should play a much more active regulatory
role over financial firms? Do you remember that?
Mr. Williams. I do. And I think my concern, particularly
with respect to financial regulation, is there is a great deal
of financial regulation that is going on right now for which
there is no analysis.
Mr. Johnson. Well, but----
Mr. Williams. Too few analysis overall, but there is no
cost-benefit analysis----
Mr. Johnson. Well, there may be some regulations that are
questionable, but I guess the point that I am making is that
that environment was caused, according to Alan Greenspan, a
famous free-marketer, was caused by a lack of regulations.
Ms. Harned, you would agree that costly rules, such as
airbags, came down the pike on businesses at some point in the
past, but those costly rules were passed on to consumers, and
they were actually beneficial to American families. Would you
agree?
Ms. Harned. Well, small businesses are not opposed to all
regulation. There are regulations that----
Mr. Johnson. Well, and I take it from your----
Ms. Harned [continuing]. Need to happen. But at the same
point----
Mr. Johnson.--I take it from your testimony that there was
really no fine distinction between good rules and bad rules. It
was almost like all rules are bad. And you would agree with me
that that is not the case.
Ms. Harned. All rules are not bad. But there are definitely
ways to do this where it is not a one-size-fits-all that really
hurts the small-business owner disproportionate to the larger
counterpart.
Mr. Johnson. Well, and so we should not just look simply at
the cost--at the cost of a rule without regard to the benefit
of the rule in determining whether or not the rule is a good
rule.
Ms. Harned. Right. But I feel--I think my concern has
been----
Mr. Johnson. So you agree with that?
Ms. Harned [continuing]. It has been more focused--they
have been overselling the benefits and underplaying the costs
in recent years on many of these regulatory requirements.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I appreciate your--you know, the weight
of your testimony goes more towards, you know, the emphasis on
cost as opposed to benefits. But you do agree that you should
consider both cost and benefits in analyzing whether or not a
rule is appropriate.
Ms. Harned. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. And how about you, Dr. Holtz-Eakin? You would
not disagree with that, would you?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think no one would disagree with the
notion that we should examine both benefits and costs.
Mr. Johnson. So we should not----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. The concern is that we don't.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. We should not overemphasize cost,
then, when it comes to, you know, the regulatory reform, as
they call it.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think that the most important reform
would be to actually require that agencies, including the
independent agencies, look at both benefits and costs in a
systematic and rigorous fashion, which they do not and are not
required to do, and, as a result, there is the great potential
that we have some very poor regulations.
The second thing we don't ever do is go back and
essentially do a program evaluation of a regulation.
Mr. Johnson. Okay.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. And there are a lot of estimates of
benefits that turn out to be way too high, and there is
literature on that.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Well, let me----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Let's look at actual benefits and actual
costs.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Thank you.
Let me get Professor Sachs to weigh in.
What do you think about what you have just heard?
Mr. Sachs. Yeah, a few points.
I mean, in general, I support the idea of a full accounting
of the costs of regulations and the benefits. I think it should
be done with a knowledge that, in a lot of areas of law, it is
hard to measure the benefits. They may come a few years down
the line. They may involve health issues that are hard to put a
dollar sign on.
Another point I want to respond to is the idea that, you
know, regulations might harm wages or might result in price
rises for customers. We have to keep in mind that a lot of
regulations are simply shifting cost and saying it is not fair
to impose those costs on consumers or on the public, who might
be threatened, let's say, by a mountain of coal ash, and that
it is appropriate and correct to put those costs where they
belong, which is on the company that is responsible for
accumulating that ash.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the Chairman of the full Judiciary
Committee, Congressman Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I am
sorry I wasn't here at the outset. I will put my statement in
the record.
And I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here
today.
Ms. Harned, I will start with you. Your written testimony
references sub-regulatory activities by which agencies evade
OIRA review, but you do not provide details. Can you elaborate
for us on what evasions are occurring and how they impact small
businesses?
Ms. Harned. As I mentioned in my testimony, we will be
issuing a detailed report in the coming weeks on this. But
examples I mentioned in the testimony are regulation by amicus,
where, literally, new standards are being proffered by agencies
in amicus briefs in courts across this country. In addition,
you see through guidance documents, field rulings, and informal
letters new regulatory requirements really being imposed on
stakeholders across the Nation. Enforcement continues to be a
tool, as well.
Mr. Goodlatte. What are field rulings?
Ms. Harned. Like, memos to field staff, to enforcement
staff for different agencies, announcing, now we are going to
look at X, Y, or Z.
Mr. Goodlatte. Got it.
Dr. Williams, Professor Sachs argues that subjecting
independent agencies to OIRA review is unwarranted because they
are already bound by the notice and comment requirements of the
Administrative Procedure Act. Would you care to respond to
that?
Mr. Williams. The notice and comment, the APA, absolutely
contains nothing about estimating costs and benefits. And we
certainly see this. We have seen that the Securities and
Exchange Commission has attempted to do benefit-cost analysis.
Four court cases later, the courts have said, and the courts
are perfectly capable of saying, you didn't follow the right
procedure to do benefit-cost analysis, and they have remanded
those rules back to the SEC.
I think this states the need that we need to have all of
these independent agencies required to do benefit-cost
analysis. We now have some 400 to 500 rules coming out of Dodd-
Frank. Almost none of them are going to have benefit-cost
analysis. We have no idea, at the end of the day, how all of
them as a whole are going to affect the financial sector of
this country.
Mr. Goodlatte. Professor Sachs, you cite a number of
factors that you say make estimates of regulatory costs
unreliable. Would you concede that there are, equally, factors
that make claimed benefits similarly speculative?
Mr. Sachs. Look, estimating benefits of a regulation that
might be on the books for years, for decades, it is a difficult
task----
Mr. Goodlatte. Or even what is going to happen in months or
weeks, right?
Mr. Sachs. Agencies do the best job they can of estimating
benefits. And that is one of the reasons I have called for more
retrospective reviews of whether those agency estimates of both
cost and benefits actually turned out to be correct years down
the road.
Mr. Goodlatte. You say that agencies rely on industry for
cost estimates and that industry has an incentive to inflate
the numbers. Do you agree that agencies have an incentive to
inflate the benefits of the regulations that they wish to
promulgate?
Mr. Sachs. Their estimates of benefits are going to be
subject to OIRA review and to judicial review, so they better
do a good job of getting it right.
Mr. Goodlatte. Dr. Holtz-Eakin, thank you for coming back
to our Committee. We always appreciate having you here.
Do you believe that the Supreme Court's opinion in Michigan
v. EPA will have a significant impact on the way agencies view
cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I hope so. It is a very blunt statement of
the importance of benefit-cost analysis being the legal
definition of what is an acceptable regulation. And it would be
my hope that the independent agencies looking for some sort of
judicial prophylactic would run their estimates by OIRA and get
them a more effective and systematic vetting of the analysis
they do.
Mr. Goodlatte. How positive a development do you think this
is? As an economist, do you have any way to express that?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. As I said, the scale of recent regulatory
activities is quite striking. I guess I would just disagree
politely with Professor Sachs on how fast it has happened. I
mean, we took a look at 362 major regulations over the past
decade, and the median time to completion was 400 days. This
isn't something that takes decades. There were 62 major,
economically significant regs in Dodd-Frank and the Affordable
Care Act that got done in the first 2 years.
When they want to move fast, the agencies move fast. As an
economist, I would say the fact that that is being done without
a systematic evaluation of the benefits and the costs is a
significant risk.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California,
Congressman Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thanks for being here. And I, too, apologize
for being here a little bit after some of your presentations.
I want to express sympathy for the effort here. I practiced
law for some time and practiced environmental law. I had a lot
of clients who were businesses, some large but mostly small,
and some local governments trying to get through regulatory
process. And it is very frustrating when you have the
inconsistency of the various letters and the rulings. And I am
more than willing to work to figure out how we can avoid that.
Let me also say that I have had a little bit of frustration
in this Committee before on being one of the folks over here
who would like to work with the folks to your left but
definitely to my right.
And I will give you the example of on NEPA. I worked on the
National Environmental Policy Act, efforts to streamline that,
to provide deadlines for agencies, to require that all comments
be made in a central place so that they could all be considered
and so that you wouldn't see these major projects go on for
years and years before you got an answer. And I have always
felt and my clients always felt, you know, you can tell me yes
or tell me no, but tell me soon so I can make plans. I am
totally sympathetic with that.
My effort to cooperate on that had been derailed, though,
because of the insistence of the majority of including a
prohibition on talking about particular content--in this case,
the social cost of carbon.
So if we can separate the ideology out from the process, I
want you to know that you have an avid advocate for process
reform that would help all of business. And I think it is
really important--it is really one of the most important
aspects for us to support economic growth in the economy. So,
if you help me eliminate some of the ideology and let the
process come up with the answer, not inject the answer ahead of
time, I am more than happy to help you. And I would look
forward to working on this in the future.
I did want to ask Professor Sachs an open-ended question,
though, with respect to cost-benefit analysis. And maybe you
could just tell us whether you think there is a role and what
that role would be for cost-benefit analysis in the regulation
of economic activity.
Mr. Sachs. I do believe there is a role. I am not an
opponent of cost-benefit analysis as a concept. I think the
devil is in the details on it. How is it done? What role does
it play? Is it a decision rule so that only those regulations
with benefits that exceed costs can go forward? Or is it just
one input into the process?
I think that there is a role for cost-benefit analysis in
telling us where the bad regulations are, where are the ones
that have vastly excessive costs compared to benefits.
So I would agree with you on that.
Mr. Peters. I guess, maybe, as we look at how to maybe land
this plane, is there some agency you think is doing it right
that we could look at and use as an example?
You know, the problem with saying that it is not exact and
it should be a factor is it doesn't really provide the kind of
guidance and even oversight that I think this Committee would
like to have in the process.
Mr. Sachs. Uh-huh. I am not able to say which agencies as a
rule are doing it better than others. What I will say, though,
is we can point to a number of cases where Congress itself has
not called for cost-benefit analysis and has said, look, we are
addressing a difficult field of law, addressing a difficult
problem, and the standard we want to put into the statute is
something other than cost-benefit analysis, something like
``use best available technology''----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Sachs [continuing]. Or something like ``regulate in the
public interest.''
Mr. Peters. Right. Okay.
Well, I know it is a tremendously difficult issue to handle
via broad brush, but I do think it is important. I want to
thank the Chairman for having this hearing. And I look forward
to trying to work constructively to come up with bipartisan
solutions to make sure that we get high standards but we do it
in a way that, in itself, doesn't slow down the economic
activity and job creation we would all like to see. And I hope
to be a partner in that.
And I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Congressman. And I look forward to
working with you on these issues.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan,
Congressman Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you to the panel for your testimony today. Always
good to discuss ways in which we can be more efficient,
especially with regard to our small-business community.
Having spent the good part of my professional career in the
practice of law and representing small business and just coming
out of a small business myself, helping run a small business, I
can attest firsthand to how difficult it is to comply with the
massive amount of regulation that exists. I was the compliance
officer in the business, so I know how this works, everything
from HIPAA to Dodd-Frank to across the board, the spectrum.
I am a little bit taken aback by the idea that, somehow,
someone came to the conclusion that in this environment the
benefits outweigh the costs of regulation. And I am wondering
how that is measured. How do we measure costs? How do we
measure benefits? Is that a unified system and standard?
I guess I would like to get your take on that, Professor
Sachs.
Mr. Sachs. Yeah, I think the studies on whether the
benefits exceed the costs are done annually by OMB. And what
they are looking at are the benefits and costs that are used in
the regulatory process, that are submitted by the agencies
themselves, and that form the basis of the OIRA review. So that
is where the numbers come from. They are estimates; there is no
doubt about that. Both that the cost and the benefits are
estimates.
Mr. Bishop. From my perspective, in kind of a real-world
setting, having been in a small business, and for virtually
everybody--and I can't think of a single soul that I have
spoken to in a small business who has made that conclusion. I
mean, all I get from the constituents, the folks that I
represent is that it is wildly oppressive, and they are
overburdened with the excessive amounts of regulation.
I would be interested to hear the NFIB's position on that.
Just give me an idea as to what the reaction would be from your
membership if they were up on this stand and heard that
testimony about the benefits outweighing the costs.
Ms. Harned. Well, they would react like your constituents.
We see that every month. Our research foundation does their
small-business economic trends, where they look at what is the
plans for hiring in the next 3 months, what is the plans for
layoffs, inventory, all of that. And then, when it is not a
good time to hire, they ask why. Every month, they ask, why, if
you are not going to hire, is this not a good time? And for the
last several years, one of the top three answers has been
government regulation. So that is a realtime, real-world thing
we are facing.
On the benefits, one thing I would say, you know, we have
been talking generally about how we, at least on the side of
small business, think that benefits have been inflated in the
calculations as of late.
The Clean Power Plan Rule that was issued last year is a
perfect example of this. They weighed the benefits to the
world. Literally, go look. It's the benefits to the world, not
just to Americans, that was used as part of their benefit
calculation. And we think that was inappropriate.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for that.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I wondered if you might be able to--as a
former head of the CBO, it is obvious that you are familiar
with this process of estimating costs. And I am wondering, what
is your current view of the Administration's cost-estimating
methodology for major rules? And if you can give me some
background on this. And is there any current rule or Committee
in place in Congress to oversee the methods? How did we get to
this point?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think the major problem is the lack of
consistency and the incompleteness in the process.
Estimating benefits and costs is hard, but it should be
done. You should do it to the best of your ability, explain how
you did it, be quite transparent in your efforts. And every
agency, the independent ones, the Cabinet-level ones, should be
doing it. They should be doing it using the same methods. And
that is not happening right now, and you get very incomplete
reports as a result.
So, for example, the report that Professor Sachs mentioned
about how benefits exceed costs, if you look in the 2013
report, OIRA monetized seven rules and came up with their
estimate of cost. We looked at the same data in the Federal
Register, and there were 310 rules that had significant
paperwork or burden costs.
So it is a very incomplete accounting of cost and benefit.
So you need a completeness in the process and completeness in
the accounting.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir.
I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Seeing no other congressional Members, this concludes
today's hearing.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for attending. I learn
something from you each time.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses or
additional materials for the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:24 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia, and Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Howard A.
Shelanski, Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Question for the Record from Noah M. Sachs, Professor,
University of Richmond School of Law, Member Scholar, Center for
Progressive Reform, and Director, Robert R. Merhige Center for
Environmental Studies

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
