- EXAMINING RECENT SUPREME COURT CASES IN THE PATENT ARENA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING RECENT SUPREME COURT CASES
IN THE PATENT ARENA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,

AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 12, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-2

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-281 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUUL LABRADOR, Idaho                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman

DOUG COLLINS, Georgia, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JERROLD NADLER, New York
Wisconsin                            JUDY CHU, California
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                TED DEUTCH, Florida
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   KAREN BASS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
TED POE, Texas                       DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 SCOTT PETERS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             ZOE LOFGREN, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
MIMI WALTERS, California               Georgia

Joe Keeley, Chief Counsel

Heather Sawyer, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 12, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, and the Internet........................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet................     3
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     4
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     6

WITNESSES

Herbert C. Wamsley, Executive Director, Intellectual Property
Owners Association, Washington, DC
Oral Testimony.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Krish Gupta, Senior Vice President and Deputy General Counsel,
EMC Corporation, Hopkinton, MA
Oral Testimony.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    27
Andrew J. Pincus, Partner, Mayer Brown LLP, Washington, DC
Oral Testimony.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Robert P. Taylor, Counsel, National Venture Capital Association,
Washington, DC
Oral Testimony.................................................    52
Prepared Statement.............................................    54

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Blake Farenthold, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet    72
Material submitted by the Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and
Chairman, Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and
the Internet...................................................    85

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Prepared Statement of United Patent Reform.......................   114
Prepared Statement of Charles Duan, Director, Patent Reform
Project, Public Knowledge......................................   124
Article entitled ``Patent troll targets crowdfunding startups--
Innovation Act could stop that''...............................   140
Letter from Michael Beckerman, President & CEO, the Internet
Association....................................................   143
Prepared Statement of David French, Senior Vice President,
Government Relations, the National Retail Federation (NRF).....   146
Letter from Bobby Franklin, President & CEO, the National Venture
Capital Association............................................   151
Prepared Statement of the American Bankers Association, the
American Insurance Association, the Clearing House Payments
Company L.L.C., The Credit Union National Association, the
Financial Services Roundtable, the Independent Community
Bankers of America, the National Association of Federal Credit
Unions, and the National Association of Mutual Insurance
Companies......................................................   154

EXAMINING RECENT SUPREME COURT CASES IN THE PATENT ARENA

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2015

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,
and the Internet

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:03 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Darrell E.
Issa (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Goodlatte, Collins, Smith,
Chabot, Forbes, Franks, Poe, Marino, Farenthold, Nadler,
Conyers, Chu, Deutch, DelBene, Jeffries, Cicilline, and
Johnson.
Staff present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Senior Counsel; Eric
Bagwell, Clerk; and (Minority) Jason Everett, Counsel.
Mr. Issa. The Committee will come to order. Today's hearing
is on examining recent Supreme Court cases in the patent arena.
The Subcommittee's work on intellectual property reform and the
likely passage in this Congress of an internet--I am sorry. I
apologize. Of a patent----
Mr. Nadler. That was this morning.
Mr. Issa. That was this morning. [Laughter.]
Of a patent reform legislation package as we did in the
last Congress in the House brings us to the importance of
updating our awareness of recent Supreme Court cases in the
patent arena.
In 2011, the American Invents Act, or AIA, became the most
substantial reform to U.S. patent law since the 1836 Patent
Act. The AIA reestablished the U.S. patent system as a global
standard. I was proud to be part of that effort, and I am proud
today that we will continue our work to uphold the
competitiveness of the American patent system.
While the AIA rewrote the underlying patent law and
procedures at the WTO, several items were left out of that bill
as is often the case in any long-awaited, and large, and
comprehensive reform. These items, coupled with the growing
threat posed by what all will admit at times is abusive patent
litigation, require us to continue our work to improve the
patent system by strengthening patent quality and promoting
smarter and less expensive, if possible, patent litigation.
Last Congress, the Innovation Act passed this Committee by
a vote of 33 to 5. And when it passed out of the House on a
highly bipartisan basis, the vote was 325 to 95. I am confident
that H.R. 9, the Innovation Act, will become law and will build
on the work of the AIA to protect the American patent system.
Increasingly, Americans find innovation obstructed with
attempts to enter the markets frequently shut down by well-
funded patent trolls that often exploit loopholes in our patent
system, bullying inventors and small business into frivolous
lawsuits that amount to litigation extortion. Reforming the
patent system, including costly patent litigation, is an
economic issue, not a partisan one.
With billions of dollars and the state of American
competitiveness at risk, reforms are not solely the
responsibility of one branch of government. All three branches
must work hard to craft and implement law that promotes our
innovative economy. And we must recognize that the work is
being done to address abusive patent litigation in all three
branches of government. In addition to the court decisions,
which we for the most part on a bipartisan basis welcome, we
will examine today how they affect the judiciary, the PTO, and
the PTO's recently announced new patent quality initiatives,
including additional staff to focus purely on patent quality.
The PTO has issued updated guidance on patent eligibility
in the wake of several related Supreme Court cases, and the PTO
continues to operate three important post-grant proceedings,
including AIA's Section 18 covered business method program,
which I believe is absolutely essential to the future of patent
quality and the effort to make sure litigation is appropriate,
meaningful, and, in fact, done expeditiously, because
ultimately a patent holder or a defendant who believes that
they will be meritorious wants their day in court always at the
fastest reasonable time.
As the House and Senate prepare to move forward on
meaningful patent litigation reform to complement the PTO's
work and the Court's decisions, opponents have recycled some of
the same tired arguments used in the lead-up to the AIA. These
opponents claim that the courts and the judiciary have
completely solved the problem, and congressional attempts to
end abusive litigation practices are wholly unnecessary.
Today's hearing will examine recent Supreme Court patent
decisions, and we will learn about areas where progress has
been made and areas where much more needs to be done. I am
convinced that before we pack our bags and go home at the end
of this session, we will, and I insist we will, have ensured
the legislative branch of government does its part to stop
litigation abuse from occurring in the first place. American
innovation cannot afford to be held captive by frivolous
litigation from weak or overly broad patents. We need to work
together to ensure the American economy does not continue to
suffer.
Before I turn the microphone over to the Ranking Member, I
must add one small personal point. When I came to this
Committee some 14 years ago, the greatest issue we seemed to
have in front of us was the 40 percent reversal rate of court
decisions leading to an effectively de novo response and high
number of appeals to the Federal circuit. The lack of
confidence that existed then was a problem. I believe we have
gone a long way in most districts to get it right earlier at
the district court level.
There is more to be done, and our efforts on a bipartisan
basis will be to do so, to make sure that we facilitate the
judicial branch having the tools and the skills to decide
properly. We cannot back up work that we should do to the
courts. The courts at the district level cannot simply pass
onto the Fed circuit, and the Fed circuit cannot simply end up
at the Supreme Court. That is part of our requirement, to get
decisions made at the lowest and earliest level that could be
counted on by the inventors.
And with that, I recognize my colleague and Ranking Member,
Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to begin by
congratulating you on your new position as Chairman of this
Subcommittee, and I look forward to working with you on the
many important issues we will consider in this Congress.
We got off to a good start by joining together as original
co-sponsors of the Innovation Act, which Chairman Goodlatte
introduced last week. The Innovation Act addresses a scourge of
patent trolls which continue to burden businesses across the
country with abusive patent litigation. Patent trolls stifle
innovation, damage our economy, and injure legitimate
businesses. Rather than inventing new products and technologies
to benefit consumers and businesses, they merely invent new
methods to drive up legal costs, which they use as a weapon to
extort settlements from innocent defendants.
A smartphone can contain hundreds of patents on everything
from touch screen technology, to cameras, to GPS mapping, and
just as the saying goes, ``There's an app for that.'' There's
also a patent for that, and worse, we are finding that there is
a patent troll for that, too. As a result, our successful
American businesses are exposed to abusive litigation on the
many patents it takes to build the tech products of today.
Whether they spend the resources on developing new products or
on fighting off frivolous claims depends in part on whether or
not we are successful in passing legislation. Therefore, our
work here is critical, not just to lawyers and inventors, but
to all of us.
I have heard from countless businesses calling out for
relief from patent trolls. They tell me that it can cost
millions of dollars just to take one case through to trial. For
small business, it can make more sense financially to settle
even a totally bogus case early even if they would be assured
of winning in the end. Unfortunately, this only encourages bad
actors to keep filing case after case and gaining settlement
after settlement.
While it is vital to ensure that legitimate patent holders
are able to enforce their rights, we need to rein in those who
seek to abuse the legal system. I supported the Innovation Act
when it passed the House in December 2013 because I thought it
struck a reasonable balance in addressing the patent troll
problems without imposing too great a burden on plaintiffs.
Since then, the Supreme Court has issued a number of patent-
related opinions on issues ranging from fee shifting to
patentability. Our hearing today will help us examine these
decisions to determine how the patent landscape has changed
since the Innovation Act passed the House, and whether we need
to make changes to account for these decisions.
Some critics of the bill argue that in light of these
decisions, legislation is no longer needed at all. I think that
overstates the case considerably, but I will be interested to
hear from the witnesses today their thoughts on how the Court's
decisions should inform congressional action. I am most
concerned with the two fee-shifting cases, Octane Fitness and
Highmark, which significantly lowered the standard which must
be met before a court will award fees to the prevailing party
under Section 285 of the Patent Act.
There is already evidence that courts in response to these
decisions are awarding fees at a much higher rate, but we need
to determine if this is a temporary phenomenon or evidence of a
long-term trend. More to the point, have these cases curbed
abusive litigation? Businesses have indicated to me that they
continue to be threatened by patent trolls and that the problem
shows no sign of abating.
I should note that I also have longstanding concerns about
fee-shifting provisions, and the language contained in the bill
is at the outer edge of what I can support. Keep in mind a
person or a business can have a legally legitimate dispute
regarding fact and law, and yet can still ultimately lose the
case. They should not be punished for trying to protect their
interests in court. Furthermore, we should not want to create a
situation in which experienced corporate defendants with
enormous resources and expert legal talent can bully injured
plaintiffs into unfair settlements because of the risks,
including especially the risk of being forced to bear not only
their own legal costs, but the defendants' legal costs as well
associated with losing a potentially successful case.
I would be interested to hear from the witnesses whether
there are improvements that can be made to the fee-shifting
provisions in the Innovation Act to deter patent trolls in
light of the decisions by the Supreme Court. I will also want
to hear how the Court's new standards on patentability,
definiteness, standard of review for factual matters and claim
construction, and induced infringement may impact future
litigation.
With these important questions in mind, I look forward to
the testimony of our witnesses, and yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. It is now my pleasure to
recognize the author of the bill and the Chairman of the full
Committee, the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
holding this hearing. Addressing abusive patent litigation,
particularly the reforms set out in the Innovation Act, are
critical to our Nation's future economic competitiveness. Last
week, I, along with a large bipartisan group of members,
reintroduced the Innovation Act. This bill was the product of
multiple discussion drafts and hearings, passing the House last
Congress with more votes than the landmark America Invents Act
of 2011.
But patent reform, just like many other issues, has its
proponents and its critics. Those opposed to reform are
bringing back the same refrains that were used during the lead
up to the AIA saying that in the last year the courts and the
judiciary have solved the problem, and that the Innovation Act
is unnecessary. We have heard this before, and though I believe
that the Court has taken several positive steps in the right
direction, their decisions cannot take the place of a clear,
updated, and modernized statute.
In fact, many of the provisions in the Innovation Act do
not necessarily lend themselves to being solved by case law,
but by actual law, congressional legislation. Congress, the
Federal courts, and the PTO must take the necessary steps to
ensure that the patent system lives up to its constitutional
underpinnings. And let me be clear about Congress'
constitutional authority in this area. The Constitution grants
Congress the power to create the Federal courts, and the
Supreme Court has long recognized that the prescription of
court procedure falls within the legislative function.
I welcome today's hearing to review the recent Supreme
Court patent cases, and as we examine those cases, we must
remember that our patent system is a unitary one. That means
that the rules that we lay out in statute apply to all areas of
technology and all types of businesses, large and small, and
generally to all users of the patent system equally.
Thomas Jefferson could not have envisioned the innovations
and inventions that were to unfold over the last two centuries
and, in particular, over the last 20 years. But when he and our
founding fathers crafted our patent system, they wrote these
laws in a way so that they applied equally to all.
In that spirit, as we crafted the Innovation Act, we worked
to ensure that its many provisions generally applied fairly and
equally to all stakeholders. That means that we view patent
trolling as an adjective that can apply to either party in a
case if they engage in unreasonable or abusive tactics. That is
also why good legislative practice should caution us against
creating excessive carve-outs to cabin in provisions of the
bill or other parts of patent law toward certain types of
stakeholders. And we should make sure that the ideas that we
put forth are well supported, and not just by those who happen
to exempt themselves from its reach. We have a unitary patent
system for a reason, and our system works best when the rules
of the road apply to all.
The American patent system is designed to reward true
invention and promote innovation. The USPTO must ensure that
they take the task of ensuring strong patent quality seriously.
On the patent quality front, I strongly believe that the PTO
should not simply be in the business of granting patents and
leaving the mess created for the courts and Congress to fix,
but rather focus on strengthening the requirements for patent
eligibility to reduce the overall number of weak or overly
broad patents from entering the system. I am encouraged by the
PTO's recent announcements in this space.
We must also remind ourselves that reforming our patent
system is not a right or left issue. It is an economic issue,
one that is bipartisan, one that will be bicameral, and one
that will be signed into law. As we take these steps toward
eliminating the abuses of our patent system, discouraging
frivolous patent litigation, and keeping U.S. patent laws up to
date, we will help fuel the engine of American innovation and
creativity, creating new jobs and growing our economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. It is now my pleasure to
introduce the Ranking Member of the full Committee, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad you did not
introduce me as the skeptical Member of the Committee, but
there is some skepticism that still remains. But this hearing
today provides an important opportunity to consider the impact
of recent Supreme Court cases involving abusive patent
litigation.
While allegations of abuse of patent litigation fed a
clamor for drastic legislative reform, patent litigation rates
in 2014 have dropped to levels last seen 5 or more years ago.
So one of the first issues that I hope we assess is the impact
of these Supreme Court decisions and whether they effectively
have eliminated the need for one-size-fits-all fee-shifting
legislation.
For example, the Court in Octane Fitness lowered the
standard by which a court may award attorney fees under Section
285 of the Patent Act. And in Highmark, the Supreme Court
increased the level of deference that an appellate court must
give to a lower court's decision in awarding attorney's fees.
As a result of these two cases, it is now much easier for
prevailing parties to obtain attorney fees. In fact, courts
have granted nearly half of all motions for attorney fees filed
in patent cases since these two cases were rendered.
Given these developments, I believe it would be unwise for
Congress to push additional fee-shifting legislation as the
Federal courts assess the ramifications of these Supreme Court
decisions. Legislative intervention at this time could create
confusion and engender more rather than less litigation. So
while I am not persuaded at this point in time that Congress
must alter the current fee-shifting statute, I do encourage our
witnesses to share their perspectives about how these two
Supreme Court cases will affect patent litigation.
In addition to these two cases, there have been two other
recent Supreme Court cases that may further decrease abuse
litigation. The Supreme Court in Alice declared that abstract
ideas could not be patented. And in Nautilus, the Supreme Court
set a higher standard for certainty and specificity for patent
claims. Because the two cases will make it easier to invalidate
many vaguely worded software patents and business method
patents, plaintiffs with such patents will have less incentive
to file lawsuits. Most importantly, the Patent and Trademark
Office will be less likely to grant such patents under the new
standards.
So taken together, these decisions largely respond to
concerns about how poor patent quality can lead to unnecessary
patent litigation. And finally, it is my hope that this
Committee will conduct further hearings that review the
changing landscape affecting patents before we take any
congressional action. In particular, we should examine what the
Patent and Trademark Office, the Federal Trade Commission and
the courts are doing to address abusive patent litigation.
We know, for instance, the Patent Office is working on
enhancing patent quality, and still in the process of
implementing the American Invents Act. The Federal Trade
Commission is in the midst of conducting a study on abusive
patent litigation behavior. In addition, several Federal
district courts have adopted model discovery orders or
discovery guidelines that limit discovery in patent lawsuits.
Following the recommendations of the Judicial Conference, the
Supreme Court will in the near future likely approve
eliminating Rule 84 and its Form 18, which will lead to the
higher pleading requirements of Twombly and Iqbal.
The Supreme Court is also expected to approve amendments to
other rules of civil procedure that are aimed at achieving
proportionality and discovery and early and active judicial
case management. These revisions would apply to patent cases
commenced on or after December 1, 2015. Cumulatively, these
various efforts may address many of the concerns expressed
during the debates last Congress on the need for the Innovation
Act.
I have long said that I am prepared to respond to the
problem of abusive patent litigation, but we must not do so in
a vacuum, but in an environment cognizant of other ongoing
developments, and we cannot do so in a way that inhibits or
discourages the creative process that has been such a critical
part of our Nation's economic success. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. It is now my pleasure to
introduce the distinguished panel for today's hearing. For the
witnesses, your written statements will be entered into the
record in their entirety. And I would ask that you summarize
any and all portions of that or independent remarks within
roughly the 5 minutes. You will see the guideline lights in
front of you. Please note yellow means get ready to stop, not
continue well into red. If you do it, it will encourage those
here on the dais to do the same thing when questioning occurs.
Before I introduce the witnesses formally, I would
appreciate if all four of you would rise and take the Committee
required oath, and please raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Mr. Issa. Thank you very much. Please be seated.
Our witnesses today include Mr. Herb Wamsley, executive
director of the Intellectual Property Owners Association,
better known as IPO; Mr. Krish Gupta, senior vice president and
deputy general counsel at EMC Corporation, and I might note, an
alumni of the Digital Corporation, one that I started my life
in electronics involved with; Mr. Andrew Pincus, partner at
Mayer Brown and former general counsel of the Commerce
Department in the Clinton Administration; and Mr. Robert
Taylor, counsel to the National Venture Capital Association.
Again, as you begin speaking, your statements in their entirety
will be placed in the record.
Mr. Wamsley?

TESTIMONY OF HERBERT C. WAMSLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Wamsley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to
speak on behalf of the Intellectual Property Owners
Association, or IPO, a diverse association whose members
include more than 200 companies and industries ranging from
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology to electronics and
information technology.
We strongly support eliminating abusive suits and
litigation misconduct by all plaintiffs and defendants in
patent litigation, large and small companies, independent
inventors, universities, and others. We believe abuses can be
eliminated without making it more difficult for patent owners
to enforce valid patents. Now, the Supreme Court has decided
seven cases since the House passed the Innovation Act in
December 2013. I will comment briefly on six of those.
In Octane Fitness, which is the most significant of the
cases as far as the Innovation Act is concerned, the Supreme
Court lowered the standard for finding a case exceptional for
purposes of awarding fees to a prevailing party. Octane also
lowered the evidentiary burden for a party to establish
entitlement to attorney's fees. In the companion case of
attorney fee awards, Highmark, the Court raised the standard of
review for appeals of attorney fee awards. The net effect of
Octane and Highmark is to make it somewhat easier for a
prevailing party to obtain attorney fees, but IPO still
supports legislation on attorney fees.
The legislation should require an award of attorney fees to
a prevailing party in every case unless the position and
conduct of the non-prevailing party were objectively reasonable
and substantially justified or exceptional circumstances make
an award unjust. This presumptive fee shifting will be more
effective than the Octane and Highmark decisions in deterring
abusive litigation practices and will provide uniformity.
The Octane standard of awarding fees in cases that stand
out from others lowers the bar, but Octane is likely to be
subject to a wide range of district court interpretations.
Legislation can require judges to shift fees when they
otherwise may be less inclined to do so. Fee shifting may be
the single most effective legislative measure for discouraging
frivolous lawsuits and frivolous defenses.
In Alice Corporation, the Supreme Court revisited patent
eligibility under Section 101 of the Patent Act. Unfortunately
the test articulated by the Court in Alice is not clear. We
believe it is too early to tell what long-term effect Alice
will have on abusive behavior in patent litigation. Since the
Alice decision, reports have suggested an increase in district
court dismissals of suits on software-related and business
method inventions.
Alice may strengthen the hand of defendants in frivolous
suits. Defendants may be able to get suits dismissed for lack
of patent eligibility at an early stage before costly
discovery. However, unless clarified, Alice may have adverse
effects on the incentive for innovation not only in software,
but in other industries.
Three other cases have some effect on patent litigation.
Nautilus adopted the new reasonable certainty standard for
patent claims that will make it easier for a defendant to
challenge a vague patent as indefinite. This will deter some
frivolous charge of infringement. Teva Pharmaceuticals held at
the Federal circuit must apply a clear error standard to review
factual findings in support of patent claim construction. The
Teva framework better aligns with appellate review of patent
claim construction, and Supreme Court precedent in the Federal
Rules probably will have no effect on abusive suits. Limelight
Networks will foreclose some patent suits based on an
infringement inducement theory.
We advise the Subcommittee to continue to monitor the
possible impact of the Supreme Court decisions as it considers
the Innovation Act. As mentioned, we draw attention to the
amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. They are
scheduled to take effect at the end of this year, which will
heighten the pleading standards for patent infringement, and
provide judges with some more discretion relating to discovery.
I will close by noting that the Patent and Trademark Office
can help deter litigation abuses by ensuring that patents that
are granted are of the highest possible quality and define the
scope of rights. We support the USPTO's new patent quality
initiative. I will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wamsley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Gupta?

TESTIMONY OF KRISH GUPTA, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND DEPUTY
GENERAL COUNSEL, EMC CORPORATION, HOPKINTON, MA

Mr. Gupta. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Nadler, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am honored to testify today on
the critical need for patent litigation reform.
EMC is a global leader in cloud computing. EMC and its
affiliates hold more than 5,100 issued U.S. patents, and our
portfolio is regularly recognized as one of the best in the
information technology business. We support a strong patent
system that protects and promotes innovation and one that
cannot be exploited by abusive litigation tactics.
Since 2005, EMC has been sued by patent entities more than
35 times and has never been found to have infringed. Yet,
defending those suits has been extremely expensive, costing $10
million in 2014 alone. And this does not include the
substantial disruption to our business resulting from these
frivolous lawsuits.
EMC is not alone in this regard. In 2014, more than 5,000
new patent lawsuits were filed. That is nearly twice as many as
were filed only 4 years earlier when Congress passed the AIA.
Most impartial observers agree abusive patent litigation harms
innovation in all industries.
Some have suggested that recent decisions by the Supreme
Court either reduce or negate the need for Congress to act. As
a practitioner who spends most of his time on patent litigation
matters, I disagree. Only Congress can comprehensively restore
balance in the patent system. Let me walk through the Court's
decisions that are most relevant to the issue of patent
litigation reform, although I do not believe they offer an
adequate solution.
In Highmark and Octane, the Court addressed the award of
attorney's fees under Section 285 of the Patent Act, which
currently limits the assessment of fees to exceptional cases.
They loosened the standard by which courts evaluate what
qualifies as an exceptional case while granting greater
discretion to district courts to make this determination.
Highmark and Octane have had no meaningful impact. In the 9
months since these decisions, motions for fees have been
granted in whole or in part only 4 percent more often than they
were in the 2 years before these cases. Thus, fee shifting is
still the exception rather than the rule. The Innovation Act
would level the playing field by requiring that fees be awarded
to the prevailing party unless the losing party's position is
substantially justified or special circumstances make an award
unjust. This provision will discourage the filing of frivolous
suits and the use and abusive litigation tactics by imposing
financial accountability in the patent system.
Next, I would like to turn to the Supreme Court's decisions
in Iqbal and Twombly. In these cases, the Court addressed the
level of specificity required in a complaint to include enough
facts to plausibly suggest that the plaintiff is entitled to
relief. With the Judicial Conference recently recommending the
elimination of Form 18 for patent pleadings, it is expected
that the Iqbal and Twombly standards will apply to all patent
pleadings as well.
However, these cases do not set forth bright line rules
necessary for patent cases and are bound to lead to variable
outcomes. Many courts will undoubtedly continue to permit vague
pleadings. The Innovation Act recognizes the need to provide
uniform and clear pleading standards. This imposes no new
burden on good faith plaintiffs who will have already conducted
proper due diligence, but it will deter bad faith plaintiffs
and will reduce costs for defendants by requiring the
allegations to be made clear at the outset.
On discovery, there have been no Supreme Court developments
regarding abusive tactics. We support provisions included in
the Innovation Act that limit discovery before the Court issues
its claim construction ruling. This would ensure that discovery
is focused on claim construction issues that actually matter.
By requiring the requesting party to cover the cost of
unnecessary discovery, the Innovation Act will limit the extent
to which discovery costs can be used as a bargaining chip to
extort a settlement.
These three areas--fee shifting, pleading specificity, and
discovery--require legislative intervention. The courts cannot
bring about the comprehensive and prompt solution that Congress
can structure while promoting consistency and predictability.
The rampant proliferation of abusive patent litigation is a
problem causing billions of dollars of costs that cry out for a
legislative solution. We urge you to swiftly pass this
legislation, and we stand prepared to help you in any way we
can to bring a bill to the President's desk in short order.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gupta follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Mr. Pincus?
I would advise all of you that we will get through your
statements, and once the vote is called at approximately 2:00,
we will operate for 10 additional minutes and then anticipate a
break for roughly two votes. So you will all be getting about a
30-minute break in about 30 minutes.
Mr. Pincus?

TESTIMONY OF ANDREW J. PINCUS, PARTNER,
MAYER BROWN LLP, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Pincus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nadler,
and Members of the Subcommittee. It is an honor to appear
before you to discuss the Supreme Court's recent patent
decisions, and, in particular, the impact of those decisions on
the very serious problem of abusive patent litigation that this
Committee in the House sought to address in the last Congress
through passage of the Innovation Act.
The Supreme Court, of course, does not have free-floating
policy authority to address concerns about patent litigation.
Its responsibility is to interpret the statutory text when an
issue is brought before it. So some of the Court's recent
decisions have overturned Federal court rulings that promoted
abusive litigation, but other of the Court's recent decisions
are likely to have the opposite effect and actually increase
the cost and complexity of patent cases. And as to some
decisions, we actually do not yet know what the outcome will
be.
For example, the Court's decision last year in the Nautilus
case rejected a Federal circuit rule that had all but
eliminated the patent max definiteness requirement, and the
Supreme Court instead made clear that a claim is invalid if it
fails to inform with reasonable certainty those skilled in the
art about the scope of the invention. Reaffirming the
definiteness requirement will help weed out some unjustified
patents.
But in the Teva Pharmaceutical case, the Court's decision
is likely to increase patent litigation costs and complexity.
As the Committee knows, the key initial first step in patent
litigation is construing the patent claim, and in doing that
the Court can consider the language of the claims, the
specifications, the prosecution record, as well as extrinsic
evidence, including expert testimony. Claim construction is a
task for the judge, and it takes place following a so-called
Markman hearing at which the parties present all of the
relevant evidence.
The Federal circuit had held that it reviewed all aspects
of claim construction de novo, including the district court's
determinations regarding extrinsic evidence, such as expert
testimony. In Teva, the Supreme Court reversed and said that
those factual determinations are subject to a clearly erroneous
standard of review. Previously, introduction of expert
testimony in the course of a Markman hearing while it occurred
was rare, but Teva may be viewed by some district courts and
some parties as an implicit endorsement of reliance upon expert
testimony and other extrinsic evidence. And district courts may
want to ground their decisions on those bases in order to limit
the possibilities of reversal on appeal. So that may mean much
more discovery and expert testimony at the beginning of the
case, which, of course, is going to make these cases even more
complicated and even more costly than they already are.
The Alice case, as Mr. Wamsley said, involves the question
of patentable subject matter. The Court had before it a patent
claim that was troubling that basically said take this
fundamental economic principle, do it on a computer, that is
patentable. And the Court said, no, something significantly
more is required, and the lower courts are now trying to flesh
out what that ``significantly more'' is. Obviously there is a
concern that that test not swallow up legitimate patent claims
and not swallow up the other tests in the Patent Act that limit
patentable. And we are going to have to see how that all plays
out.
Most troubling, I think, from the perspective of reducing
litigation abuse were the Court's decisions in the two
attorney's fees cases, Octane and Highmark. They together give
district courts more discretion, but the Supreme Court
reaffirmed that the exceptional test, which is the language
used in the current version of Section 285, which means that
fee shifting is an option in only a small minority of cases
because the case has to be exceptional, which by definition is
going to be a very small group of cases.
So a defendant deciding whether to settle or fight a claim
that the defendant views as abusive cannot count on the
availability of fee shifting to offset the plaintiff's ability
to inflict significant litigation costs through the litigation
of the case. So the critical question I think is, how does that
rational defendant view the ability to recovery attorney's fees
if it decides to fight? And where the test is exceptional, that
rational defendant has to say my ability to recover attorney's
fees is going to be quite low. That is why a change along the
lines of the Innovation Act really is essential.
So that ruling confirms the reality that the text of the
Patent Act does not authorize the Supreme Court to address the
principle factor producing abusive lawsuits, which is the
ability of plaintiffs to inflict these huge asymmetric
litigation costs on defendants while paying little themselves.
That is what allows the coercion of unjustified settlements,
and that is what congressional action is needed to address.
Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pincus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Taylor? I think we cannot quite hear you yet.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT P. TAYLOR, COUNSEL, NATIONAL VENTURE
CAPITAL ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Taylor. I am Robert Taylor appearing for the National
Venture Capital Association. NVCA represents approximately 400
venture capital firms that collectively account for the vast
bulk of all venture capital invested in this country.
Let me stress three basic points. First, strong protection
of intellectual property allows entrepreneurs and investors to
assume the risks necessary to commercialize breakthrough
technologies. Despite the fact that a few companies may not
rely on patent protection, for the great majority of startups,
patents are essential to their existence and survival.
Second, although people are justifiably offended by abuses
of the legal system, it is important to ensure that efforts to
correct that problem do not cause more damage to innovation
than does the problem itself. NVCA strongly urges Congress to
direct its efforts at improper behavior, not at the patent
system. Innovation requires a healthy patent system, including
the ability of innovators to enforce their patents without
undue risk and expense.
Third, recent activity at the Supreme Court, the Federal
Trade Commission, the Judicial Conference, and the Patent
Office pursuant to the AIA has changed the patent landscape in
important ways that already address most of the problems to
which H.R. 9 is directed. As a result of these changes, new
patent case filings dropped 18 percent between 2013 and 2014,
and the full effect of those developments has yet to be felt.
Let me expand a little. For decades innovative new
companies have been the most important source of job growth in
this country. Creating a new company requires entrepreneurs
willing to forego job security to pursue a vision for a better
future. It requires investors willing to share that vision and
to dedicate time and money to make it a reality. The process is
fraught with considerable risk.
Several years ago I represented a small company that
pioneered a revolutionary advance in minimally invasive
surgery, surely the type of innovation we should encourage. As
soon as that company showed its products to surgeons, however,
large companies that sold surgical equipment began to copy the
design, modify their own tools, and bundle their sales in ways
that foreclosed my client from the market. The company spent
nearly 5 years in scorched earth patent litigation with
corporate giants to enforce its patents and stay in business,
but ultimately it prevailed.
For the vast majority of innovative startups like that
client, patents are the only way to ensure a return on
investments sufficient to justify the risks involved. This
group includes companies developing digital technologies that
employ innovative hardware and software, energy companies,
communication technologies, new polymers and metallurgical
products, information technologies, medical devices, biologics,
and pharmaceuticals.
My second point. H.R. 9 will make patent litigation more
cumbersome, more expensive, and more risky for litigants on
both sides. Importantly, this will impact smaller companies
much more than their larger and better-funded competitors,
irrespective of which side each is on. And for innovators, the
ability to enforce patents at reasonable cost and risk is an
essential part of the patent right. Patents that companies
cannot afford to enforce become nothing but wall decorations,
and when incumbents perceive that a new entrant is unable to or
unwilling to enforce its patents, the temptation to copy
becomes irresistible. For venture capital firms themselves, the
transparency and joinder provisions of H.R. 9 present serious
problems.
My third point. My written testimony describes a number of
actions by courts and Federal agencies that are creating a sea
change in patent law that is already responding to much of what
H.R. 9 targets. A series of Supreme Court decisions alone has
made it much easier for companies to defend against meritless
patent cases, including the ones that others have already
referred to. Other changes are equally significant. The
abolition of Form 18 is going to bring patent pleading in line
with other Federal litigation. The FTC has taken on the
challenge of abusive demand letters, and the AIA is having a
major impact.
My closing point. The entrepreneurial drive to pursue new
visions has been a bedrock feature of American culture for
decades and has largely been responsible for our remarkable
success as a Nation. The patent system is essential to protect
the innovative spirit that pervades our national character. It
would be tragic if this Congress, in the misguided belief that
H.R. 9 will promote innovation, made it more risky and
expensive for our most promising companies to protect
themselves and their technology.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Issa. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for a 5-
minute round of questioning. Mr. Taylor, what was the name of
the company that spent 5 years trying to defend its right,
ultimately prevailed?
Mr. Taylor. I was not involved for the full 5 years. The
company was Applied Medical Systems.
Mr. Issa. They have my sympathies because, in fact, the
clod slow difficult system to enforce your patents is exactly
what this bill is intending to fix.
Mr. Gupta, in the case of a major part of this legislation,
the heightened pleading was followed by the early Markman in
order to discover what the patent is and provide both sides a
good faith understanding of what the patent really means and
how it might apply to the product in question. Does that, in
your opinion, and I will go to each of you, get you to many
resolutions, some unclogging of the system, and ultimately an
opportunity for people who in good faith want to end up with an
ultimate outcome, to get there at lower cost?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I agree----
Mr. Issa. I love it when someone says ``yes'' first.
Please.
Mr. Gupta. The Innovation Act, in my mind, has balanced
provisions that are designed to make the litigation process
much more efficient than it is today. We are in court today in
a Markman hearing. The plaintiff asserted eight patents against
us, accusing two major product lines. The complaint did not
identify any of the hundreds of claims involved in the patents,
did not identify any model numbers. 3 months later, they added
three additional patents to bring it up 11 patents, another
product, no model numbers. 8 months into the litigation, they
gave us some claim charts and some claims. 12 months into the
litigation, they attempted to add even more claims that were
not announced previously and new products, and the Markman was
about a month after. They attempted to add new claims again.
So it is an extremely cumbersome process for defendants
when plaintiffs do not identify exactly what product, what
claims, and how the infringement is being argued. And, more
importantly, the imbalances in discovery are so severe that
defendants often are left with two choices: one, either get
extorted or settle, or take it all the way to the end, spend
millions, and still not really win because they are out of
pocket several hundred million dollars.
Mr. Issa. And I appreciate that, and I want to go to Mr.
Wamsley, too. But in a nutshell, having practiced as a patent
holder and a defendant as a manufacturer, the one thing I know
that I hope I get a yes from all of you on is, in a perfect
world the pleadings tell what the infringement is if it is
available to be defined. And if it is not available to be
defined, at least sufficient for why you believe in good faith
that there is a patent infringement, and an early Markman with
discovery related to that.
Is that not the goal of everyone who has a valid patent
that they truly believe has been infringed, or a defendant who
truly believes they do not fall within the proper meaning of
the patent? Is there anyone that disagrees with that?
Mr. Taylor. May I just address that, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Issa. As long as you are brief because I did describe
your opening statement in my opening statement.
Mr. Taylor. Okay. Yes, I think in an ideal world you would
like the pleadings to disclose as much as possible. It is often
the case, however, and this is not just true of patent
litigation, it is true of virtually all litigation. The
plaintiff at the outset of a trial or outside of a case does
not know all the facts it needs to put together a full trial
brief.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Well, let me follow up on that because I
think that is extremely important having been the plaintiff. If
you do not know there is patent infringement, then where do you
get the right to go on a fishing expedition to see if you can
find one?
Mr. Taylor. No lawyer today in light of----
Mr. Issa. That was a question that requires an answer
related to if, and I will go to Mr. Pincus because I have not
gone to him yet. If you do not know there is patent
infringement, what in any part of the law allows you to begin
having Mr. Gupta's company spend money because you want to go
on a fishing expedition because your patent on a swimming pool
might apply to an array of disk drives?
Mr. Taylor. I do not think--oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Pincus. I think that is exactly right, Mr. Chairman. I
think you certainly should know which claims of your patents
are infringed and what the infringing articles are, and I think
that is the critical issue.
Mr. Issa. And should you not know your accuser's true
identity, particularly if you are being sued by a shell
corporation? That is my closing question because I know Mr.
Taylor objected to that.
Mr. Pincus. I think you should know that as well, and I
think that is why regardless of Iqbal and Twombly, the
Innovation Act's specific requirements are so appropriate
because if I were a patent plaintiff, I would not want to wait
for 5 years for Iqbal and Twombly's application to patent
infringement cases to be----
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Mr. Wamsley, very quickly because my
time has expired, if you have something to add.
Mr. Wamsley. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with your
description of how it should work in a perfect world, and we
support heightened pleading standards in principle. When we
looked at this in the last Congress, we did it through a
recommendation to amend Form 18 to specifically require
identification of one or more claims, and explain how the
latest infringing instrumentality infringed those claims. Now
the Judicial Conference has gone to the Twombly/Iqbal standard,
that may produce the same result, but we do not know yet.
Mr. Issa. I look forward to finding out. Mr. Nadler is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I would like to ask Mr. Taylor to
comment on the question that you did not get a chance to answer
from the Chairman. I never liked the Iqbal or Twombly
decisions, and I, in fact, introduced legislation to overturn
them, which unfortunately has never passed because if you have
a good reason to believe it is a general tort, the defendant is
more likely to have the specific knowledge of the evidence.
But, Mr. Taylor, in patent, is that applicable? Should you
not know if your patent is being infringed or how it is being
infringed? Should you not be able to describe the provision of
patent that is being infringed?
Mr. Taylor. Congressman, at least in the courts I have been
practicing in for most of the last 35 years, lawyers before
they will file a complaint are subject to Rule 11, which
requires that you have a reasonable basis for believing that
the factual allegations in the complaint are true. And I do not
know any responsible lawyer that will file a case simply hoping
that they can prove infringement. We go to great lengths
sometimes----
Mr. Nadler. So then Iqbal is okay.
Mr. Taylor. I did not hear you.
Mr. Nadler. So then Iqbal is correct.
Mr. Taylor. Iqbal, it does not authorize people to make
factual assertions in complaints for which the lawyers don't
have some factual or some reasonable basis for believing them
to be true. That is Rule 11 of the Federal Rules, and it is a
seriously applied rule.
Mr. Nadler. But in a patent, is it not generally the case
that if you are filing a patent infringement claim, you should
have probably more specific knowledge in some tort case or
whatever about what in your patent is being infringed
allegedly?
Mr. Taylor. That is generally the case, and most
responsible plaintiffs will take an accused's product and they
will have it reversed engineered or they will analyze it. They
will make every effort to determine whether the elements of a
claim in the patent are all present, and in the process it is a
little more difficult sometimes to find out.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Wamsley, in light of Octane
Fitness and Highmark, do you believe we still need legislation
on these subjects? And if so, why?
Mr. Wamsley. Yes, Mr. Nadler, we believe that legislation
is still needed----
Mr. Nadler. Because?
Mr. Wamsley [continuing]. While Octane and Highmark are a
step forward, the tests set forth by the Supreme Court in
Octane that attorney's fees could be awarded in cases that
stand out, it is broadly worded language.
Mr. Nadler. Too vague?
Mr. Wamsley. And we believe there is a spectrum of
interpretations of that by the district court, and it is better
to nail a brighter line in legislation.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Taylor, could you comment on the
same question?
Mr. Taylor. I think that what we ought to do is wait for a
while to see how the lower courts are going to apply the
Highmark and Octane cases. I am not sure I agree that it is
better to have a presumptive shifting of fees and for the
following reason. At least from the perspective of the venture
capital world, a small company that has been sued by a larger
competitor is looking at two kinds of liability, liability for
the infringement, and if you tack on attorney's fees as a
presumption, that simply increases the ante. It raises the
bogey, and that works distinctly to the advantage of larger
companies to the detriment of smaller companies.
Mr. Nadler. And, Mr. Taylor, you say that the lower courts
appear to be reading Alice to hold that subject matter
eligibility can be decided in early stage of litigation without
the need for costly discovery or claim correction. Mr. Taylor
said that.
Mr. Taylor. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nadler. And that would seem to imply that we do not
need legislation on that point.
Mr. Taylor. I certainly would suggest that we wait to see
what the implications of Alice----
Mr. Nadler. And who would disagree with that on that point
and why, of the other witnesses? Mr. Wamsley?
Mr. Wamsley. Well, Mr. Nadler, I would say that we may need
legislation on Alice.
Mr. Nadler. We do not know yet.
Mr. Wamsley. But on clarifying Alice, the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office is now going through a public procedure to
clarify.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Last question because my time is
running out. Mr. Taylor, you said in your testimony that
legislation should focus on specific behavior, not on the
procedural aspects of enforcing patents. How would you
accomplish this? What would you do?
Mr. Taylor. Well, the specific behavior, what we are trying
to deal with here is what people consider to be abusive
behavior by litigants. The courts already have a vast amount of
power to deal with abusive behavior. And currently, I think the
National Venture Capital Association would say that little is
needed in connection with this, although, as noted in our
statement, we do support the TROL Act, enactment of the act
that would increase the power of the Federal Trade Commission
to deal with abusive and deceptive demand letters.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the Chairman
of the full Committee, the author of the bill, the gentleman
from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Taylor, on that
last point, that is exactly what we are doing. I mean, we are
providing for fee shifting, but in very precise circumstances,
only when there is no reasonable basis in law or fact for
asserting the claim, whether it is by a plaintiff or a
defendant. When you translate that to the small startups that
your companies invest in, they already are facing that right
now. And when they get that claim, they are facing a
multimillion dollar bill to defend their claim right now, or to
assert it if they feel that some company, a bigger one, is
going to do that, with no prospect--no prospect whatsoever--for
recovery of that large loss.
So many of them choose to simply not fight it, and that is
a reason why they are less successful in getting off the
ground. So this predatory environment that they operate in is
made, I think, worse by the fact that they have no prospect of
anybody determining whether predatory actions took place in the
first place, so I do not follow your reasoning there at all. I
think this will be a big help, and many startups have told me
just that, that it will be a big help to stop these kinds of
predatory actions taking place against them.
Mr. Taylor. Some of the lawyers who represent non-
practicing entity plaintiffs have told me that fee shifting is
not going to affect their behavior at all.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, that does not explain why they are
working very hard against this bill, I can tell you that.
Mr. Taylor. In my view, having been on both sides of lots
of patent cases, I see the presumptive shifting of fees as an
argument that allows the plaintiff to say to the defendant you
owe me $100,000----
Mr. Goodlatte. It is not presumptive shifting of fees.
There is no presumptive shifting of fees in this law. It is
only a shifting of fees when the Court finds that there was no
reasonable basis in law or in fact for that to take place. So
this constant assertion that there is going to be rampant fee
shifting in patent cases after the passage of this law is
incorrect.
What will happen, though, is there will be much greater
certainty about when that fee shifting would take place. So you
and your clients will be able to determine whether or not they
have a good patent defense or a good claim to assert against
somebody else and know much more likely than they do now what
is going to happen because of the discovery process, the
requirements when you file the case. And I think also
importantly to know under what circumstances they should assert
a defense and when they should not, because if they are not
being reasonable, then darn right, they should not assert the
defense. But if they are, this creates greater certainty than
this morass of lawsuits.
So let me just say, and the elephant in the room here is
that it is generally very rare for the Supreme Court to take up
patent cases. But with all the recent Supreme Court decisions,
it really looks like the Court has taken the Federal circuit to
task. No judge wants to be reversed on appeal, especially not
an appeal court judge that sits on a court with exclusive
jurisdiction.
I will start with you, Mr. Wamsley. Do you think that the
Federal circuit is getting the message, or do you foresee that
the Supreme Court is having to just keep taking up more cases?
Is this the new normal for the patent world, and is it good for
the patent world to rely upon and wait on the next Supreme
Court decision rather than to have some statutory certainty
that is carefully negotiated, and takes into account all of
these cases that have come down the line, but does not wait on
that next decision around the corner, says here based upon
experience and based upon what we have seen is some certainty
in the law?
Mr. Wamsley. Well, Mr. Goodlatte, I would say the Federal
circuits are certainly reading the Supreme Court decisions, and
I believe recent decisions in some of the cases following
Alice, for example, show that although there is still some
inconsistency. And Alice is a case where the Supreme Court may
have to come back to it again.
On fee shifting, I think the Federal circuit will follow.
There was a case argued last week, according to the IP press,
at the Federal circuit where, according to press accounts
anyway, it sounded like the Federal circuit was inclined toward
fee shifting.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Gupta?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In certain areas, the
Supreme Court cannot provide the sort of consistent balanced
solution that Congress can. And as I pointed out, for example,
in the area of abusive discovery, there is no Court guidance
and there are no Court decisions to help us. And in the area of
pleading specificity, which is really important, you know,
reliance on Iqbal and Twombly is not going to solve the problem
because Iqbal and Twombly do not provide the kind of bright
lines that we need in a specialized area like patent
litigation.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Pincus?
Mr. Wamsley. Mr. Chairman, could I just----
Mr. Goodlatte. I am already 30 seconds over. It is going to
be up to that Chairman.
Mr. Wamsley. Could I just complete my last response?
Mr. Issa. If the Chairman would like to let you have time,
I would ask additional time.
Mr. Goodlatte. We will hear from Mr. Pincus and then we can
go back.
Mr. Wamsley. I would just like to say that no matter how
strong the Federal circuit supports fee shifting, we think
legislation is still needed because the way the statute is
worded right now, only Congress can strike the balance that you
want.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. Mr. Pincus?
Mr. Pincus. Well, the Federal circuit had a bad year. There
were six cases, and it did not get a single vote, so it was
sort of 0 and 54 and a bad year for the Federal circuit, and I
think that was a message that the Supreme Court was trying to
send. But I think the problem is that the Supreme Court cannot
rewrite the fee-shifting law to make the standard less mushy
and clearer along the lines of what you were saying in terms of
people's ability to anticipate how it will be applied and take
that into account into their decisions. And that is something
that only Congress can do.
The same with pleadings. Iqbal and Twombly can apply, and
maybe in 10 years we will know how it applies to patent
infringement actions. But there are some pretty clear rules
that Congress could specify right now that would be great for
both plaintiffs and defendants so they would know what is
needed to get into court, and that would be that.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. We now recognize the Ranking Member
for up to 7 minutes depending upon how fast he wants to run to
the vote. I would advise all Members this will be the last
question before we recess for the vote.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you so much. Let me ask, Mr. Taylor,
with your background, counsel in venture capital firms who
invest in patent owning businesses, how would the pending
legislation impact the decisions venture capitalists make in
investing?
Mr. Taylor. One of the provisions that we are most
concerned about is the so-called joinder provisions, which are
not clearly written, and read as if a venture capital firm that
owns a majority share in a patent plaintiff would be on the
hook for attorney's fees in the event a court were deciding to
award that. Most venture capital investments are made, and that
is the end of the money until they decide to make a new one,
and to impose on the investors a responsibility for the actions
of some of their companies. Piercing the corporate veil, as it
were, is something that is going to have a serious deterrent
effect on venture capital investment.
Mr. Conyers. How would this impact small investments and
startups?
Mr. Taylor. Well, almost all venture capital investment is
in entrepreneurial companies, innovative companies that are in
either startup mode or not very far along from that.
Mr. Conyers. All right. And my last question is to Mr.
Wamsley. How has fee diversion impacted on USPTO's effort to
ensure high quality patent examination?
Mr. Wamsley. There has been a serious adverse effect from
fee diversion over the years. Going back over a period of
years, more than $1 billion has been diverted to unrelated
government programs or sequestered, and studies have shown that
this is a principle reason for the backlog of cases to be
examined. And we believe that more resources are also needed to
improve quality, and so we would urge Congress when it has an
opportunity to revisit the issue of guaranteeing secure funding
for the PTO.
Mr. Conyers. Do the other three witnesses generally agree
with that response?
Mr. Pincus. That diversion is a bad thing, absolutely.
Mr. Gupta. Yes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I would advise all Members of the
Subcommittee that we will return immediately after this series
of two votes. So the first two Members back will begin the
process. We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Issa. Could I ask you all to please take your seats? We
are going to start again in a moment. The Committee will come
to order. Is the gentleman from Texas prepared?
Mr. Farenthold. I am always prepared.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Gupta, I would like to touch briefly on a related issue, namely
the rise of patent litigation before the ITC. I think it is
important we do something about the rising tide of litigation
in the Federal judiciary and the fact that we are moving over
into concurrent tracks with litigation in the ITC. We have got
to keep in mind that any reforms we do with respect to what
happens in the judiciary may also roll over into the ITC.
My fear is that the trolls will use the ITC to pressure
litigants to settle rather than face the cost of defending in
that venue. We have already seen patent assertion entities
starting to play the same game in the ITC that we are seeing in
the Court, bringing suit against the customers or technology
companies. To that end, I would like to ask you, is it your
understanding that PAEs have additional leverage at the ITC and
are actually in a better position to make settlements than in
Federal courts?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. It is
concerning to us that the ITC is being used by patent assertion
entities to essentially have dual litigation at times. The ITC
is best able to deal with foreign knockoffs that come into our
country, but to have an American entity litigate against
another American company, particularly when the accusation is
probably directed to some small component that might have in
the supply chain originated outside the country appears to be
not the most efficient use of the ITC. And I agree, and I share
your concern.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. Let us kind of shift
to a different topic. In your written testimony you talk about
the Teva Pharmaceuticals case and the potential of providing
unscrupulous patentees with an incentive to pick the district
court most favorable to them. Knowing their claim
interpretation will be insulated from de novo review in the
Federal circuit. I am wondering what you think about the impact
of striking the broadest reasonable interpretation standard
will be on current litigation environments in light of that
decision.
I am especially interested given the decision in, what is
it, the Cuozzo Speed Technologies this week holding that
applying the broadest reasonable interpretation standard
reduces the possibility that after a patent is granted, claims
may be interpreted as giving broader coverage than justified.
Mr. Gupta. We believe that the BRI standard is appropriate
for IPRs and reviews post-grant. We have had several patents of
ours challenged through the IPR proceedings, and we have
challenged others as well. And we think that the Patent Office
should be allowed to use the broadest reasonable interpretation
standard when it looks at those patent claims.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, thank you. Mr. Taylor, I believe
in response to Mr. Nadler's question, I think you referred to
``good plaintiffs,'' and I think that is not what we are after
in this. I think our concerns are the bad actors who are using
the expensive litigation to force settlements in questionable
claims and the like. So I have no problem with, I guess, the
term ``good plaintiffs'' with good cases coming, and I think we
are drafting that such that we are going to preserve that. It
is the bad actors we are going to get after.
But I am also a little interested, you know, based on your
testimony, it kind of seems like it may be a little bit in
conflict with NVCA's membership. There is a survey I think that
said by and large they are harmed by patent trolls and
supportive of reform. Why are you generally opposed to this
litigation if some of your members or the majority of your
members are having a problem?
Mr. Taylor. The only study I have seen is one that sampled
a very small section of venture capital firms, and certainly
does not represent the center of gravity of the NVCA. I have
been working with the NVCA board now for almost a year on this
issue, and trying to help people understand what the statute
would say and how it would affect their businesses. And the
positions that I am setting forth here today are the positions
of the National Venture Capital Association.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. And with the
Chairman's permission and the consent of the Committee, I have
a letter from Engine Advocacy titled, ``Startup Investors
Nationwide Support Broad Patent Reform,'' that I would like
entered into the record.
Mr. Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Farenthold. And I timed that almost perfectly. I will
yield back----
Mr. Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Farenthold. I will.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Taylor, would you provide transparency as to
your members' statuses because it really is now a question of,
you said you have been trying to convince your board to support
opposition to the legislation. Do we have transparency for the
400 companies that are involved in yours to figure out how many
of them support your position in light of the fact that it does
appear as though there may be some doubt as to whether there is
a formal process on a board and transparency?
Mr. Taylor. It is a large organization, and I am not
certain how much of it is public. I have been dealing basically
with the staff and with the board of directors, so I am not
sure I can answer the question.
Mr. Issa. Okay. I will take that as a no. [Laughter.]
With that, we go to the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Chu.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Gupta, we have been talking quite a bit about
the fee-shifting cases of the Octane and Highmark cases. You
argue that these cases did not go far enough in deterring the
filing of frivolous patent cases that companies both large and
small have faced. You provide some statistics that can be
helpful to us in evaluating how we should legislate in this
area.
Why do you think that the rate of fully-granted motions
increased shortly after the first 3 months of the Court
decisions and then slowed in the last 3 months? Do you think
this trend will continue?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you, Congresswoman. You know, we have only
had 9 months of data since Highmark and Octane, so it is hard
to really speculate as to why it has been trending down. But
the point I want to make is that Highmark and Octane, based on
the data that we have right now, have not really had a
meaningful impact. And I really believe that to get abusive
litigation to slow down the abusive tactics, the plan or the
proposal that is in the Innovation Act is a thoughtful
bipartisan approach that I think will make a serious, you know,
or have a serious impact on bad actors in court.
Ms. Chu. And can you tell us about the type of cases in
which the defendant is being awarded fees since Octane and
Highmark? Do they appear to be troll type suits, or is there no
real pattern?
Mr. Gupta. I do not know that I can generalize. We have a
couple of motions pending ourselves where we have asked the
court to grant us our fees, and we are waiting to see how the
court will act, but I do not have a general sense. I think
based on the data we have seen that the numbers generally seem
to be evenly split between defendants and plaintiffs in terms
of fee recovery, but not necessarily whether it is a NPE
litigation or not.
Ms. Chu. And also in the Nautilus decision, the Supreme
Court addressed how definite or clear a patent must be. The
Court established a new test which requires that the patent
provide reasonable certainty of what it covers. You have stated
that it would be easier for a defendant to challenge the
validity of a vague patent given the decision. Could you
explain why it would be easier for the defendant and what long-
term effects do you think the decision will have on abusive
patent litigation?
Mr. Gupta. Certainly. We often find that patentees will
attempt to really stretch the meaning or the meets and bounds
of a patent in litigation downstream. Sometimes a patent 10, 12
years old, covering technology that was dated, they will
attempt to stretch it to cover new developments in technology.
And we think that this decision in Nautilus will allow us as
defendants to be able to argue that Section 112 requirements
were not met by the patentee, particularly in light of claim
construction orders.
If the judge grants a claim construction order that is
really broad and the plaintiff pushes for that broad
construction, I think it will be easier for defendants
downstream to then show that that claim construction is simply
not supported by what is in the specification, but it is too
early to tell. We also have one motion pending before a
district court arguing that certain claims are invalid in light
of Nautilus, but we do not have a ruling yet.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Mr. Pincus, what do these Supreme Court
cases not address? And by that I mean what are the provisions
in the Innovation Act that are still necessary despite the
court decisions?
Mr. Pincus. Well, they obviously do not address at all
pleadings. The patent specific decisions. Obviously the changes
that will be made in the Federal Rules striking Rule 84 and the
forms will have some effect on pleading, but the Supreme Court
has not addressed it. And as I said earlier, I think the
Congress has an opportunity to put specified clear rules of the
road for pleading rather than leave it to the courts to flesh
out what Iqbal and Twombly mean in the pleading context, which
will take a few years and could leave people uncertain about
what the rules are. So pleading is one area.
Discovery is another area not addressed at all. The
asymmetrical discovery costs which really are one of the
critical drivers of the litigation, nothing done there. And
with respect to the attorney's fees, although Highmark and
Octane do address the issue, the problem is that because the
current language of the statute is what it is, the Court could
not interpret that language to provide the kind of guidance
that is really necessary so that somebody making the decision,
do I fight this case because I have a reasonable chance to get
my fees back, or should I settle because I cannot be sure, and
so fighting it will end up costing me more. The current statute
does not do that.
The other problem with the current statute and the Court's
decision in Highmark with respect to deference is at least when
we are concerned about abuse by plaintiffs, plaintiffs pick the
forum. And if a district judge indicates or members of a
district court indicate that they are going to be tough on fees
under a murky standard, it is pretty easy for the plaintiff to
say, well, I am going to go somewhere else where this murky
standard is getting a better interpretation. If Congress makes
the rules of the road clearer, that kind of disparity is much
less likely to develop.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. We will now go to the
gentleman from Georgia's 9th District, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am pleased to
be starting back here. I am pleased to be on this Committee
with you and also the Chairman as Vice-Chair of this Committee
because this is very important to me. It is something I worked
hard in my first term, and look forward to working even more so
in our second term. As we look forward to working with this
Committee on intellectual property, obviously patents are a
vital part of the system. So I want to thank the Chairman
Goodlatte for holding this hearing and reintroducing the
Innovation Act.
It is important for Congress to look for ways to eliminate
frivolous and abusive litigation. We need to unclog the system
to ensure that true innovators are given fair opportunity to
enforce their patent rights, a right that our founders
explicitly provided for in the Constitution. Last year, I had
some serious concerns with the direction of some patent reform
proposals, especially those that attempted to expand and extend
the CBM program.
These types of proposals are unsettling because they
discriminate against a particular type of technology rather
than focus on the real problem, the bad behavior that occurs
all too often during patent litigation. So I am grateful to the
Chairman that the CBM issue is not a part of the Innovation
Act. Having it in would certainly undermine my ability to
support the bill in Committee and on the House floor. Now we
can focus on moving forward legislation that eliminates and
stops bad actors and improves our patent system.
But also before we start, this is my question. It was on
something, Mr. Taylor, that you brought up, and I believe if we
have it. Okay, if you would look at the screen. In your
testimony, after your testimony I took your testimony and I
went to your website, which is now on the screen. And on the
first page under ``research'' tab, there was a study listed by
Robin Feldman, and I am going to read just a few lines before
turning to my questions. In the paper it said, ``A study
conducted on the topic of patent demands against venture back
startups. The study was conducted through the members of the
National Venture Capital Association.''
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
It said, and quoting from this report, it says, ``74
percent of venture capitalists and 58 percent of startup
companies report that patent demand had a significant impact on
a company.'' The next one it said, ``According to the vast
majority of both venture capitalists and startup companies, the
cost of preparing for and defending against patent demands
exceeded $50,000 per company with a number of companies
reporting costs in the millions of dollars.''
When asked whether they see patent assertion as a positive
for startups in the startup community, 72 percent of venture
capitalists disagree. We might have an insight into why you are
having trouble getting people to disagree with this bill.
Mr. Gupta, thank you. I appreciated listening to your
testimony. I have heard from some groups that the Innovation
Act will actually devalue property rights by diminishing the
ability for parties to license their patents and defend them in
court. How would you respond to that claim?
Mr. Gupta. I completely disagree with that
characterization. The Patent Act was designed to promote
innovation and to promote art and sciences, and the true value
of a patent really goes to the claims and the invention that
those claims describe. I think a reformed system makes patents
stronger. It provides companies like us, who rely on our R&D
investment to protect our innovations, to know that we can
actually enforce our patents in a meaningful way and protect
the investments we have made.
The suggestion or the logic that somehow a patent is
devalued if a patent holder cannot plead imprecisely and bury
the other side with discovery requests, and do so with impunity
knowing that at the end of the day they have no downside and
they can walk away if they are not able to extort settlements
from people, is just flawed.
Mr. Collins. And I think the thing that I have mentioned so
many times in this Committee, and I think proposing this whole
issue of patent, copyright, and others, that really strong
protections, they actually increase and encourage innovation,
and do not detract from it, whether it be venture capital or
anything else. You want to invest in something that you know
that you are at least protected to the extent you can be in a
free market from an abusive system like we have now.
Mr. Pincus, I really like your expertise in this
intellectual property area, and I think it is not only
important we improve our patent system, but we also improve
other aspects of the country's intellectual property policy. I
am particularly interested to make sure that America still
contains the highest standards really in the world. All too
often we see our trade secrets stolen out of our factories here
in the United States and then end up on a plane to a foreign
competitor. I also want to improve the system to protect
America's inventors, which is why I supported the Committee's
trade secret legislation last year.
Can you talk about the intersection of patents and trade
secrets? I am also interested in your perspective on any
current improvements that we could make to our current trade
secrets policy.
Mr. Pincus. Yes, thank you, Congressman. As you know,
sometimes for various reasons companies have very important,
and significant, and valuable intellectual property that they
either do not want to patent or cannot patent, but is valuable
and is confidential to them. And the question is how does the
law protect that? Trade secret law has traditionally been the
means of doing that, and as you know, trade secret law has
traditionally been the domain of the States. But I think
increasingly we have realized that in the global environment in
which we find ourselves now, that there are holes in that
protection, and something at the Federal level that puts forth
clear rules of the road is really essential to ensuring that
American companies can protect those trade secrets effectively.
Mr. Collins. I appreciate it. You will be hearing more from
me on that in the weeks coming. Mr. Chairman, I yield back and
appreciate that time.
Mr. Issa. We now go to the gentlelady from Washington One,
someone who is familiar with intellectual property, Ms.
DelBene.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all of
our witnesses for taking the time to be with us today.
I know there has been a lot of close attention paid to the
Supreme Court cases on Section 101, and, Mr. Wamsley, in your
testimony, you stated that the lack of clarity in the Alice
case makes it more difficult for innovators to determine when
it is appropriate to invest in patent protection and cast a
shadow of uncertainty on all patents, even good ones. And so, I
wondered if you would elaborate a little bit more on that
statement and what your concerns are with respect to the Alice
case.
Mr. Wamsley. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
Yes, we feel there is a great uncertainty caused by Alice
currently, and the Alice case concerned a computer-related
invention. But recently the Federal circuit extended the
abstract idea test in a case involving the University of Utah
even to a biosciences invention.
So I think right now with the level of uncertainty we have,
people who are making R&D decisions in companies, at least
computer implemented inventions, pharmaceuticals, cases that
involve processes of all kinds, are wondering whether they are
in the patent eligible area, even if they have what they think
is a practical application for what might involve abstract
process. So we think there is an urgent need to clarify this.
Now, there was an earlier question about whether we need
legislation. I would not urge legislation tomorrow, but if the
courts are unsuccessful in clarifying this, I think that
ultimately Congress needs to look at the adverse effect on the
incentives for R&D.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you.
Mr. Taylor. Could I offer just a footnote to that? It is
important to remember that one of the purposes of the patent
system is to encourage disclosure of inventions. And to the
extent people conduct research and develop technology that they
are not confident they can patent, or in the case of what we
have been talking about this afternoon, not confident that they
can reasonably enforce their patents, the tendency will be to
protect it by trade secrets. And it is my strong sense right
now, given some of these cases from the Supreme Court and given
the pendency of this legislation, that companies are making
that decision and opting to go the trade secret route for more
of their technology that they used to try patenting.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you. Many supporters of the Innovation
Act have complained that they are being sued by shell companies
with few assets to pay attorney's fees even if they are
awarded. And according to the American Intellectual Property
Law Association, the average cost of defending a patent suit
with a million to $25 million, at risk is about $2.5 million,
and the cost of defending patent suits with more than $25
million, at risk is over $5 million. And we know that there has
been targeting obviously of startups that are particularly
vulnerable.
So I guess I will ask you, Mr. Gupta, what do you see as
the best way to deal with abusive litigation by shell companies
in particular when they have a lot to gain and not a lot to
lose under the current system? And do you think the Innovation
Act will address that issue?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. I
think the Innovation Act has a provision that requires people
who have a financial interest in the litigation be joined. I
think it is an important requirement. We are often sued by
shell companies who are very thinly capitalized, and so even if
you get an award, they are judgment proof essentially.
And by the way, my company, EMC, is a member of the
National Venture Capital Association. We have a venture arm. We
invest several hundred million dollars in venture funding. We
are not concerned that as a VC that one of the companies we are
investing is somehow going to be joined in a patent suit
because we do not invest in companies whose primary business is
to sue people with their patents.
And in the past 15 years, we have acquired 96 companies and
spent $18-plus billion in acquisitions, primarily of venture-
backed companies. And I can assure you that when I talk to the
CEOs and the entrepreneurs who started these companies, they
are very concerned about abusive patent litigation, and they
are very concerned about how much of their funding they are
having to spend on defending these demands versus hiring an
engineer developing the technology that they want to perfect.
And so, I really think, you know, requiring joinder of
folks who are funding the abusive practices is a very important
step, and I believe that this bill has the right types of
provisions for that.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you. Thanks. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Anecdotally, Mr. Gupta, I would assume
that you are not in support of your association's position here
today.
Mr. Gupta. Absolutely not.
Mr. Issa. Just checking. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, gentlemen, thank
you so much for taking the time to share your expertise with us
today. I apologize that some of us have had to be in and out
for votes. So it is not my desire to reopen a line of
questioning that perhaps has been asked and answered, but I do
want to make sure I am getting clarity.
And, Mr. Taylor, in response to what I heard the Chairman
ask you, as I read your written statement and heard your oral
presentation today, you accentuated the fact that you had 400
members, I believe, in your association. But it would not be
fair to conclude that your position today represents the
position of those 400 members. Would that be fair to say?
Mr. Taylor. I think it is fair to say that the position we
have tried to develop represents the center of gravity of that
organization. I cannot tell you that all----
Mr. Forbes. Let's look at the center of gravity then, is
Cisco one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. Say again?
Mr. Forbes. Is Cisco one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. Of the National Venture Capital Association? I
do not know.
Mr. Forbes. They are I think. And do know their position on
this?
Mr. Taylor. I do.
Mr. Forbes. And they are for the Innovation Act, are they
not?
Mr. Taylor. They are.
Mr. Forbes. How about Google? Are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know the answer to that.
Mr. Forbes. Do you know their position on this act?
Mr. Taylor. I do.
Mr. Forbes. And they are for the act, are they not?
Mr. Taylor. Correct.
Mr. Forbes. Dell, do you know whether they are one of your
members?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know.
Mr. Forbes. And do you know their position on the act?
Mr. Taylor. I am not sure I do.
Mr. Forbes. EMC, you look down the panel. You know their
position. Are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Forbes. Are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. According to Mr. Gupta they are, and I have
nothing to refute that.
Mr. Forbes. Okay. Intel, are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know, but I think they are.
Mr. Forbes. Do you know their position?
Mr. Taylor. I assume they are in favor of this bill.
Mr. Forbes. Micron, are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know.
Mr. Forbes. Do you know their position?
Mr. Taylor. No.
Mr. Forbes. Motorola, are they one of your members?
Mr. Taylor. The piece that is owned by Google. I do not
know the----
Mr. Forbes. Do you know their position?
Mr. Taylor. I do not.
Mr. Forbes. How about Salesforce, are they one of your
members?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know.
Mr. Forbes. Verizon?
Mr. Taylor. I do not know the answer to that either.
Mr. Forbes. So then basically you are not sure which of
your members are for the Innovation Act or against the
Innovation Act as you testified today. Fair assumption?
Mr. Taylor. That is fair except that I would say that all
of the companies you identified are very large corporations.
And the concern I have expressed is that for small innovative
companies, and they were once small innovative companies I
might add.
Mr. Forbes. And I think that would be fair, but I think it
would be also fair to say that there is a large segment of your
members that would be against your position today. Is that fair
to say?
Mr. Taylor. Let me say this a different way. The members of
NVCA that I have talked to have often not known enough about
this legislation----
Mr. Forbes. So all these large companies you either have
not talked to them or you feel that they just are not well-
informed enough to have an informed opinion on whether they
support the Innovation Act or not.
Mr. Taylor. I have had no reason to talk to the large
companies. Their position has been clear since before I took
this----
Mr. Forbes. Thank you. Mr. Gupta, can you help me with
this? We have heard from stakeholders that the discovery
proposals would actually make litigation longer and more
expensive. As a litigator and practitioner who spends much of
your time in court, do you agree with this statement? And if
so, why or why not?
Mr. Gupta. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I do
not agree with that. I think if we streamline discovery to
focus discovery early on to claim construction and Markman
issues, and expedite Markman hearings and defer non-Markman
related discovery to later, we will end up streamlining and
speeding up the process immensely. We will de-clutter our
courts to give them more time to handle substantive motions.
We will end up saving a lot of time, and mindless
discovery, and expert reports for both plaintiffs and
defendants, and bring a lot more focus to the litigation
process, and make it a whole lot more efficient.
Mr. Forbes. And just a follow-up question, Mr. Gupta. We
have heard claims that the number of cases are on the decline
with estimates as much as a 40 percent drop, negating the need
for Congress to act. Can you just respond to those numbers?
Mr. Gupta. The fact of the matter is we still had over
5,000 patent cases filed, and I believe that is twice as many
since the AIA was enacted, on an annual basis, and that is a
lot of patent litigation.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you all so much for being here. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Would the gentleman yield his remaining time?
Mr. Forbes. I would be glad to yield to the Chairman.
Mr. Issa. So if can characterize, Mr. Taylor, what I think
your testimony is, small companies within your group that you
are not naming here today oppose the act based on your
explaining it to them, and large companies, some of which have
been named and more will be placed in the record, support the
act, but because they are large, they do not count. You are
still speaking on behalf of the venture capital firm that you
head. Is that correct? Or venture capital association you head?
Mr. Taylor. I have not heard any dissent from members of
the National Venture Capital Association with respect to the
positions, and they have been widely publicized within the
organization.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Then I ask unanimous consent that the
members of the NVCA from the website be placed in the record, a
partial list including Seagate, IBM, Johnson and Johnson, KPG,
Morgan Stanley, Nike, DuPont, General Motors, Google, SoftBank,
the owners of Sprint, EMC, of course, Delphi, Dell Corporation,
USAA, the large fraternal association of former military
personnel, Tyco, Verizon, et cetera.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Who is next? Mr. Cicilline, thank you for coming
back. You are now recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for this very useful hearing. And, you know, I think
it strikes me that it matters a lot how you look at the
implications of both these Supreme Court decisions you have
discussed and the proposed legislation depending on whether you
are a plaintiff or defendant, whether you are defending a
patent or being a defendant in a patent litigation action.
So I think the goal here, at least from my perspective, is
to have reforms which ensure that we have a strong patent
system, but also ensure that we make the ability to resolve
disagreements cost-efficient, fair, quick, and that we preserve
the ability of small entrepreneurs, particularly who have maybe
economic imbalance of power in the system to be able to protect
their inventions and their discoveries.
So what I am wondering first is, should our focus be, you
know, if the idea is how do we come to the quickest resolution
or the quickest determination as to the validity of a claim.
Shouldn't we direct our attention to the pleading and discovery
phases where we can make improvements to help arrive at that
determination in a fairer, faster, more transparent way? And I
know the Supreme Court decisions do not focus on those, but
does the panel think that is an area we should focus on where
there is the greatest opportunity to eliminate the abuse that
we are intending to eliminate?
Mr. Taylor. Who did you want to answer that? Well, let me
take a first stab at it.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes, Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. It is always the case when a lawsuit is filed
that the defendant will sit down with the patent and ask its
lawyers to locate whatever prior art they can. Often the
defendant will have the better prior art and to assess the
strength of the claims, and if the claims are really genuinely
not valid. I have had a number of situations in bringing prior
art to the attention of the plaintiff and the case went away.
It is one of those issues that you should be able to resolve
early if you can.
One of the reasons for the AIA proceeding was to allow the
litigants to get the validity issues out on the table. An AIA
proceeding costs substantially less than trying to do it
through a district judge and combative adversarial lawyers. And
so, that is a partial answer to your question. I am not sure it
is complete.
Mr. Pincus. I think certainly those are two critical
elements. I would not say they are the only ones, but I do
think they are critical. I think at the pleading stage, I think
everybody has agreed today that anybody filing a lawsuit should
be able to identify the particular claims that they think are
being infringed and the particular articles that are
infringing. That seems pretty basic, and that is basically what
the Innovation Act pleading provision requires.
And I think with respect to discovery, the critical
question is staging the discovery to fit the part of the
proceeding. Everybody should want to have the discovery, if
there is any relating to the Markman proceeding, before the
Markman proceeding. That then puts pressure on the judge to
have to decide the Markman issue right then, and then move to
the next phase of the proceeding. You know what the patent
means. Now, let's look at validity and infringement and get the
relevant discovery with respect to that. So staging things in
that way is quite sensible.
I think the other critical ingredient is something that
levels the economic playing field because it still will be the
case even if you make those changes that the costs of
litigation are going to be asymmetric as it moves forward. And
so, the question then is how do you incentivize a defendant to
not settle a claim that he knows is pretty much abusive at the
beginning when the settlement offer that is being made is less
than----
Mr. Cicilline. Okay, I take it back. I just have a few
minutes left, 1 minute left. I just want to ask Mr. Wamsley,
you said we should not act on Alice, legislate right away. And
I am wondering whether or not it might make sense for us to see
Highmark and Octane, how they play out, whether or not the
Court may have actually solved at least that piece of the
problem. Does it make some sense to give these decisions some
time to be absorbed the Court?
And then secondly, I would just ask Mr. Taylor or any of
the other panelists, what can we do to protect small investors
who might be disadvantaged by some part of the Innovation Act?
We want to deal with this issue of patent trolls in a serious
way, but are there any suggestions you can make of things we
should be looking at that will protect the small investors?
Mr. Taylor. Small investors?
Mr. Cicilline. Small entrepreneurs?
Mr. Taylor. I think that protecting investors, it is
terribly important to get rid of the joinder provisions that
allows a prevailing defendant to turn to the owners of a
company, pierce the corporate veil, and make the owners stand
liable for attorney's fees. And the statute is capable of being
read that way, although I think it is somewhat ambiguous. The
concern we have is that it will be read that way. I think that
provision is just anathema to encouraging venture capital
investment.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. We now go to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Taylor, let us talk a
little bit about the venture capitalists. How widespread is the
market in venture capitalism with regard to patent litigation?
Mr. Taylor. I do not think that for most venture-backed
companies patent litigation to date has been a significant
problem. The ones that I am aware of and the ones that I have
actually personally dealt with have almost all been venture-
backed companies being sued by larger competitors because they
have got an innovative technology that the larger competitor
sees an advantage to taking out.
Mr. Marino. Would you agree with me that in most
situations, those individuals investing in venture capitalists
concerning patent litigation or any other investment pretty
much know what is going on, what they are investing in?
Mr. Taylor. I think as a general proposition, yes.
Mr. Marino. Okay. And you talk about piercing the corporate
veil, which is an interesting point. But would you agree with
me that in order to pierce the corporate veil, the investors
would have to know or should have known that there was
unethical or even criminal activity taking place with the
investors, with the principals who are running the investment?
Mr. Taylor. State laws differ with respect to the
requirement for piercing the corporate veil, and there are a
number of situations in which courts have done that. But in
general, I can tell you that most investors assume if you are
just buying stock in a company, you are not assuming any
responsibility for a company's liabilities.
Mr. Marino. I know you are right. It is something that
could rear its ugly head, but not on a regular basis or highly
unlikely. You have to show intent on the part of the investor
that they were condoning, or allowing, or turning a blind eye
to what was taking place with whom they gave money to invest.
Mr. Taylor. The way I read this legislation is that if
someone has a financial interest, the owner of patent, and
given the joinder rules, they are susceptible to being joined.
That is one of the fundamental problems that surfaced when I
first read it.
Mr. Marino. Have you seen situations where that has
occurred where investors were held liable because of activity
on the part of the principles?
Mr. Taylor. Not to date.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Let us talk a little bit also about
courts. I clerked a long time ago for a Federal judge at least
in my last year in law school and then as a prosecutor, U.S.
attorney. I am very familiar with the Federal court system both
in the criminal and the civil side. U.S. attorneys have
responsibilities on the civil side to resolve cases as well.
And I found over the years and years of my experience that
courts are just reluctant to award attorney's fees, to fee
shift, even for egregious activity. I have been in court
numerous times and showed clearly evidence that was purposely
withheld or false statements were made, and the courts would
not sanction or award fees. So what other way could this be
handled other than re-legislating, among other things, that
issue of awarding fees?
Mr. Taylor. Well, the mechanisms are in place for truly
abusive and frivolous litigation already.
Mr. Marino. I understand that, sir. They are there. You
studied the Federal rules. I know the State rules at least in a
couple of States. But the courts are just not doing it.
Mr. Taylor. I think Congress----
Mr. Marino. Can you give an example of why they are not
doing it?
Mr. Taylor. Since the Octane case was decided last summer,
there have been 49 cases in which the prevailing party sought
fees, and in 21 of those cases the court has awarded it, which
I think is a different equation today than existed at the
beginning of last year. There is a quotation from Justice
Sotomayor from a copyright case, and she lists the kind of
activities that should give rise to a fee award, and they
include asserting frivolous positions.
Mr. Pincus. Congressman, can I----
Mr. Marino. Go ahead. Yes.
Mr. Pincus. So here is the problem. In the real world,
there is Rule 11, but the problem is very few people ever seek
fees because what they do in these cases is they decide it is
cheaper to settle than fight. So the fee application never
happens because the case is settled.
What you want people to do is stand up and say I am going
to fight this because I think this fee standard gives me some
reasonable belief that if I fight, I am not going to end up a
net economic loser. And that is the critical change that has to
be made is to get people willing to invest the time to fight,
which will change all of the incentives in the action. I wonder
if I could just----
Mr. Marino. Well, that is going to be up to the Chairman
because my time is well over.
Mr. Issa. If on the subject of the question you want to
complete your answer you may, but only that, please.
Mr. Pincus. I will be very quick, Mr. Chairman. I know Mr.
Taylor is very worried about this interested party provision.
But I would just urge people to read the text of the Innovation
Act, which is quite restrictive and specifically says that just
having an economic interest in the company is not enough to
make you an interested party.
Mr. Marino. I would agree with that.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. The gentleman from Florida, a fellow
Michigan graduate, although I was down the street. I was at
Siena where you at the big school, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor.
Mr. Deutch. I think we saw you in the stadium some Saturday
afternoon.
Mr. Issa. Well, that is because we did not have a football
team. We had women's field hockey. The gentleman is recognized.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Chairman Issa and Ranking Member
Nadler, for holding this important hearing today. There is no
question that we have got to address the real problem of patent
trolls and truly fix the broken patent system. Any legislation
that moves forward from this Committee has to strongly promote,
not stymie, American innovation and ingenuity.
We have got to take into account the rights of inventors
and small businesses, make it harder for patent trolls to take
advantage of this system at the expense of legitimate
practitioners and third parties. And if we fail to balance
these goals, then we are going to hurt American businesses,
weaken inventors, harm our universities, and seriously damage
our economy.
I am personally committed--personally committed--to
improving our patent system. That is why I introduced the End
Anonymous Patents Act that would help end the secret system of
patent ownership. I strongly support many provisions in this
bill, including the new transparency rules and many others. But
I genuinely worry that the legislation as currently drafted
contains language that could actually weaken a patent holder's
willingness and ability to protect their valid patent rights.
I am also concerned that the legislation fails to take into
account the new and significant shift in the law that was the
result of Supreme Court cases. That change in law and the
change in the courthouses, Mr. Pincus, I would suggest is also
the real world. These cases give district court judges
significant and expansive discretion to award fees to a
prevailing party, and they have more than ever. I trust judges
that know the facts intimately to properly exercise such good
discretion rather than rigid rules set by Congress that cannot
separate the innovative inventor from the patent troll.
And as much as I like H.R. 9, I am concerned that the loser
pays attorney's fees provision in the bill may, in fact, deter
patent holders from pursuing even meritorious patent
infringement claims. I am worried that small businesses and
independent inventors will be affected. Mr. Taylor, those are
perhaps companies that you know best.
So I would ask after Octane Fitness--Mr. Taylor you just
spoke about this. Now, you pointed out that judges have awarded
fees in patent cases far more than they have before, so here is
the real question I have. In light of all of the steps that
have been taken by the PTO, by Congress, and now by the Supreme
Court, Mr. Taylor, help me understand why it is necessary to
place additional burdens on the individual who is seeking to
defend his or her property right.
Mr. Taylor. I do not think you should be placing additional
burdens on the person trying to defend his or her property, nor
do I think we should be placing additional burdens on litigants
who have been sued by larger competitors. Those are serious
concerns. And I think the way you stated it, I would certainly
subscribe to.
Mr. Deutch. Do the Supreme Court decisions make it harder
for patent owners to file frivolous lawsuits? Does it make them
think more in light of the decisions that have come down in
what we have seen in Federal court?
Mr. Taylor. I think that the reason you have seen a drop
off is patent owners are going back to the drawing board with
their lawyers and seriously examining whether or not they are
inviting a fee award at the end of a losing case rather than a
settlement. But bear in mind, the bulk of these cases will
continue to settle, and the fee award, by raising the risk to
both sides, gives the plaintiff a very good argument to the
defendant for why you ought to settle the case without taking
it to trial.
Mr. Deutch. Now, you had said in your testimony, Mr.
Taylor, that if the Innovation Act as written were to pass, it
would have a chilling effect on investment and patent-intensive
companies. Can you just expand on that? And I apologize if you
have already, but I had two other hearings.
Mr. Taylor. Well, I think for all the reasons we have been
talking about, I think the fee-shifting proposal is going to
make it more difficult and certainly make it riskier. I believe
the fee-shifting proposal is going to raise the expense. I
think that the pleading requirements are going to raise the
expense because what will happen as a practical matter is I
file a complaint, and you are the defendant, and you come in
and say, hey, look, Congress has listed 20 things here that you
have to comply with in order to file a valid complaint.
And I am going to say to the Judge, well, I think I have
done them all, Your Honor. And then there is going to be a
motion filed as to a number of those points that is going to be
$30,000 or $40,000 per side just to resolve whether the
complaint is any good.
Mr. Deutch. I only have a few seconds left. Can you
describe some of the types of companies that might be affected
in that way?
Mr. Taylor. Companies in the energy business who depend
terribly on their patents, biotechnology companies,
pharmaceutical companies, medical device companies. The medical
device companies are particularly vulnerable because a medical
device takes a lot of development time. It is so easily copied.
And unlike pharmaceuticals, the FDA process for clearance of a
medical device if you have got another device on the market is
quite simple.
And so, for medical device developers, unless they can
protect their patents, they are dead in the water, and the
larger companies are watching the marketplace. They spot the
new technology, new trends. And it is not uncommon for medical
devices quickly to be copied by their larger competitors.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Issa. You are most welcome from one Michigan kid to
another. Sort of Michigan.
We now go to a man who understands State court law, Judge
Poe.
Mr. Poe. Thank the Chairman. Thank you all for being here.
Yes, it is true. I did serve as a district judge in Texas for
22 years, but it is a fact universally that most cases settle.
Civil cases, criminal cases, big cases, little cases, traffic
cases, most of them settle. Is that not a truism in our court
system, State and Federal? Anyone disagree with that?
[Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Poe. Most cases do not go to trial. They settle
somewhere early on. They settle on the steps of the courthouse.
They settle when they see who the judge is. They settle
eventually. It is a universal issue about litigation and the
cost of litigation when someone decides to sue another one. How
much is it going to cost and who is going to pay for that? This
a discussion that has been going on since before any of us
probably were lawyers.
It seems to me that public policy, we want people to be
able to go to court if they can if they have what they believe
to be a legitimate case of some kind. And if they win, great.
If they lose, there is always the theory or threat, well, I
have lost, now I have got to pay, and I do not have the money
to pay.
Let us talk about this issue of patent trolls, use the
definition, whatever you prefer. Would not what would happen
is, and let us take the new legislation. Mandatory to the
judges, you got to impose these fees. Patent trolls are not
going to be paying those fees, are they? The judge finds it is
a frivolous lawsuit. These patent troll companies, they just go
out of business and start another business. Is that not what is
going to happen? It is a question. If any of you want to answer
it, it is fine.
Mr. Taylor. I do not know exactly how that is going to play
out. What I do think, though is that the courts have today the
mechanisms to put in place assurances that that will not
happen. The courts had, for example, what we may see is the
attorney's fee issue does not have to wait until the end of the
case. And indeed what I am told by some of my friends who are
representing people actively today in litigation is there is
already posturing going on among the lawyers to set up the fee
issue at the end of a case.
And if you are dealing with a genuinely impecunious
plaintiff and it has no real party interest, and there are
mechanisms already in the Federal rules for finding out who the
party-in-interest is. And it is not very many real parties-in-
interests that are completely impecunious. The judge is in a
position to make rules that either make them streamline the
case to the point that it can be afforded, or make some kind of
a presentation or representation----
Mr. Poe. That was not my question. Is that going to be the
end game, they are just going to re-incorporate under another
name? Anybody else want to weigh in on this? I have one other
question, too. Go ahead.
Mr. Gupta. If I may, Congressman. I think the Reform Act's
provision dealing with ensuring that people who are funding the
enterprise and funding the entities who are acquiring patents
just to sue people is a thoughtful solution to that issue. If
you peel behind sort of the actors who are funding a lot of
this, there are a lot of common players. I think I have seen
research that said more than 60 percent of troll actions are
really initiated, are funded by a very small group of
companies.
And so, I think the reason that patent lawsuits settle as
much as they do is because patent litigation is very expensive,
and small companies in particular. And I have data that I have
cited from MIT and Harvard, very recent studies, saying that
they are really impacted negatively when they have to deal with
patent suits rather than spending their resources in creating
technology.
Mr. Poe. I understand. That is what some of them say, and I
do not necessarily disagree with them. My other question is,
having been a judge, of course, I think the trier of fact or
the person who gets to hear the whole case is in a pretty good
position to make some decisions about attorney's fees, if you
will. I agree with that philosophy. Except for the statistics
mentioned by Mr. Taylor, why have Federal judges been reluctant
to order fees since they can already do it? They have the
discretion. Why do they not do it?
Mr. Taylor. Prior to the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Octane and Highmark, there had been in place for at least a
decade Federal circuit decisional law that made it essentially
impossible for the prevailing party, a prevailing defendant
particularly, to recover attorney's fees. And the message one
gets from the two decisions written by Justice Sotomayor is
that we, the Supreme Court, reject that approach. We think the
district judge, as you just stated, is in a way better position
than the Court of Appeals to decide whether or not there is a
reason to shift fees. And we are going to entrust that issue to
the discretion of the judge. The Federal circuit may no longer
review it de novo. The Federal circuit is required to review
it.
Mr. Poe. Let me interrupt because I am out of time.
Mr. Issa. Yes, you are.
Mr. Poe. If the Chairman would let me ask the question?
Mr. Issa. Without objection.
Mr. Poe. Look, the district judge who hears the whole case
but early reversed the decision of the district judge if there
is an abuse of discretion as it is under some other types of
law.
Mr. Taylor. Correct.
Mr. Poe. Would that be a fair analysis----
Mr. Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Poe [continuing]. Of something that maybe we should
consider?
Mr. Taylor. That is what the decision in Highmark and
Octane specifically state.
Mr. Poe. I understand. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I would
remind all the witnesses that we do allow significant revise
and extend in order to comment further on some of the specifics
where a question could not be fully answered. So it is not full
amicus, but we certainly would look forward to your further
comments.
We now go to the gentleman from Brooklyn, Mr. Jeffries.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank Ranking
Member Nadler as well, and thank the witnesses for your
presence and your testimony here today.
I want to explore this issue of trying to help through the
Innovation Act startup companies, tech entrepreneurs, young
inventors, and others, the small inventor, which is of
particular importance to me. The Chairman noted that I am from
Brooklyn. We have a growing technology and innovation economy
filled with tech entrepreneur startup companies, new inventors.
And, you know, Mr. Taylor, you seem to indicate in your
testimony that in your view, the Innovation Act would hurt
these entities. But in speaking to some tech entrepreneurs and
some small startup companies, who have had experiences with
patent trolls, one of the concerns that they face is that
because there is such an imbalance right now, and abusive
litigation is not being decided on the merits, which it should
be, but is being decided on the basis of the expensive cost of
litigating to the very end.
Even if you believe that the case being brought is invalid,
would not the Innovation Act in its effort to restore this
litigation balance so that people can make decisions based on
the merits of the claim, actually help the tech entrepreneur,
the startup company, and the young inventor?
Mr. Taylor. I do not believe that that would be the case,
and the reason is that the way in which the bill is structured,
the enhanced pleading requirement is going to raise the cost of
getting the court even to have the initial pleadings in place.
The fee-shifting provision is going to become an amount of
money that the defendant has to take into account as what it is
facing by way of risk at the end of the case. And it is going
to create more pressure on the defendant to settle than exists
today.
I agree with you. Today the cost of litigation is
prohibitive, and it is particularly prohibitive for small
companies. But I do not think this bill gets rid of that.
Mr. Jeffries. Now, in terms of the enhanced pleading, I
would note that when the Private Securities Litigation Reform
action or Act was passed, I think, in the late 1990's, which
put in enhanced pleading as it relates to securities
litigation, there was a view amongst many that this would hurt
the ability of the small individual investor, the individual
plaintiff, the type of person that I am concerned with--I was
not in Congress at the time--to actually bring actions holding
big companies responsible for financial impropriety. But that,
in fact, has not been the case, notwithstanding the enhanced
pleading. And that is in a much broader context, the securities
litigation, than the specialized area of patent litigation.
So on the fee-shifting point, however, I am very interested
in because I am sensitive to the concern as it relates to
separation of powers, one that I think the Judiciary Committee
should take seriously, that the House of Representatives should
take seriously, in terms of us being a co-equal branch of
government. And at the end of the day, you know, the Supreme
Court and the courts at the circuit level and the district
court level should be separate and co-equal and have a capacity
to determine how matters should proceed through the judiciary,
though Congress has the authority to do it.
That said, in the post-Octane environment, you made mention
of the fact that courts now appear more willing to shift fees.
Is that correct? So what I am trying to understand is since the
Court said the previous standard, which I believe was
objectively unreasonable and asserted in bad faith, was not the
standard that should be applied in determining whether this was
an exceptional circumstance. And that we have now got a
standard where we have shifted the burden to say that the court
shall award fees unless the case was reasonably justified in
law and fact.
It is not clear to me that there is a lot of space between
the enhanced Supreme Court directive and the attorney's fees
provision that is in this bill. And I would be interested in,
you know, your observation, Mr. Pincus, and the observation of
Mr. Taylor if time permits.
Mr. Pincus. I think the difference is the Supreme Court's
standard is basically sort of a Gestalt standard, right? They
say it is exceptional and the district court can consider all
relevant factors in deciding whether or not it is exceptional.
And so, I think the problem is in terms of both getting some
uniformity across district courts and also in terms of having a
standard that people can anticipate how it might be applied in
a particular case, that is not really a very helpful test.
And I think the testimony that is in the Innovation Act
focuses the district judge on some key factors. One is, as you
say, reasonable in law and fact, and then the countervailing
consideration about whether special circumstances, and it
specifically says such a severe economic hardship to an
inventor. So specifically saying if this is going to hurt a
small inventor, do not do it, I think focus the district judge
on the key factors in a way that the current law does not
because it sort of says look at everything and make this
decision.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Seeing no further questions for our
witnesses, I want to thank you for your testimony here today. I
want to thank you for your candor. And, again, to the extent
that you want to give us additional information either to be
placed in the record, that would have to be within 5
legislative days. So without objection, all Members and our
witnesses shall have 5 legislative days in which to submit
additional written questions for the witnesses or additional
materials for the record. Anything coming in after that will
still be disseminated to all the Members of the Committee.
We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
