- HEARING ON THE LEGAL WORKFORCE ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE LEGAL WORKFORCE ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
IMMIGRATION AND BORDER SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-081 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUUL LABRADOR, Idaho                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security

TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Chairman

RAUUL LABRADOR, Idaho, Vice-Chairman

LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
DAVE TROTT, Michigan

George Fishman, Chief Counsel

Tom Jawetz, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 4, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Lamar S. Smith, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Texas, and Member, Subcommittee on Immigration and
Border Security................................................     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     4
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Texas, and Member, Subcommittee on
Immigration and Border Security................................     5

WITNESSES

Randel K. Johnson, Senior Vice President, Labor, Immigration and
Employee Benefits, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Testimony.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Jill G. Blitstein, Esq., International Employment Manager, Human
Resources, North Carolina State University
Oral Testimony.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    25
Angelo I. Amador, Esq., Senior Vice President & Regulatory
Counsel, National Restaurant Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32
Charles F. Conner, President and CEO, National Council of Farmer
Cooperatives
Oral Testimony.................................................    43
Prepared Statement.............................................    45

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Trey Gowdy, a Representative
in Congress from the State of South Carolina, and Chairman,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................     8
Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................    55
Material submitted by the Honorable Pedro R. Pierlusi, a
Representative in Congress from Puerto Rico, and Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................    63
Material submitted by the Honorable Trey Gowdy, a Representative
in Congress from the State of South Carolina, and Chairman,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................   119

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................   128

HEARING ON THE LEGAL WORKFORCE ACT

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 2015

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Trey Gowdy,
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gowdy, Goodlatte, Labrador, Smith,
King, Buck, Ratcliffe, Trott, Conyers, Jackson Lee, and
Pierluisi.
Staff Present: (Majority) George Fishman, Subcommittee
Chief Counsel; Andrea Loving, Counsel; Graham Owens, Clerk; and
(Minority) Tom Jawetz, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Gowdy. Good morning. This is the Subcommittee on
Immigration and Border Security. This is a hearing on H.R.
1772, the ``Legal Workforce Act.''
The Subcommittee will come to order. Without objection, the
Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the Committee at any
time.
We welcome everyone to today's hearing on the Legal
Workforce Act. I will introduce the witnesses.
And we thank you for your presence and your expertise. I
will introduce you later, but for now, I will recognize the
gentleman from the great State of Texas, Mr. Lamar Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
yielding me time and giving me the opportunity to talk about
this piece of legislation, which I introduced in the last
Congress and hope to introduce in the next few days in this
Congress.
Mr. Chairman, almost 20 million Americans are unemployed or
underemployed. Meanwhile, 7 million people are working in the
United States illegally. These jobs should go to American
citizens and legal workers who need these jobs.
The Legal Workforce Act turns off the jobs magnet that
attracts so many illegal immigrants to the United States. The
bill expands the E-Verify system and applies it to all U.S.
employers.
Illegal workers cost Americans jobs or depress their wages,
according to nearly all studies on the subject. For example, a
Center for Immigration Studies report found that illegal
immigration reduces the wages of American workers by
approximately $650 per worker. We need to do all we can to
protect the jobs and wages of American workers.
The Legal Workforce Act also would open up millions of jobs
for unemployed Americans by requiring employers to use E-
Verify. The E-Verify system is quick and effective, confirming
99.7 percent of work-eligible employees.
Recent data shows that approximately 575,000 American
employers voluntarily use E-Verify already, and an average of
1,400 new businesses sign up each week for E-Verify. One third
of American jobs are now covered by E-Verify.
The program is free, quick, and easy to use. In fact, E-
Verify will soon be available for use on smart phones. It will
take about 1 minute per potential employee.
Individuals provide their Social Security number when they
visit a doctor, open a bank account, or buy a home. It makes
sense that other businesses should check the status of
prospective employees to ensure that they have a legal
workforce.
The Legal Workforce Act requires that U.S. employers use E-
Verify to check the work eligibility of new hires in the U.S.
The verification period is phased-in and depends on the size of
the employer's business. Smaller businesses have up to 2 years
to implement E-Verify.
The legislation balances immigration enforcement priorities
and legitimate employer concerns. It gives employers a workable
system under which they cannot be held liable if they use the
system in good faith. The bill prevents a patchwork of State E-
Verify laws, but retains the ability of States and localities
to condition business licenses on the use of E-Verify. It also
allows States to enforce the Federal E-Verify requirement, if
the Federal Government fails to do so.
The Legal Workforce Act increases penalties on employers
who knowingly violate the requirements of E-Verify and imposes
criminal penalties on employers and employees who engage in or
facilitate identity theft.
The bill creates a fully electronic employment eligibility
verification system, and it allows employers to voluntarily
check their current workforce if done in a nondiscriminatory
manner.
Furthermore, the Legal Workforce Act gives U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services the ability to prevent identity theft.
The bill allows individuals to lock their own Social Security
number so that it cannot be used by others to verify work
eligibility. The legislation also allows parents to lock the
Social Security number of a minor child to prevent identity
theft.
If a Social Security number shows unusual multiple uses,
the Social Security Administration locks the number for
employment verification purposes and notifies the owner that
their personal information may be compromised.
A report by Westat in 2009 on error rates and the cost of
E-Verify is clearly outdated. That study utilized old data and
failed to consider the provisions aimed at preventing identity
theft mentioned above and that are in the bill today.
In regard to cost, one study showed that three quarters of
employers stated the cost of using E-Verify is zero.
Equally important, the American people support E-Verify.
Last month, a Paragon Insights poll showed that 71 percent of
voters ``support Congress passing new legislation that
strengthens the rules making it illegal for businesses in the
U.S. to hire illegal immigrants.''
In fact, E-Verify receives the most public support of any
immigration reform provision.
Unfortunately, many States do not enforce their own E-
Verify laws, and others only apply E-Verify in a very limited
way. The Legal Workforce Act helps ensure that employers from
every State have the same standard when it comes to hiring
employees.
This bill is a common-sense approach that will reduce
illegal immigration and save jobs for American workers and
legal workers. It deserves the support of everyone who wants to
put the interests of U.S. workers first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Texas.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Michigan,
the Ranking Member, former Chairman of the Judiciary Committee,
Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy. This is a subject,
that of today's hearing, that is very familiar to us because
over the past 4 years, this same Subcommittee has held six
hearings on E-Verify, the government's electronic employment
verification system.
Each time that we have looked at it, each time we have
considered the Legal Workforce Act, I have also said that E-
Verify is an important tool. But I have also said, and the
witnesses appearing before us have agreed, that E-Verify cannot
be made mandatory for all employers without comprehensive
reforms to our Nation's broken immigration system. That is a
very important point, that E-Verify cannot be made mandatory
for all employers without comprehensive reform to our Nation's
immigration system.
For years, some have argued that to fix the broken system,
we need only enforce the laws on the books, but we know that is
not a real and viable solution. We cannot rely solely upon
enforcement of our broken laws.
The truth is that enforcement without reform will actually
hurt the American worker. But if we fix our broken immigration
system, we can help American workers and grow our economy, or
to put it another way, the Congressional Budget Office told us
in December that enacting this bill into law would increase the
deficit by $30 billion over 10 years. But enacting the Senate-
passed immigration reform bill, S. 744, would in fact reduce
the budget deficit by $158 billion over the first 10 years and
by about $680 billion over the next 10 years. I want to get
into that in the hearing.
Whenever we talked about E-Verify, it is important that we
think about how the world really works. I have heard people say
that E-Verify will help American workers because every time an
undocumented immigrant is denied a job, an unemployed American
gets hired. It is a pretty simple idea, and I can see how it
could be appealing. But the problem is that it is false.
Immigrants often fill gaps in our own workforce, where
there are not enough Americans willing to do the work. Because
50 percent to 70 percent of the Nation's farmworkers are
undocumented, mandatory E-Verify would be especially
devastating to that industry. No one would pick the fruits and
vegetables in the fields, and they would probably be left to
rot. American farms would go under, and jobs would be moved
overseas, including the millions of upstream and downstream
American jobs supported by agriculture.
Now when we first considered this bill in the 112th
Congress, the Legal Workforce Act contained a simple solution
for the agriculture industry. It created a special carve-out in
the law to exempt farmers from the requirement to use E-Verify.
And in the final days of the 113th Congress, this Committee
reported to the floor this bill and an agricultural guestworker
bill. But in part because the guestworker proposal did not have
much support, neither bill went anywhere.
Finally, E-Verify could already be required for employers
around the country. Had my conservative friends in the House
taken up the bipartisan comprehensive immigration reform bill
passed by the Senate way back in 2006, mandatory E-Verify would
be the law today. And had House Republicans taken up S. 744,
the bipartisan comprehensive immigration reform that passed the
Senate with a supermajority in the last Congress, or H.R. 15,
the bipartisan bill in the House, mandatory E-Verify, again,
would be the law of the day.
So instead, our Republican leaders in the House chose not
to act on either of these proposals. They withered on the vine
and died, just as crops would go unpicked if this bill were to
become law without broader changes to our immigration system.
So I look forward to the hearing, and I want to welcome all
of the witnesses to today's hearing. I thank the Chairman and
yield back any time remaining.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Michigan.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman from South Carolina
for holding this hearing, and I thank the gentleman from Texas
to my immediate right here for once again championing the Legal
Workforce Act. It will play an integral role in the enforcement
of U.S. immigration laws and the discontinuation of the jobs
magnet responsible for so much illegal immigration.
Americans have long been promised tougher immigration
enforcement in exchange for the legalization of those
unlawfully in the U.S. But Administrations never kept these
promises, and today, we are left with a broken immigration
system.
One way to make sure we discourage illegal immigration in
the future is to prevent unlawful immigrants from getting jobs
in the U.S. Requiring the use of E-Verify by all employers
across the country will help do just that.
The Web-based program is a reliable and quick way for
employers to electronically check the work eligibility of newly
hired employees.
The Legal Workforce Act, as reported out of this Committee
last Congress, builds on E-Verify's success and helps ensure
the strong enforcement that was promised to the American people
many years ago. But the bill does not simply leave enforcement
up to the Federal Government.
In fact, it actually empowers States to help enforce the
law, ensuring that we do not continue the situation we have
currently where a President can turn off Federal enforcement
efforts unilaterally.
Nearly 575,000 employers are currently signed up to use E-
Verify. It is easy for employers to use and is effective. In
fact, as USCIS testified in front of this Subcommittee last
Congress, E-Verify immediately confirms the work eligibility of
persons eligible to work 99.7 percent of the time.
But the system is not perfect. For instance, in cases of
identity theft, when an individual submits stolen identity
documents and information, E-Verify may confirm the work
eligibility of that individual.
This happens because E-Verify uses a Social Security number
or alien identification number and certain other corresponding
identifying information, such as the name and date of birth of
an individual, to determine if the SSN or alien identification
number associated with that corresponding information is work
eligible. Thus, if an individual uses a stolen Social Security
number and the real name corresponding with that Social
Security number, a false positive result could occur.
The Legal Workforce Act addresses identity theft in several
ways.
First, it requires notification to employees who submit for
E-Verify an SSN that shows a pattern of unusual multiple use.
In this way, the rightful owner of the SSN will know that their
SSN may have been compromised. And once they confirm this, DHS
and the Social Security Administration must lock that SSN so no
one else can use it for employment eligibility purposes.
The bill also creates a program through which parents or
legal guardians can lock the Social Security numbers of their
minor children for work eligibility purposes. This is to combat
the rise in the number of thefts of children's identities.
The bill also phases in E-Verify use in 6-month increments
beginning with the largest U.S. businesses, raises penalties
for employers who do not use E-Verify according to the
requirements, allows employers to use E-Verify prior to the
date they hire an employee, and provides meaningful safe
harbors for employers who use the system in good faith.
The witness testimony and other support proffered today
will show that the Legal Workforce Act balances the needs of
the American people regarding immigration enforcement with the
needs of the business community regarding a fair and workable
electronic employment verification system.
I will continue to work with my colleagues and other
stakeholders to address any additional concerns with the bill
as we move it through the Committee.
I look forward to the witness testimony and welcome all of
you here.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the Chairman.
The Chair will recognize the gentlelady from the great
State of Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chairman very much, and I
acknowledge the indication that the Ranking Member of this
Committee had to be called away today, and I thank you and her
for this hearing and offer this statement on behalf of the
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security.
Let me be clear at the outset that E-Verify is an important
tool for the future, but it needs to be made mandatory at the
right time and in the right way. The bill that we marked up in
the summer of 2013 had many good features to it, but it did not
meet those two important requirements.
Let me also say that I do this and make this statement in
the backdrop of the need for comprehensive immigration reform
and would simply ask the question, wouldn't this be a better
approach if we did have a comprehensive approach?
Let me state it plainly: E-Verify cannot be made mandatory
for all employers until having first enacted comprehensive
immigration reform, because E-Verify without that would have
devastating though unintended consequences.
One possibility is that it would essentially drive 8
million undocumented workers out of the workforce, which would
devastate many industries that depend upon on that workforce,
especially in agriculture. And I would venture to say that it
would be an uncertainty as to whether or not there would be
enough buses to bus 8 million individuals back to their home
country.
Another possibility is that it would drive those 8 million
undocumented workers even further under the radar and off of
the books, and that is what led CBO to find that enacting this
bill into law would raise the deficit by $30 billion over 10
years.
Mr. Chairman, if we are going to do E-Verify the right way,
we agree with much of what is in the law, but there are
deficiencies in this bill that we highlighted during the markup
last Congress, and that we detail in our dissenting views: the
lack of due process for workers who are harmed by erroneous
nonconfirmations, provisions that will facilitate
discrimination and inappropriate bars to proper judicial
relief, and unnecessary and inappropriate ban on class action
lawsuits, for instance.
E-Verify has the potential to be an important tool in the
effort to address unauthorized employment, but if done in
isolation as the Legal Workforce does, it would inflict
tremendous harm on American workers, businesses, and the
economy.
I am also concerned that requiring the use of E-Verify will
cause many Texas workers to lose their jobs. The rush to
implement a flawed E-Verify program across-the-board is
guaranteed to hurt thousands of authorized U.S. workers like
people in the 18th Congressional District, my district, who
need good jobs but will be erroneously denied employment
authorization by errors in the system. The system is heavily
overburdened and can be, if it is not a sophisticated system.
The bill would also hit small businesses particularly hard,
imposing significant burdens on very small firms that may not
even have human resource departments, but would still have to
use the new system, even those with only a single employee.
But I also think of small mom-and-pop restaurants, which
would face that. And I notice that the National Restaurant
Association is here, and I hope that they would consider that,
as they represent their large restaurateurs, about the mom-and-
pop restaurants.
E-Verify would actually exacerbate Texas unemployment,
according to estimates based on government sources. If the
entire U.S. workforce were required to have its employment
eligibility verified through E-Verify, a conservative estimate
is that between 1.2 million and 3.5 million U.S. citizens and
authorized immigrants would either have to correct their
records or lose their jobs. Extrapolating from these estimates
approximately, 101,000 to 291,000 citizens and authorized
immigrant workers in Texas would have to correct their records
in order to avoid being fired.
In Texas, approximately 19.3 percent of the labor force is
comprised of foreign-born workers. Foreign-born workers
authorized for employment have encountered a disparate
disproportionate E-Verify error rate 20 times greater than
U.S.-born employees. If we were to use a rough estimate, this
would affect up to 63,495 legal workers in Texas.
I would note that in yesterday's Rules Committee, a number
of bills were considered relevant on this very issue.
Lastly, we consider how E-Verify would decimate the
agriculture industry. We have heard a lot of that from Mr.
Conyers. So I would simply say that, in joining on his point, I
conclude by reiterating that we need a larger system to deal
with E-Verify.
And I hope, as the witnesses present their testimony, they
will, with good intentions, tell us if they believe in
comprehensive immigration reform. That should be put on the
table because I know there are several groups at that table who
represented to me that they support comprehensive immigration
reform.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentlelady.
Without objection, additional Members' opening statements
will be made a part of the record.
Before I recognize our witnesses, I would ask unanimous
consent to put in the record letters of support from the
International Franchise Association, National Association of
Homebuilders, and NumbersUSA.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Gowdy. With that, I welcome our distinguished panel. I
will begin by asking you to please rise so I can administer an
oath to you.
Do you swear the testimony you are about to give shall be
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help
you God?
Let the record reflect everyone answered in the
affirmative.
I will introduce you en bloc, and then I will recognize you
individually for your 5-minute opening statements. Despite the
fact that we do not always honor them, the lights mean what
they traditionally mean in life. Yellow means you have about a
minute left, and red means if you would conclude whatever
remarks you are in the middle of.
Randel K. Johnson is a senior vice president of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce for labor, immigration, and employment
benefits. Before joining the Chamber, he served as counsel to
the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Education and
the Workforce. He is a graduate of Denison University, the
University of Maryland School of Law, and earned his masters of
law and labor relations from Georgetown.
Ms. Jill Blitstein is here on behalf of the College and
University Professional Association for Human Resources. She is
currently the international employment manager at N.C. State
University. In this position, she oversees the employment
eligibility verification process and compliance procedures at
N.C. State. Prior to joining N.C. State, she was senior
associate with a Chicago law firm that I cannot pronounce most
of the names for, but I am sure is very distinguished, from
1997 to 2007. Ms. Blitstein received her law degree from DePaul
University College of Law in 1995.
Mr. Angelo Amador is senior vice president and regulatory
counsel for the National Restaurant Association. He advocates
on behalf of the National Restaurant Association and its
members before the U.S. Congress and the executive branch.
Prior to enjoying the NRA--not that NRA, the National
Restaurant Association--he served as executive director in the
labor immigration reform and benefits division of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce and as an adjunct professor of law at the
George Mason University School of Law. He is a graduate of the
Robert H. Smith School of Business at the University of
Maryland. He obtained a master's of arts in international
transactions from George Mason and a J.D. from George Mason,
graduating with honors.
Lastly, Mr. Chuck Conner is president and chief executive
officer of the National Council of Farm Cooperatives, a D.C.-
based trade association representing the interests of U.S.
agricultural cooperatives. He has more than 25 years of
national and State government agriculture and trade association
experience. Prior to joining the NCFC, he served as acting
director and deputy director for the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. He is a graduate of Purdue University with a
bachelor's of science and a recipient of Purdue's Distinguished
Alumni Award.
Welcome each and every one of you.
Mr. Johnson, we will recognize you for your opening
statement.

TESTIMONY OF RANDEL K. JOHNSON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, LABOR,
IMMIGRATION AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy.
As Mr. Conyers suggested, we have been at this for some
time. In the earlier days, when the Chamber has testified, I
think at this same table, we in fact, as Mr. Smith knows,
opposed mandatory E-Verify, of course, for a lot of good
reasons back then. But the Chamber can change as times change.
As the years went by, and more of our members engaged in the
system voluntarily, and, frankly, while we were watching things
on Capitol Hill and in the courts and in the States, we decided
to re-evaluate our position.
We put together an extensive task force back in January
2011, almost 5 years ago now, comprised of a cross-section of
our members. We drew that from our immigration policy
subcommittee with input from our small business council and
said, well, we need to take a look at E-Verify. What do we need
to sort of buy into a mandate, if we can?
Obviously, at the Chamber, and I have been there now 16
years, I think there has been only one other time I have
testified agreeing to a new mandate on our members. We take
that very seriously and very carefully, for one reason, I love
my job, and I am not going to agree to a mandate for the
Chamber unless our members are behind me. And in this case,
they were. That ranges from the larger businesses and the
smaller businesses.
So I am pleased to say today that we do support a mandatory
E-Verify system and the act that we worked together principally
with Mr. Smith on.
Let me just kind of go through the sort of variations or
the issues that we talked about. First of all, and I think this
is important to note, it is, certainly, in my written
testimony, but it was suggested by further speakers, there have
been a lot of technical improvements on E-Verify over the
years.
Every system, not every system, this system certainly has
gotten better as the kinks have been worked out. There are
errors, but there are less errors than before. It would be
better if there were no errors but when you are down to an
approximately 0.3 percent error rate, I think that is something
to be bragged about. And we are never going to get down to a
zero rate unless we start rolling this out to more people and
continue to work out the costs.
With regard to costs, I know there are some, and Mr. Smith,
he talked about this, there are a lot of misinformation out
there. A lot of economists have looked at this. I can tell you
our economists have looked at the studies out there that talk
about something like 2.7 billion. Economists can come up with
lots of studies. We all know that. The bottom line is that, for
my members, we hear they can adapt to this system quite easily,
and the costs are quite minimal. If anything, they are
principally concerned about costs of reverification, if in fact
the law went that direction, which, fortunately, it doesn't.
Third, preemption, Mr. Goodlatte touched on this,
preemption of State laws. Look, we have mostly multinational
companies, but we also have small businesses that work across
State lines. We had to have in a bill that we could support a
preemption of State law, State and local laws. The language in
the bill is a balance of various interests in this. Would we
have rather had blanket preemptions such as under ERISA or the
National Labor Relations Act? Sure. But we have to understand
that compromises have to be made and that compromises are
reflected in this act.
Fourth, we cannot support a blanket reverification of an
existing workforce. One doesn't have to be a genius to think
about the burdens and obligations that would accrue to, say, an
IBM that had to reverify its 10,000 workers, et cetera. And in
reality, because we have such high turnover in this day and
age, essentially, the workforce often will recycle through
anyway through a new E-Verify system.
Fifth, we also need to have sorts of safe harbors, which
are reflected in the act. I do want to mention that the act
does protect the contractor and subcontractor relationship.
And, Chairman Gowdy, in a time when the National Labor
Relations Board is revisiting the whole area of joint employer
liability, we are pleased that the act in front of the
Committee today isolates contract and subcontractor liability
from each other.
Lastly, I want to close with saying that I think the 800-
pound gorilla in the room here is what we do about agriculture
industry. I know everyone on the dais is attuned to this. But
surely, I think before an E-Verify bill goes to the floor, you
all have to figure out what we do about the agriculture
industry, whether it is a fix in the guestworker program or
legalization, I am not smart enough to say. That, certainly, is
in their world, but something has to be done in the area.
And with that, let me just say that we still remain
committed to immigration reform in other areas, Mrs. Lee. And I
am sure that will come up in the Q&A. The Legal Workforce Act
is a key aspect, a key underpinning of other reforms. But,
certainly, it is one important aspect of those reforms. Whether
it proceeds to the floor jointly with other bills or
separately, I am not here to say. But we are, certainly,
committed to other parts of immigration reform.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Ms. Blitstein?

TESTIMONY OF JILL G. BLITSTEIN, ESQ., INTERNATIONAL EMPLOYMENT
MANAGER, HUMAN RESOURCES, NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY

Ms. Blitstein. Chairman Gowdy, honorable Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today to express support for the Legal Workforce Act. I am
the international employment manager at North Carolina State
University. N.C. State is an active member of the College and
University Professional Association for Human Resources.
CUPA-HR represents more than 1,900 educational
institutions, 44 percent of which are public. And I am speaking
to you today on behalf of CUPA-HR.
My institution has been using E-Verify since January 1,
2007, when it was mandated by the State of North Carolina for
all public agencies and for the university system.
I have responsibility for N.C. State's I-9 and E-Verify
processes. With more than 8,000 regular employees and almost
8,000 more students and temporary workers, including foreign
nationals, our use of the I-9 and E-Verify process is constant.
I will speak to you today as someone who has experienced
the favorable effects of this program, as well as someone who
can offer a few informed suggestions as to its implementation.
CUPA-HR supports the majority of positions within the act
as being positive both for employers and employees, including
the reduction in the number of acceptable documents to prove
identity and employment authorization. Many documents on the
current list are confusing or rarely used, so streamlining them
will add much needed clarity to the process, facilitating
faster and easier compliance for everyone involved.
Additionally, CUPA-HR strongly supports the recognition of
a good faith defense based on compliance with the processes of
the act. As an example, N.C. State has relied on E-Verify final
nonconfirmations to justify the termination of employment of
some of our employees.
CUPA-HR especially supports the act's clear preemption of
State and local law on unemployment verification. Having a
single national verification process is extremely important not
only from a national policy perspective but also from a
practical standpoint for an employer with employees across the
U.S.
As a collaborative research institution, N.C. State has
employees in over 40 States. The current patchwork of policies
and laws around the country make it incredibly difficult for
employers like us to know and comply with each jurisdiction's
rules regarding employment eligibility verification.
N.C. State never experienced the worst-case scenarios that
circulated several years ago regarding fears of excessive final
nonconfirmation results. And in the 8 years that we have used
E-Verify, we have received almost instantaneous employment
verification results for the majority of our employees. We
believe the employment verification process works as intended.
That said, based on direct experience, we do have a few
suggestions regarding the current act. It would require that
within 6 months after enactment, all Federal, State and local
government employers verify employment eligibility for any
employees not already in the E-Verify system. Having verified
the entire workforce at N.C. State University, I can tell you
with confidence that that is not a realistic timeframe in which
to achieve full compliance for large employers.
Based on an amended executive order in 2009, N.C. State was
required to either verify employees constantly as they came and
went on certain Federal contracts or to verify all employees.
We quickly realized that our best option was to verify our
entire workforce, meaning every active employee hired before
January 1, 2007. We had to enter data from approximately 12,000
I-9 forms into E-Verify within 6 months to achieve compliance,
and it took us 7 months to accomplish that goal.
The time and effort required was significant. And since
then, we have invested in an electronic system to help manage
our process.
CUPA-HR would encourage consideration of a 24-month phased
rollout compliance timeframe, particularly for the largest
public employers.
CUPA-HR would also like to recommend that the timeframe for
verifying foreign national employees who have applied for a
Social Security account number be extended beyond the proposed
3 days after the actual receipt of their new number. As an
employer with approximately 1,000 foreign national workers and
employees every year, it is impossible for N.C. State as the
employer to know exactly when a new employee receives his or
her new number. Consequently, we have no realistic way to know
when this 3-day requirement to finish E-Verify would begin or
end.
Lastly, CUPA-HR also suggests that the verification
process, which is currently 3 business days after the hire
date, be extended to at least 5 business days after the hire
date. Any large employer can tell you that performing the
required identity and employment authorization verification
check within the 3 business days is incredibly labor-intensive.
Despite best efforts, meeting this deadline is a constant
source of frustration even for those employers most committed
to compliance.
In closing, the Legal Workforce Act as a balanced approach
to creating a more secure and flexible employment verification
system. CUPA-HR respectfully encourages the Committee to
consider the suggestions we have offered today, and we are
grateful for your time and attention. And I personally thank
you for this opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Blitstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Ms. Blitstein.
Mr. Amador, I want to congratulate you on that beautiful
tie you have on with the seal from the State of South Carolina.
It did not go unnoticed. I will direct no questions toward you
today, but you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF ANGELO I. AMADOR, ESQ., SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT &
REGULATORY COUNSEL, NATIONAL RESTAURANT ASSOCIATION

Mr. Amador. I knew I wore it for good reason.
Good morning, Chairman Gowdy, Congressman Conyers, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Special greetings to
our Congressmen Pierluisi, who actually broke me into doing
policy here in Washington, D.C. I am always glad to see you
here.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to represent the
National Restaurant Association. My name is Angelo Amador, and
I am the senior vice president and regulatory counsel for the
National Restaurant Association.
The National Restaurant Association believes that the Legal
Workforce Act is a thoughtful, balanced approach to
implementing a major change related to workplace hiring for
employers. We appreciate the bill's sponsors and the
Subcommittee's efforts to think through the real-world
implementation a universal E-Verify mandate.
Put in context, the mandate once implemented will be the
final hurdle that every U.S. employer must clear for each and
every hiring decision made in the United States. In our
industry, with naturally high turnover rates and one that is so
reliant on a robust workforce, the details of how the system is
implemented is incredibly important.
While I touch on a number of other areas in my written
statement, I would like to address four key areas of concern in
the implementation of a mandatory E-Verify program. Before I go
into those four, I will reiterate as well that we oppose
reverification of the entire workforce, which is one of the
reasons, not the only reason, that we supported the King
amendment during the last Congress, the last markup, that
allows reverification of certain workers for good cause.
But the four that I want to talk about today, the first one
is Federal preemption. We believe that designing an employment
authorization verification system is, without question, a
Federal law role. Action by 50 different States and numerous
local governments in passing a patchwork quilt of employment
verification laws creates an untenable system for employers and
prospective employees.
Under the Legal Workforce Act, States and localities are
preempted from legislating different requirements or imposing
additional penalties. However, they may enforce the Federal law
and also revoke a business license for failure to participate
in the program.
As the Chamber stated, we also would prefer a blanket
preemption, but we understand the need to reach a balance.
Second safe harbor, full and fair enforcement of an
improved E-Verify system should protect employers that act in
good faith. Piling on fines and other penalties for even small
paperwork errors, punishing the people who are trying to do the
right thing, is not the answer. The Legal Workforce Act states
that an employer cannot be held liable for good-faith reliance
on information provided through the E-Verify system. We
strongly support this provision and believe that no employer
who is using the system in good faith should be held liable by
the government for relying on information provided by the
government's database that turns out to be incorrect.
Likewise, we also strongly believe that employers should
not be held liable by an employee or worker they chose not to
hire as a result of faulty information provided by the
government's database. Now we are not saying they should not
have recourse, but the recourse should not be on the employer.
Third, early verification, we support the provision in the
bill that allows verification when an offer of employment is
extended and making that offer conditioned on final
verification of identity and employment eligibility of the
employee. Employers should be given authority to check work
authorization when an offer of employment is made. In those
cases where a temporary nonconfirmation is issued, it allows
the employee to start working with the government as soon as
possible to fix any discrepancies before they show up for the
first day of work. After all, you can do all of the other
background checks beforehand, as well.
Finally, employment laws, there are already existing laws
governing wage requirements, pensions, health benefits, the
interaction between employers and unions, safety and health
requirements, hiring and firing practices, and discrimination
status.
Verifying employment authorization, not expansion of a
Christmas tree wish list of employment protections, should be
the sole emphasis of an E-Verify mandate. That is one of the
reasons we did not support the employment verification title in
the Senate bill, and in the Q&A, I will be happy to address
that in more detail.
The association is very encouraged by the Legal Workforce
Act's emphasis on keeping it simple, a workable national E-
Verify system.
In summary, it would be easy to ignore the real concerns of
the business community with a national E-Verify mandate simply
passing a law requiring its use. It is harder to pass a
responsible E-Verify mandate that accommodates different needs
of the close to 8 million employers in the U.S.
In the National Restaurant Association's opinion, the Legal
Workforce Act reaches the right balance, a broad Federal E-
Verify mandate that is both fast and workable for businesses of
every size under the practical, real-world working conditions.
Thank you again for this opportunity to share my testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Amador follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Amador.
Mr. Conner?

TESTIMONY OF CHARLES F. CONNER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL
COUNCIL OF FARMER COOPERATIVES

Mr. Conner. Chairman Gowdy, Congressman Conyers, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
testify today. I am Chuck Conner, president and CEO of the
National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. I am also here on
behalf of the Agriculture Workforce Coalition. The AWC brings
together nearly 70 organizations representing the diverse needs
of farmers and agricultural employees and serves as the unified
voice for agriculture on immigration issues.
While labor situation in agriculture has been a concern for
many years, Mr. Chairman, it has now reached a breaking point.
Today, large segments of American agriculture face a critical
lack of workers.
Specific to the topic at hand today, mandatory E-Verify,
without addressing agriculture's broader labor crisis, would be
devastating. As an industry, we recognize the need for interior
enforcement. It just cannot be decoupled from addressing
agriculture's workforce concerns.
Despite the employer's best efforts, many if not most of
the agriculture workforce does not have proper paperwork
authority. Based on the study conducted by the American Farm
Bureau Federation in 2014, an enforcement-only approach would
cause American agriculture output to fall by $30 billion to $60
billion. It would decrease fruit production by 30 percent to 61
percent and vegetable production by 15 percent to 31 percent.
The livestock sector would also see losses of up to 27 percent.
American dairy farmers in particular would be impacted by
an enforcement-only approach. For dairy farmers, their harvest
comes twice a day, every single day. The dairy industry with
year-round needs cannot use the current H-2A program as
currently interpreted. Dairy farmers are left without any legal
channel to find workers, if U.S. workers are simply not
available or not interested.
Mr. Chairman, American agriculture's biggest challenge in
the future is to increase our food output in order to meet the
dramatic rise in food needs for a growing planet. A large
decrease in our food production in the U.S. would have
significant humanitarian consequences in the future.
For agriculture, the ideal approach to solving the labor
problem would be to provide a solution for the experienced
workforce and a redesigned guestworker program. This then could
be followed by a phased-in E-Verify program.
Mr. Chairman, I doubt anyone on this Subcommittee would
question the integrity of America's law-abiding farmers and
ranchers. The vast, vast majority of American farmers fully
comply with the law. But the paper-based system created by
Congress in 1986 is vulnerable to use of false documents.
Employers, including farmers, are not experts at spotting false
documents. So long as a solution is in place to ensure access
to a legal and stable workforce, farmers would welcome a system
that is simple, efficient, effective, and certain.
Bills in recent years would have phased-in E-Verify with
agriculture generally being last in line. These bills recognize
agriculture's demographic challenges and its need for foreign
labor.
This is a bold thing for us to suggest, Mr. Chairman, but
if this Congress were to pass reform legislation that truly
addresses agriculture's workforce challenges, the industry
could pursue a phase-in of E-Verify sooner rather than later.
But in closing, let me just be very clear. The agriculture
industry would be forced to oppose any E-Verify legislation
that does not address the agriculture workforce crisis. E-
Verify legislation without provisions to address the unique
labor needs of agriculture will drive more of our farmers out
of business and move more of our food production abroad, where
there is, indeed, abundant labor. I have never encountered
anyone, a Member of Congress or in the general public, who
believes that would be a positive outcome, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Conner.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me direct my first question to Mr. Johnson with the
Chamber. You mentioned in your statement, and I wonder if you
would elaborate, in recent years, several States and localities
have enacted their own E-Verify requirements. What is the
concern of the business community if more and more States
continue to enact their own requirements as opposed to the
Federal Government enacting a nationwide requirement?
Mr. Johnson. It is one of practicality and human resource
compliance, which is, it is obviously easier to administer and
instruct your H.R. people if you have one standard to tell them
they need to comply with. And if that is the Federal standard,
that is the one they need to be taught toward, as distinguished
from multiple standards across State lines.
Is it possible? Sure. Lots of things are possible. But it
is extremely difficult.
Further, Congressman, it is not just a question of the law
on the books as they are written, because if you have State and
localities enforcing those different laws, that enforcement
itself has a different patina on it, which then your compliance
people and your companies have to be trained on. So it is an
extremely complex area, and we think it is simply one that is
unworkable.
I do note that, of course, the preemption language in Mr.
Smith's bill does allow for some State enforcement with regard
to when an employer is not using the Federal E-Verify system,
so the language in there seems to strike a balance.
Mr. Goodlatte. Enforcement but not having a separate method
by which you verify. In other words, they can participate in
enforcement but not set up their own----
Mr. Johnson. Right. Exactly. They cannot set up their own
mechanism.
Mr. Goodlatte. Let me ask Mr. Amador, you mentioned in your
testimony concerns about some of the requirements in the Senate
bill. The employment eligibility verification process set out
in the Legal Workforce Act, Mr. Smith's bill, and the last
Congress' Senate immigration reform bill were quite different.
What are some of the problems with the Senate bill's employment
eligibility verification process?
Mr. Amador. I think the Senate version, by the time it was
done with amendments, it became something other than an
employment verification system. It ended up becoming more like
a labor law, employment law, and it created new causes of
action, and created an awkward incentive for undocumented
workers to either file grievances against employers or to be
able to stay, once they were in proceedings, by filing claims.
Before they even decided whether there were bogus claims or
not, they would get a visa.
There were a number of other things in the bill. It made it
easier to fine, discrimination provisions and labor provisions.
It became another labor law as opposed to an employment
verification bill.
Mr. Goodlatte. Ms. Blitstein, do you agree that the Legal
Workforce Act adequately restricts the number of documents that
can be used to prove identity and work authorization in order
to help prevent fraud while at the same time allowing enough
documents, understanding that not every person has every
document?
Ms. Blitstein. I do believe that the Legal Workforce Act
does an adequate job of restricting those documents. As I
mentioned, a lot of them are--I have been doing this for almost
17 years and some of them I have never seen. There is kind of a
small percentage of documents that are seen 90 percent of the
time. So I think having more clarity, having a more brief list
would be very, very helpful and would help streamline the
process for the employer and employee.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Amador, Mr. Conner expressed some concerns regarding
the safe harbor provision. Can you discuss the current safe
harbor provision in the Legal Workforce Act and how, as
drafted, it is workable?
Mr. Amador. I must say, I guess you can take any language,
and I have gotten calls from people who think they can make it
stronger. My view is that I haven't seen stronger safe harbors
in immigration law than the one that is currently in the bill.
So could it be changed? I mean, everything can be changed. But
the way I read it, and the way I continue to read it, I haven't
found anything that is stronger. We support it, so we don't
want that amended as it is right now. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Got it.
And, Mr. Conner, you support employment verification. You
want to see a legal temporary worker program for agriculture
that would meet the needs of not just seasonal production but
also processing plants and dairies that are year-round. And we
have provisions in this bill, unlike current law and unlike the
Senate bill and unlike other provisions that address more of
those concerns than any that I have seen before, in terms of
what I anticipate will follow.
I don't disagree with you that we are going to have to have
a better system to determine who is lawfully here in the
country and who is lawfully eligible to accept employment. When
we do, it is going to create a problem in agriculture, and we
need to be prepared to address that, so I, certainly, look
forward to working with you on that.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Virginia.
The Chair will now recognize the Ranking Member from
Michigan, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy.
I want to put forward a proposition to you and have
everyone give me their view. I think E-Verify is perfectly
okay, but bringing in an electronic employment verification
system to agriculture presents some unusual problems, and that
until we begin to deal with those first, as Congresswoman
Sheila Jackson Lee pointed out, it is how we go about doing
this.
So I am in the position of being for the measure, if we can
take care of some of the problems. It is a cart before the
horse type situation. E-Verify is the cart, and we can't get
there first.
So do you agree with me that there are some big problems?
We talk about the immigration system being broken, et cetera,
but do you see some difficulties in the agricultural sector
that could be a negative, that would not make E-Verify
successful?
What do you think, Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, it is a conundrum. There is no question
about it.
Mr. Conyers. Right.
Mr. Johnson. I think the agricultural community or field is
the poster child of this problem. It exists in other
industries, but they clearly would be the most adversely
affected with E-Verify being signed into law by the President.
There is a lot of space between the lip and the cup here, and
nothing else either right behind it or preceding it.
The order of how things proceed in the House is something
you all will have to figure out and the Rules Committee. I
should note that, just for the record, that while we supported
the Senate bill, we never said the House should take up the
Senate bill, by the way. We always thought the House should do
its own thing and figure out how to do it. As a former House
staffer, I would never support a Senate bill and say the House
should just take up a Senate bill.
Mr. Conyers. Of course not.
Mr. Johnson. And I told the Senate staff over there they
were crazy.
But these things are linked, but so far, we are in a period
of gridlock and not moving on anything, except perhaps border
security. But even that got pulled from the floor.
Mr. Conyers. Right.
Let me go to attorney Blitstein and see if she shares the
view that it is the order that we proceed in that is critical
and that could determine, in agriculture, the ultimate success
of E-Verify.
Ms. Blitstein. Representative Conyers, I would have to say
that CUPA-HR is not very familiar with the particular issues as
related to the agricultural industry. So we would have to put
that under more consideration before we would be able to offer
an opinion on that.
Mr. Conyers. All right.
And, Mr. Amador, attorney Amador, you raised some of this
question yourself in your commentary and in your written
statement. Do you see the problem that I am presenting, and is
it a fair one?
Mr. Amador. On agriculture, our board, when they decided
our position, we were clear that we did not want any exemptions
for restaurants. We did not touch on the issue of agriculture,
and we think Mr. Conner is in a better position to talk about
his industry.
Mr. Conyers. Right.
Chuck Conner, you can finish up your observations on this
point.
Mr. Conner. Let me make two points, if I could, Mr.
Conyers. I think you are right. Our problem with E-Verify is
kind of twofold. The first is more fundamental, and that is we
know we have a workforce that constitutes, as you have noted,
50 percent to 70 percent of our hired workforce in agriculture
that is not here with proper paperwork. So to go to an e-
verification system, as I have noted in my testimony, you would
be removing large chunks of our workforce in place that is
responsible for providing the food and feed for America today.
I do not think anybody wants that consequence.
The second one is more specific to agriculture, and that is
just in terms of how you go forward with E-Verify. We do have
the unique needs.
Just an anecdotal point and that is my wife and I both have
farms in Indiana. Not the most remote part of the world, by any
means, but when we go out there, sir, iPhones don't work. I am
sorry, but they don't. And there are a lot more remote
agricultural regions in the country that are dependent on this.
There are just a lot of structural issues that may sound
good sitting here. But when you get out there in the field and
you have peaches to harvest and the storm is coming and you
have 12 hours to get them down, there are some practical----
Mr. Conyers. In the real world, problems arise.
And I thank you very much. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from the great
State of Texas, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the Vice-Chairman of the Subcommittee, Mr.
Labrador, for letting me precede him with questions. Although
coming third when talking about a specific bill usually means
that a lot of your questions have already been asked, and Mr.
Goodlatte did a good job of that a few minutes ago. I have a
couple left.
Mr. Johnson, let me address my first question to you. That
is, I know you all have polled your members. How do you respond
to the occasional charge that I think is unsubstantiated that
E-Verify is costly or burdensome? Have you found that to be the
case?
Mr. Johnson. Well, as I said, the study that is quoted by
some we had our economists go through, and it is amazing, Mr.
Smith, the analysis is in my written testimony about how the
people who put that study together actually carved out from
their conclusions the employers who reported zero costs and
they just calculated in the employers who reported costs. There
is also a weird way that they hired people moving, so the so-
called JOLTS study where they included people as new hires who
were really promotions and promotions within a company.
But look, the bottom line, Mr. Smith, is, we have a great
policy committee at the Chamber. I have 200 people on my labor
committee. I have 60 or 70 on my immigration policy
subcommittee. They are from all levels of the economy and
companies. Those are the people I go out and ask. They are out
there where the rubber meets the road, and they are saying we
can handle this.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Amador, I know you have lots of members. I meet them on
a regular basis. I am really appreciative of their support.
I should say I thank you all for your support of this
legislation, and for your constructive criticism, Mr. Conner,
as well. You have made some good suggestions.
Mr. Amador, do you find that your members find E-Verify to
be accurate, and to what extent? According to your survey, do
they find E-Verify to be accurate? And why do they like it?
Mr. Amador. Yes. We conducted a survey in 2012. We were
able to crank the numbers by 2013. We introduced it as part of
a statement for the record, back in April 2013. The vast
majority of the people that were using it, 80 percent, said
they would recommend it to others.
The ones that did not recommend it, they said that the
issues were initially getting into claiming, but once they were
using it, it was fine. Across all of the demographics, they
said, actually 80 percent, that they had 100 percent accuracy.
We allowed for comments in the survey. Again, it was about
800. The one comment that they said was that we would rather
know earlier whether the person is tentative nonconfirm,
because when they show up to work and they come tentatively
nonconfirm, at least in our industry what happens is they do
not show up the next day when confronted with, hey, you need to
go and----
Mr. Smith. You actually anticipated my next question, which
is what is the advantage of knowing prior to someone actually
being hired, and having that E-Verify conducted ahead of time?
Mr. Amador. I think it is twofold. There is an advantage to
the employee that they would not have to take time off from
work to go to the Social Security Administration, or wherever
they need to go to fix this problem. And it is an advantage to
the employer, because if there is any problem with the employee
that he is not work-authorized, if they are going to disappear,
you rather that they disappear before they already have a shift
and they already started working.
Mr. Smith. Right. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Amador.
Mr. Conner, I understood you to say, and I just want to
make sure this the case, because it will be helpful, that you
would support E-Verify if it was used in conjunction with a new
guestworker program. Is that generally correct?
Mr. Conner. That is half of the story, Mr. Smith. In
addition to obviously needing a viable guestworker program,
which we currently do not have with H2-A, we need a solution
for our existing trained workforce that has been estimated to
be about 1.2 million to 1.4 million people who are already
working full time on our farms and ranches.
So our solution is twofold, a guestworker program, a
solution for existing workforce. And with that, we are willing
to talk to you, still acknowledging agriculture has some unique
interests, as I have identified, in an E-Verify program. But we
would be willing to try to resolve those.
Mr. Smith. As you are aware, in the last Congress, this
Committee did pass and approve a very robust guestworker
program. So I was trying to see, and it sounds like while you
may not be able to commit until you see the details and the
language, and I understand that, but generally speaking, if
there was a new guestworker program, you would understand why
we would need to have E-Verify apply to it.
Mr. Conner. Well, again, I do not want to downplay the
importance of a guestworker program. We appreciate your effort
to try to make that program workable. It is very unworkable,
provides less than 7 percent of our labor population in
agriculture right now.
But for us, again, we have trained people, in some cases,
employees on our farms and ranches who have been there for a
very, very long time, years, if not over 10 years.
Mr. Smith. I understand all that.
Mr. Conner. We have to keep those.
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Conner. And under the current E-Verify plan, we would
lose those workers.
Mr. Smith. I see. So you are concerned about the ones who
are working now. If we could address that, then that would
clear the way for you.
Mr. Conner. Those two points, yes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Conner.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Texas.
The Chair would now recognize the gentlelady from Texas,
Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Conner, I don't know if we can
piecemeal repair some aspects of what you have spoken about,
but we all know that the agriculture industry is tantamount to
a major contributor to the economy. But it is also the
breadbasket of the United States, of course, but around the
world. So we are concerned and very interested in making sure
that we take the right pathway.
As you well know, although you have been discussed over the
years, agricultural workers, special carveouts in legislation,
you were quite well responded to in a comprehensive approach
when we were talking about comprehensive immigration reform. Do
you remember that?
Mr. Conner. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And you remember that those efforts were
made quite strongly on your behalf?
Mr. Conner. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So I want to just ask the question of
where we are today. Yesterday, we held our first hearing for
the House Judiciary Committee in the 114th Congress. It was
interesting to me that out of all people in the world, the
majority asked two people from the Center for Immigration
Studies to testify.
Earlier this week, a policy analyst from the same Center
for Immigration Studies wrote an opinion piece in The Hill that
characterizes people who employ undocumented workers as
lawbreaking employers who want their illegal labor to get work
permits.
I ask unanimous consent to enter that article into the
record.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
To you, Mr. Conner, considering that a large majority of
farmworkers are unauthorized to work, 50 percent to 70 percent,
do you think that the more than 1 million farmers who you
represent are lawbreakers? Is that a fair characterization of
the situation they find themselves in? If you would just take
this other and give me an answer, please.
One thing about that characterization is that it makes the
employers seem greedy, purely self-interested. And as much work
as we have done to improve the quality of life of ag workers, I
take issue with that assessment.
Can you talk a little bit about the work that undocumented
farmworkers do and how farmers think about their workers?
Mr. Conner. Well, Congresswoman, thank you for the
question. It is great question.
I will just tell you, I have spent my entire career, 36
years, working on agricultural policy in this town. I am just
passionate about the fact that our farmers absolutely want a
solution to this problem.
Are they lawbreakers? Absolutely not. They are collecting
the proper paperwork from these workers. They are prohibited
from questioning any information on the paperwork by law, with
sharp penalties if they do. They are proceeding forward and
following the intent of the law.
Now, again, we all acknowledge that paperwork is prone to
be wrong, at times. That is not the fault of the farmer and the
people doing the employing in this case.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So clearly, you would need some major, if
you will, accommodations for any law that would put more
burdens on farmers.
Let me ask another question. You say that the farm jobs are
not meant for the unskilled. That is my understanding, too. I
have heard that farmworkers must have proper understanding of
soil quality, fertilizers, irrigation, and cultivating
techniques. For example, they need to know how to prune an
apple tree without damaging it, or how to determine which
berries are ripe enough to pick, or oranges, or how to pick a
cucumber before it is too large to be marketable. That looks
like a lot of skills that are needed.
Can you provide more information about the necessary skills
that farmworkers must have? Is this a job that anyone can do?
And then follow-up, is that why you support legislative reform
that includes an eventual path to a green card for current
experienced, unauthorized agricultural workers, which is,
certainly, a concept of comprehensive immigration reform, Mr.
Conner?
Mr. Conner. Again, Congresswoman, thanks for the question.
It is good. I will just say that, in our view, these workers
are skilled workers. The work is very, very difficult,
sometimes involving very, very long days, hot sun, working
around animals. Working around animals is not something for the
unskilled. You just do not pull somebody in and throw them
amongst dairy animals and expect safety and proper care of the
animals.
These are skilled workers. We pay them accordingly, as is
demonstrated by wage rates for average workers that we can
submit for the record, as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would appreciate if you would do that.
Thank you for your answer.
I would like to ask Mr. Johnson, if I might, Mr. Johnson,
first of all, I appreciate your accommodation in being
interested in this legislation and offering suggestions. I do
recall working very closely with the Chamber over a number of
years on the idea of comprehensive immigration reform.
You testified that before being subject to E-Verify,
agriculture employers must have access to a workable program to
sponsor lawful workers. This bill contains no provisions
pertaining to an agricultural visa program, nor does it provide
an opportunity for current farmworkers to earn legal status. It
does, however, require that all agricultural employers to use
E-Verify within 24 months. If the Legal Workforce Act is not
paired with an agricultural visa reform, and you have heard Mr.
Conner, the kind of reform reflected in S. 744, H.R. 15, or the
old ag job compromise, which I have been on this Committee long
enough to know that plan, will the Chamber still be in a
position to support it, given the crucialness of those
provisions for our agricultural industry?
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson, you may answer the question.
Mr. Johnson. I think there are several levels in the
legislative process. If E-Verify went to the floor without an
ag fix before that or at the same time, what would our position
be? I am not sure. I think it is incredulous to think that
would happen.
But, certainly, I would think, subject to further review at
the Chamber, that before an E-Verify bill went to the President
for signature, the ag issue would have to be solved. The
Chamber would reevaluate its position at that time, if that was
not going to occur.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for noting the defect of the
legislation and the importance of moving forward on
comprehensive immigration reform.
Thank you all for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentlelady from Texas.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Idaho, the
Vice-Chairman of the Subcommittee, Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Conner, for being here today. As you know, I
come from an agriculture State. I understand the need that we
have. I do find it, just as a point of interest, that it seems
like the Democrats on this panel have no problem with EPA
regulations when it affects agriculture, have no problem with
the Waters of the U.S. legislation when it affects agriculture.
The only time they ever have a problem with regulation and
agriculture is when we are trying to stop the hiring of illegal
and undocumented workers.
I just want to put that out there for the record, because
all the other stuff that is affecting your industry, they have
absolutely no concern about it. In fact, they are pushing for
that kind of legislation and that kind of regulation that has
an ill and deleterious effect on your industry. But that is not
what you are here to testify about.
Are you aware that we passed in the 113th Congress a bill
out of this Committee that dealt with your needs in
agriculture, that dealt with hiring the people who are here
undocumented right now? It added the dairy industry to the H-2
program, and it created a new system for agriculture to deal
with their guestworker needs.
Mr. Conner. Congressman, I am assuming you are referring to
the guestworker legislation that was considered. As I noted
with Mr. Smith's comments as well, we appreciate the effort to
improve the current guestworker program, because it is in great
need of improvement. It is not used by very many producers out
there, particularly small producers. They do not have H.R.
personnel. They do not have lawyers. They cannot afford them.
They cannot navigate the current system. So we appreciate that
work.
But it is not close to being the solution to the problem.
Mr. Labrador. I understand that you do not think it is
close, but it was a beginning. It was a first step in trying to
fix the problem we have with immigration system, especially
with regard to agriculture.
Mr. Conner. We appreciate the acknowledgment that the
guestworker program is in need of improvement.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. And do you realize that not a single
Democrat in this Committee voted for that bill?
Mr. Conner. I was not aware that.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. So when I sit here and I listen to the
pontification about how we are not willing to do anything with
regard to immigration, I want the people to understand that the
Democrats were not willing to work with us on a step-by-step
approach.
This is not your industry, but are you aware that we
actually passed in the 112th Congress the STEM visa bill that
would have dealt a lot with the problems that we have with the
high-tech immigration? Are you aware of that?
Mr. Conner. Yes, I am aware, sir. Again, I add that we have
to deal with this in its totality, that is guestworkers, that
is our----
Mr. Labrador. So what you are here to testify is that
unless we do the Senate bill, then it is unacceptable? Is that
what you are saying?
Mr. Conner. Well, one without the other really doesn't work
for American agriculture. We do need a complete solution.
Mr. Labrador. I agree with you, agree with you a 100
percent that we need a complete solution.
Mr. Johnson, are you aware that we in the 112th and 113th
Congress tried to pass immigration legislation that would have
dealt with the high-tech immigration needs of the United
States?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, out of this Committee, you did pass that.
Mr. Labrador. And actually, out of the 112th Congress, we
passed it out of the House, and the Senate would not even take
it up. And we were told that the President would not accept
that legislation, because the President believed that it was
either everything or nothing.
I think that is the frustration that I have. I agree with
Mr. Conner that we have to fix entire immigration system. I
agree that agriculture has some needs that are unique to the
agricultural industry. But to sit here and pontificate about
how we have not done anything about immigration is just plain
false. It is absolutely false.
We have tried to do a step-by-step approach where we have
tried to fix the immigration system, and we have been held
hostage by the President and his party because they are
unwilling to work on a step-by-step approach. All we are doing
today, starting with the E-Verify legislation, is fix one of
the problems that we have in the immigration system.
I think all of you have testified that it improves the
current E-Verify system that I have had some problems with in
the past, as a former immigration practitioner. But I think we
need to understand that unless we work together, unless we
realize that we have to do this in a step-by-step way, what we
are doing is we are allowing the people on the other side of
the aisle to hold this issue hostage.
We have not fixed this problem for 30 years, and we have
not fixed it because it has been an all or nothing approach. In
fact, the President of the United States, when he was a
Senator, he promised the Bush administration that he would
support comprehensive immigration reform. And guess what he
did? He went to the Senate floor and he voted for poison pill
amendments that killed the entire Bush immigration process.
We would have had this problem solved many, many years ago,
if it were not for this President when he was a Senator. He
promised the American people that the first thing he would do
as President was to do comprehensive immigration reform, and
neither he nor his party did anything to fix the problem.
So let us just start fixing the problem and let us move on
with the solutions that Americans are craving.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Idaho.
The Chair would now recognize the gentleman from Puerto
Rico, the former attorney general, Mr. Pierluisi.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you. Welcome, all. I am particularly
pleased to see Angelo Amador here. You make me feel proud as a
fellow Puerto Rican-American. That is great.
Mr. Conner, I understand that the council didn't endorse
the ag guestworker bill in the 113th Congress. Is that right?
Mr. Conner. I am sorry, which bill, sir?
Mr. Pierluisi. The guestworker bill that was just referred
to by my colleague Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Conner. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Pierluisi. The council didn't endorse that bill?
Mr. Conner. We did not endorse that bill because it really
represents only part of the solution that is necessary out
there, the big part of the solution being our existing
workforce.
Mr. Pierluisi. Do you know of any other group of growers or
ag group that supported the bill?
Mr. Conner. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you.
Mr. Amador, in your written statement, you say that you are
committed to fixing the broken immigration system, which
includes legalization of a portion of the undocumented
workforce, and that simply changing the E-Verify system will
not be enough to fix an immigration system that has been
collapsing for almost 30 years.
I agree with you on that point, but can you explain why you
think that changing the E-Verify system itself is not enough to
fix our immigration system? Why is it important that any fix to
our immigration system include provisions that would allow
undocumented people to earn legal status?
Mr. Amador. Well, I think one of the bigger issues for us
is what happens moving forward. I know you have heard about the
H-2A program, which is for agriculture. There is no such
program available for low-skilled workers in our industry.
The last time I saw a workable solution for the guestworker
program, Senator Kennedy was still alive and George W. Bush was
President. We cannot wait that long. We have been waiting, and
we have not seen it from Democrats or Republicans to give us a
guestworker program to be able to move forward.
So what we have decided is, if there are good solutions to
different pieces, we are going to support them. I mean, I
didn't hear from any Democrat calling my office complaining
about the fact that we supported deferred action for childhood
arrivals. That is just one piece. And we said even then,
``Well, that is just one piece. It only takes care of a very
small population, children and all that. For those reasons, we
support it.'' But E-Verify is another piece.
As more and more of my employers and restaurants are using
it, they are complaining that, ``Look, I started using it. I
find somebody. I try to work with this good employee. At the
end of the day, there is a final nonconfirmation. I have to let
them go, just to see them go work across the street at another
restaurant that is not using the program.'' That is just unfair
competition.
The government is mandating it. We are opposing the way the
President mandated E-Verify for Federal contractors. It does
not have safe harbors. It does not have a number of things.
We are glad that several years ago, then-Chairman Lamar
Smith sat with us and sat with others and said, what are the
problems? So we shouldn't wait another 20 years to fix one
portion of immigration just because no one seems to be in
agreement on a guestworker program right now.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you. In your testimony, you also argue
that employers should be allowed to run potential hires through
E-Verify and make the job offer conditioned on the final
verification. Here is my concern about that. We already know
some employers don't notify employees when they receive a TNC.
Instead, they just terminate employment, and the employee never
has the opportunity to contest the TNC and demonstrate
authorization to work.
If people could be run through E-Verify before starting
employment, isn't it likely that even more people would never
be informed of a TNC, which could be defective or false? They
would simply be told that the company no longer needs the
employee for that job. Doing this for a person who hasn't even
shown up for work seems much simpler than doing it for a person
who has already joined your workforce. Couldn't this kind of
prescreening of employees before the date of hire mean many
more U.S. citizens and work-authorized noncitizens will lose
job opportunities?
Mr. Amador. I think from a practical perspective, the
feedback that we have gotten is you do all of the other
background checks, even drug checks and all these other things
you do before the person shows up to work. We are not saying
that you prescreen before an offer is made. An offer has been
made and you are being told, we are now going to go do this
number of things. We are going to check your references, we are
going to a check E-Verify, whatever it is that you do.
Being able to do all the other things, and we are not
saying it shouldn't be legal not to inform the worker. You
should inform the worker, number one, that you are going to do
an E-Verify check, and, number two, what comes back. The whole
idea is to allow this employee to fix it before they show up to
work.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you so much.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Puerto Rico.
The Chair would recognize the gentleman from Colorado,
former district attorney, Mr. Buck.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Blitstein, I have a quick question for you about the
safe harbor provisions. During a May 22, 2013, hearing before
this Committee, former ICE Assistant Secretary Julie Myers Wood
commented that ICE operates under the assumption that the
existence of a high number of employees who circumvent the
system through identity theft contradicts a company's argument
that it relied in good faith on its E-Verify confirmation.
ICE's position deprives the employer of the E-Verify safe
harbor under current law, and exposes the company to legal
liability for failing to detect and deter identity theft,
notwithstanding its good faith use of E-Verify.
I have heard these stories from many constituents in my
district. I am wondering whether this bill fixes that, whether
you are comfortable with the safe harbor provisions in this
bill that will be introduced soon?
Ms. Blitstein. We are comfortable with the safe harbor
provisions. We do think it will further protect employers.
In my personal experience at N.C. State is that we have
used the system to terminate some employees when we have gotten
a final nonconfirmation. Fortunately, we never had those
employees come back to us for any reason. But we were,
certainly, relying on the fact that we were using the system as
intended. We got that final nonconfirmation result and then
relied on it to make our employment decision.
So we do very much feel that the provision in this
particular bill will be more helpful to employers to go about
the business of verifying their workforce, making sure they are
not employing people without authorization, at a more
comfortable level.
Mr. Buck. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson, I have a question for you. The President has
undermined the immigration system with his executive orders,
prosecutorial discretion, and his excuse of resource
allocation. My question is, what prevents the President from
ignoring this law as he has so many others?
Mr. Johnson. Well, that is an interesting question based on
issues of standing and the natural fact that no matter how
restrictively this body writes a law, there is always going to
be some discretion written into anything you write.
Look, you have the power of the purse to rein in the
President. Of course, the Speaker has filed a case against the
President under Obamacare.
Congressman, I am not going to pretend really. At some
point, you can say we don't trust the President, and do
nothing, because you aren't going to be able to write a law
that doesn't depend on some degree of the President exercising
his discretion. But if you take the position, ``We don't trust
the President,'' well, the follow-on on that is, ``Well, we may
as well not do anything in this body.''
Mr. Buck. That is not what I am suggesting at all. I am
suggesting there are pieces of this law that require executive
action. There is a computer system that needs to be set up.
There are various activities that need to be engaged in, in
good faith. There are contracts that need to be let to the
private sector to upgrade the system.
My question is, in what way do we know that the President
is going to do these things?
Mr. Johnson. The only answer is you can't write those more
restrictively probably than they are already written, because
they are very detailed administrative functions. Really, the
answer is strong oversight through this Committee. Of course,
you are in the majority now.
Mr. Buck. Would it help if we had timeframes and
requirements that the Administration report back?
Mr. Johnson. Administrations, Republican and Democrat, and
I have been in both, often miss deadlines. Occasionally, they
meet them. But the real answer to that is your oversight and
calling the officers up here from the Administrations and
saying, ``What the heck is going on? You are in charge of this
law, and you are in charge of the government, why aren't you
meeting these deadlines?''
And frankly, you have the blunt instrument of trying to cut
their budget in some ways to send the signal to them, or use
Committee report language, which we often did when I was up on
the Hill, to send a signal to them to get their act together.
But there is no real clean answer to that. Sorry.
Mr. Buck. Okay.
I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Colorado, before we go to the
gentleman from Texas, we are going to briefly go to the
gentleman from Puerto Rico.
Mr. Pierluisi. Mr. Chairman, if there is no objection, I
would like to introduce in the record a statement from the
American Immigration Lawyers Association, as well as a letter
from the American Farm Bureau Federation.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Puerto Rico.
The Chair would now recognize the gentleman from Texas, the
former United States Attorney, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is no secret that when ICE opens a worksite enforcement
matter, it is usually based on information or intelligence that
there is a workforce of illegal aliens at a particular company.
One of things that a prosecutor wants to find out early in an
investigation before making any charging decisions is whether
the employer had knowledge or reason to believe that illegal
aliens were, in fact, part of the company's workforce.
When I was a prosecutor in such cases, and the employer was
relying solely on the I-9 process, whether an employer was
subjected to penalties and fines ultimately hinged on
prosecutorial discretion, namely whether I was persuaded that
counterfeit documents, sometimes for hundreds of employees,
could, in fact, be mistaken as genuine or authentic by the
employer.
That coupled with the fact that I never had a worksite
enforcement action against an employer that used E-Verify seems
to provide anecdotal evidence that E-Verify is a great
protection for employers. But again, that is anecdotal, so I
want to get some testimony in that regard.
And I want start with you, Ms. Blitstein. In the years, as
I understood your testimony, for 8,000 employees that have gone
through and been subjected to E-Verify, can you talk briefly
and hopefully quantify whether there were instances where E-
Verify did in fact identify I-9 process documents that were
false even though they may have looked valid on their face?
Ms. Blitstein. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Ratcliffe.
I would like to say, at least for N.C. State, we actually
probably at this point, after using the system for 8 years, we
have probably E-Verified about 30,000 employees over the course
because usually, when the semester is underway, when you add in
the additional 8,000 students and other workers, then our
workforce doubles to 16-plus-thousand during an academic year.
So over 8 years, people come and go, about 30,000.
Off the top my head, I can tell you I can remember very
distinctly two incidents where people presented false green
cards. One of them was actually very good, and the system came
back with the final nonconfirmation. We let the person go. I
studied it for a while and finally was able to see some of the
flaws. One of the other fake green cards was actually rather
terrible. So once I got involved at my level and saw it, I knew
right away. But we let E-Verify just kind of clean up the
process there. So we have had those two.
I would have to say that our industry is higher education,
so we probably have smaller rates of people without
documentation trying to pass themselves off. We really don't
experience it to the same degree that I am sure some other
industries probably do.
But at this point now we are very reliant on the system
after 8 years. We are required by the State. We are going to
keep using it probably indefinitely. But again, the safe harbor
idea is very attractive for us.
And in over 30,000, I can remember those two. There might
be a few others, but I would probably say less than 10 over the
8 years we have been using it where we actually were dealing
with something that might be related to fake or false
documents.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay, thank you. And you mentioned safe
harbor, and I apologize, I know there has been some testimony.
I have gone in and out. But, Ms. Blitstein, you offered a
number of recommendations in your testimony about ways that you
believe the Legal Workforce Act could be improved, but one of
them didn't include any changes to the safe harbor provisions.
Do I take that as an endorsement of the currents safe harbor
provisions?
Ms. Blitstein. That is correct. We did not see any
additional need for improvement, based on what is already in
the act.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Amador, you already spoke to that issue, so I think I
am clear on that point. I think you called it the strongest
language that you had seen thus far with respect to safe
harbor.
Mr. Amador. Correct.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay.
What I am not clear is, Mr. Johnson, have you given
testimony with respect to that? And if not, on behalf of many
folks associated with the Chamber, your thoughts on that?
Mr. Johnson. Well, look, we have had a lot of experts look
at this language, litigators, before we agreed to it. We think
it is solid. As more and more individuals and experts look at
it, there may be a tweak here and there that we can recommend
to the Committee. But as of right now, we are satisfied with
it.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Texas.
The Chair would now recognize himself.
Mr. Conner, I want to start with you, and I want you to
deliver this message for me, because it is really, really
important that this message be delivered. The secretary of
agriculture in South Carolina is a longtime friend of mine
named Hugh Weathers, who happens to be a dairy farmer.
Mr. Conner. He is a good man.
Mr. Gowdy. He is a good man. He married into the very first
family that helped me when I ran for district attorney, so if
anybody is wondering who to blame, it would be the Gramling
family from South Carolina. They are peach farmers, so I am
keenly aware of agriculture's interest, and so is our Chairman,
who is the architect and the author of an agricultural bill,
which the South Carolina Farm Bureau endorsed last session.
We necessarily cannot have simultaneous hearings, or at
least I have not figured out how to have simultaneous hearings,
so you have to start with one. But I do not want you, and I
would ask you to take back to the farmers, the fact that we
started with E-Verify in no way, shape, or form means that we
are not cognizant of the issues that the agriculture community
faces.
So if you would let them know how much we appreciate them,
and we had to start somewhere. Had we start started with the ag
bill, then other folks would have been critical of us for going
in that chronology. So if you could help me get that message to
your constituency, I would be most grateful to you.
Mr. Johnson, I know the Chairman asked Mr. Amador, but I
want to hear from you as an entity that had overall support for
the Senate immigration bill, but yet had some concerns about
their E-Verify process. What were those concerns, with
particularity?
Mr. Johnson. Well, the safe harbor language is better in
the House bill. There is a crazy provision in the Senate bill
that deals with the so-called U visa, which is a narrow visa
for people who testify in criminal, very egregious kinds of
cases. It was expanded to cover virtually any kind of workplace
complaint, which we viewed as an incentive really for somebody
to come forward and file a complaint against an employer
because the result of that would be they cannot be deported
from the country while that event was pending.
They, frankly, changed the legal authority of the Office of
Special Counsel over there from enforcing intentional
discrimination to intentional plus unintentional
discrimination--i.e., disparate impact, which since I did my
graduate paper in that area, I was particularly annoyed by. And
they have a whole matrix of sort of appeals when the tentative
nonconfirmation comes back that the employee could stay on the
payroll forever while this mouse trap of appeals was going
forward.
And look, Mr. Chairman, there has to be a balance here, but
there is no perfect answer to a lot of cases. And you have to
balance giving the employee a chance to correct the records, if
in fact there is a mistake, which I think Mr. Smith's bill
does, versus creating a whole matrix of other requirements and
lawsuits, which our members are not going to just buy into.
I have a treatise on my desk. It is 2,000 pages long, just
talking about what employers must comply with under our few
civil rights law. We have enough litigation. We have enough
gold mines for plaintiff lawyers without creating more.
Mr. Gowdy. And correct me if I am wrong, if my memory
serves, U visas would be utilized by victims of domestic
violence, hypothetically, in one area so they could come
forward and cooperate with law enforcement and not have any
fear of any legal consequence for coming forward. And then that
was expanded in the Senate version to include labor violations.
Mr. Johnson. Also workplace disputes.
Mr. Gowdy. Okay.
Ms. Blitstein, your written testimony stated that you had
developed a successful program for handling foreign national
scholars and graduate students who are coming to the U.S. for
the first time and, necessarily, do not have a Social Security
number. What is the process?
Ms. Blitstein. We have developed a system. Especially with
our electronic system now, we are able to do the I-9 without
the Social Security number, because when they first come, they
have to wait about 10 days after ending the U.S. before they
are eligible to apply for a number at the Social Security
Administration.
So we still do the electronic I-9. It is kind of pending
until they go to Social Security. When they are able to get
their number, they come back to us. We enter it, and then it
gets pushed through to E-Verify. And for that process, the E-
Verify 3-day timeframe is suspended because there is just
practically no way, and Social Security is not going to turn it
around that fast either.
So we have developed that process that we have trained a
number of our decentralized campus users of the E-Verify system
on. It is still not perfect, which is why one of our
suggestions was to allow a little more time, because once the
Social Security Administration gives the new number to the
individual, they give it straight to them. They do not notify
us as the employer when they have issued them the number. So we
still sometimes need to work with the new employees to make
sure they come back to us, provide us with that number, so we
can finish up the process.
So we are still always searching for ways to improve and to
make things even better. But that is our current system.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you. I inadvertently overlooked, I do not
know how, Mr. King, when he was here. I want to apologize to
him and now recognize the gentleman from Iowa for his 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. King. I thank the Chairman for recognizing me and for
holding this hearing. And I thank the witnesses for your
testimony. Having listened to your testimony, a number of
questions emerge, and I would direct my first one to Mr.
Johnson.
That would be, there are limitations written in the bill on
how an employer might verify an existing employee. Can you
perhaps explain to this panel why--I will make this assertion.
If I am an employer and I have an employee tell me that he is
unlawfully present in the United States and can't legally work,
but he has slipped through my bookkeeping system, why should I
not be able to run him through E-Verify and deal with him
according to the law?
Mr. Johnson. I think you would be able to deal with him
under this system. If he slips through because of false paper?
Mr. King. If I suspected an employee of being unlawfully
working for me, why wouldn't an employer who had the best
intentions of complying with the law, which is what Mr. Conner
said his people do, why couldn't that employer just got a E-
Verify, run the data through E-Verify to see if that employee
can actually lawfully work?
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think the bill does provide a process
by which, if a tentative nonconfirmation comes back, that the
employee--I think it is right to give the employee a chance
before he is fired to see whether or not the information is
wrong when it comes back.
Mr. King. I agree.
Mr. Johnson. It is only 10 days under the bill, as I
recall, and then the employer can fire the employee.
Mr. King. Let me suggest we are really not quite on point
here, because the bill has been improved from what it
originally was a couple years ago, in that now the employer has
to check everyone either within a geographic area or within a
work category. I suggest that is an unnecessary limitation,
although it is an improvement.
So I would move on from that and thank you for your
response.
Also, it has a conditional job offer for an employee, a
potential employee. That is an improvement in the bill.
But I am concerned, then, Mr. Johnson, about the preemption
of the States. My concern has been in the past that if States
are preempted from enforcement, and I understand in this now
new version of the bill that they can enforce in parallel with
and in mirror to the Federal law, but if States are preempted,
and the Federal Government doesn't enforce, wasn't that one of
the reasons for preemption in the first place, that if the
Federal Government doesn't enforce, then we don't have to worry
about the States doing that, as was the basis of S.B. 1070?
Mr. Johnson. Well, I have the Section 6 language here in
front of me on preemption, and it is quite complicated. I would
say that it still allows the States, even on its most
restriction reading, Mr. King, it allows the States to check
whether or not the employer is complying with Federal E-Verify
rules and regulations, and if not, step in.
I think it is perhaps a little unclear whether or not the
State has power beyond simply--not simply. Removing the license
for the business to operate.
Mr. King. And also to levy fines.
Mr. Johnson. And levy fines.
Mr. King. And retain those fines.
Mr. Johnson. And retain them.
So to me, this was a balance that, as I said before, we
would have preferred a broader preemption, but this does allow
the States to have a role. It is obviously a smaller one than
after the Supreme Court's decision in Whiting.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I appreciate it.
I would like to turn to Mr. Conner. I was interested in the
percentages that you gave of the different components of
agriculture, in particular, that could be the potential losses,
if there was mandatory E-Verify abruptly without time to adjust
to that.
Can you tell us how those numbers, those percentage losses,
were calculated?
Mr. Conner. Certainly, Congressman King. Those numbers were
the result of the study by the American Farm Bureau Federation
and we would be happy to provide that full study with those
results for the Committee record, if you so choose that.
Mr. King. Could I ask you to do that and ask if the Chair,
at his discretion, might forward that onto the Committee
Members, the Farm Bureau analysis?
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir.
Mr. King. I thank the Chairman of the Committee for that.
And you also mentioned that there was as much as a 50
percent worker rate that would not be in compliance right now.
Did I hear that correctly?
Mr. Conner. Yes. We have an existing workforce of about 1.2
million to 1.4 million, and the estimates of what that
constitutes is somewhere between 50 percent to 70 percent that
we believe probably would not have proper work authority in
this country.
Mr. King. I am fairly shocked by that, but I would go
further with these questions and just make this concluding
statement instead, Mr. Conner. And that is that it appears to
me over my working life, all of it within sight of cornfields
and soybean fields and agriculture, as you know, that this
country has evolved into a high dependency on illegal labor,
particularly in agriculture.
I can replay this through my mind's eye on what it would
look like today if that were not the case, if these 50 States
were islands unto themselves rather than a continent that
allowed for a flow of labor.
And I would just make this point in conclusion. There are
92,890,000 Americans of working age who are simply not in the
workforce. And to all employers out there, I would suggest that
if you need one, you can find one from that list. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Iowa.
In conclusion, I would ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record statements from the Society of Human Resource
Management and the National Federation of Independent Business.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. This concludes our hearing today.
I do want to thank every one of our witnesses for your
expertise, your collegiality among one another and with the
Committee, and your cordiality with the same. We have all
benefited from your expertise, and we thank you.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses or
additional materials for the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:43 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Immigration and Border Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
