- INTERNATIONAL ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT: CHINA AND BEYOND

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNATIONAL ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT: CHINA AND BEYOND

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
REGULATORY REFORM,
COMMERCIAL AND ANTITRUST LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-80

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-350 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel

------

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law

TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania, Chairman

BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice-Chairman

DARRELL E. ISSA, California          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                  Georgia
MIMI WALTERS, California             SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
DAVE TROTT, Michigan                 DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan                SCOTT PETERS, California

Daniel Flores, Chief Counsel

Slade Bond, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

JUNE 7, 2016

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory
Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law...........................     1
The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the State of Georgia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law     3
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     4
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    24

WITNESSES

The Honorable Maureen Ohlhausen, Commissioner, Federal Trade
Commission
Oral Testimony.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mark A. Cohen, Senior Counsel, United States Patent and Trademark
Office
Oral Testimony.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32
Sean Heather, Vice President, Center for Global Regulatory
Cooperation, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Testimony.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Thomas J. Horton, Professor of Law and Heidepriem Trial Advocacy
Fellow, University of South Dakota School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    59
Prepared Statement.............................................    61

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................    25
Material submitted by the Honorable Mike Bishop., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and
Antitrust Law..................................................    85

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Maureen
Ohlhausen, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission..............   100
Response to Questions for the Record from Mark A. Cohen, Senior
Counsel, United States Patent and Trademark Office.............   102
Response to Questions for the Record from Sean Heather, Vice
President, Center for Global Regulatory Cooperation, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce............................................   104

INTERNATIONAL ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT: CHINA AND BEYOND

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 7, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law

Committee on the Judiciary,

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:02 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Darrell
E. Issa (acting Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Issa, Collins,
Ratcliffe, Bishop, Johnson, and Conyers.
Staff Present: (Majority) Anthony Grossi, Counsel; Andrea
Lindsey, Clerk; (Minority) Slade Bond, Minority Counsel; and
James Park, Counsel.
Mr. Issa. The Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial
and Antitrust Law will please come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
We welcome here everyone, and particularly our witnesses
supporting International Antitrust Enforcement: China and
Beyond, and I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
We convene today's hearing to examine the enforcement of
competition laws across the globe but with a focus on how China
is enforcing its laws. This focus is a result of troubling
reports that China may be using its competition laws or, if you
will, its antitrust laws, to advance industrial policy at the
expense of America and other foreign companies. We will also
examine how the executive branch has responded to China's
administration and its competitive laws.
Over the past 30 years, China's economy has experienced
remarkable growth, increasing at a rate of nearly 10 percent
per year. During that time, China has become an important trade
partner to the United States and a significant influence in the
American economy. Between 1990 and 2015, total trade with China
rose from $20 billion to $598 billion and, just last year,
China passed Canada as the United States' largest trading
partner.
China is the second largest U.S. agricultural export
market, the third largest U.S. merchandise export market, and
the fourth largest U.S. service export market. In total, China
is estimated to be a $400 billion market to American companies.
While these statistics provide stark numbers, one need only
look no further than the labels on phones, toys, cars, clothes,
and a wide array of other consumer products to see a familiar
marking ``made in China'' to understand the pervasive impact of
China's economy in the United States. As China's economy
developed, so did its laws and regulations designed to foster
future growth. In 2007, China enacted its competition laws
called the ``Anti-Monopoly Law,'' or ``AML.''
Since the AML's enactment, there have been troubling
reports of China deploying the law in a manner that violates
international norms of due process with the result of
prioritizing the advancement of China's industry policies over
promoting competition. These reports include allegations that
China prevented foreign lawyers from representing their clients
before competition authorities, threatened foreign executives
during the course of competition investigations, targeted
foreign companies more frequently than Chinese companies with
respect to merger remedies, and conduct investigations pursued
the extraction of intellectual property at below market rates,
and sought remedies that directly benefited the Chinese
industry.
Given the size of the Chinese economy and the importance to
American industry, these are serious allegations. Following
these reports, the executive branch has responded in a variety
of ways. Notably, the Commerce Department has engaged with
China through the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and
Trade and the Departments of State and Treasury similarly
engaged in the U.S.-China Strategic/Economic Dialogue, which is
taking place this week in Beijing.
Past meetings with U.S. officials have resulted in non-
binding voluntary commitments by China to improve transparency,
increase due process, and enhance the fairness of the AML.
We should ensure that U.S. companies are treated fairly,
consistently, and objectively by international jurisdiction.
Today's hearing will help inform the Committee regarding
international competition law enforcement, particularly China,
and whether other countries are influenced by China's use of
the AML.
Additionally, the hearing will update us regarding how the
executive agencies are coordinating with each other and
engaging with China and other countries on the treatment of
U.S. companies and citizens abroad. On a personal note, I was
an electronics executive during the era in which many, many
American companies found themselves moving abroad, often to
Taiwan, the new territories, and then into Mainland China.
During that era, this was not the law, and yet there was
inherently a desire to build a future China. And to this, on a
personal note, I want to build a better China, and commerce is
the answer, but it's only the answer if in fact they embrace
the international norms that allow them to win when they're
competitive and choose other vendors when in fact the most
competitive vendor comes from somewhere other than China.
I look forward to today's discussion and our excellent
panel, and it's my honor to recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Johnson of Georgia, for his opening remarks.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the Chairman.
Today's hearing is a welcome discussion of international
antitrust enforcement with a specific focus on China's approach
to competition policy under its Anti-Monopoly Law. Over the
past several decades, one of the most profound developments in
antitrust law has been its expansion into the global economy.
In the 1980's, as few as five countries robustly enforce
the antitrust laws. Today, more than 100 jurisdictions are
members of the International Competition Network, an
organization of enforcement agencies. This growing interest in
antitrust law reflects a broader trend that reflects Nations
moving away from centrally planned economies to open markets.
In recent years, there has also been some divergence from
the U.S. approach to antitrust enforcement among Nations with
established competition authorities. This change is
particularly evident in China's aggressive enforcement of its
Anti-Monopoly Law, which includes both procompetition goals
such as preventing monopolization, and noncompetition
directives such as improving economic efficiencies and
development in China.
Some have suggested that these twin goals have at times
served to protect domestic commerce rather than promote
competition. Examining these differences is important because
local enforcement decisions can have global effects, as Federal
Trade Commission Chairwoman Edith Ramirez has observed. But
diversity and enforcement policy is itself--in itself is not
necessarily bad.
Progressives have long suggested that we rethink our
antitrust policies to move beyond the excesses of the Chicago
school of economic theory, as our former colleague Senator Herb
Kohl has referred to it, to incorporate noneconomic values that
promote the public interest through enforcement policy.
With this in mind, I commend our enforcement agencies for
taking a long view in competition policy that embraces diverse
antitrust frameworks and respects local autonomy, while also
seeking to establish a fair, independent, and transparent
enforcement process internationally. While most work remains to
be done to broaden international consensus and ensure that
enforcement policy is not just a tool for promoting domestic or
industrial policy goals, I'm confident that we can continue to
work productively to bridge our differences and complement
divergent enforcement regimes.
As we seek consensus, it is imperative that we avoid an
exceptional view of our own enforcement practices if we are to
build upon ongoing dialogues with other sovereign Nations to
establish economic and political comity. Indeed, progressives
have long suggested a rethinking of our antitrust policies to
move beyond what Senator Herb Kohl again referenced as the
excesses of Chicago school of economic theory, and that we seek
to incorporate noneconomic values that promote the public
interest through enforcement policy.
In closing, I thank the Chair for holding today's hearing,
and I hope to continue to look beyond our own antitrust
enforcement practices in future hearings. I also thank our
witnesses for their testimony. We truly have a wealth of
expertise on the panel. I'm looking forward to hearing your
views, particularly on the issue of whether or not there should
be just one regime and it be our regime for antitrust
enforcement. And when I say ``ours,'' I mean the American
formula. And with that, I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. It's now my pleasure to
introduce the Chairman of the full Committee for his opening
statement, the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Judiciary Committee routinely exercises its oversight
authority to ensure that our Nation's antitrust laws are
applied in a manner that is transparent, fair, predictable, and
reasonably stable over time. A natural extension of this
oversight is ensuring that our Nation's companies and citizens
receive comparable treatment in foreign jurisdictions.
As commerce becomes an increasingly global enterprise, the
manner in which antitrust and competition laws are applied to
companies and citizens located or engaged in business outside
of the United States also grows in importance. In particular,
China has risen in prominence as an economic marketplace as
well as a competition law jurisdiction.
Over the past several years, reports have surfaced that
allege China is deploying its competition laws in a manner that
strains the boundaries of due process, that focuses on
advancing domestic industrial policies, and that seeks to
extract valuable American innovations without fair
compensation.
I would like to thank Chairman Issa for holding today's
hearing to delve into these potentially serious abuses. Today's
testimony will help the Committee gain a better understanding
of the history of China's competition laws, how they have been
enforced, and the potential impact of this enforcement on other
international competition jurisdictions. Furthermore, it will
provide a record regarding how our executive agencies,
including our antitrust enforcement agencies, have been
coordinating among each other and engaging with China and other
foreign countries on international competition law enforcement.
This hearing also serves as a reminder that the United
States should be a leader in fair and reasonable antitrust
enforcement. To that end, enacting important antitrust reforms
such as the SMARTER Act, will help to ensure that the U.S.
continues to be an example to international competition law
authorities.
I look forward to hearing from today's excellent panel of
expert witnesses on these important issues, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman for his opening statement
and his comments.
If Mr. Conyers arrives, we'll take his opening statement in
due course. But it's now my pleasure to introduce the
distinguished panel here today. The witnesses' written
statements will be entered into the record in their entirety,
and I would ask each of the witnesses to summarize their
testimony within 5 minutes.
Since virtually all of you are pros, I'll summarize by
saying, the red lights work just like they do on city streets.
Please look at them for the same indications of go, go faster,
and stop. To help you stay within that time period, please
observe them.
It's now my honor to introduce our witnesses, but before I
do that, in concert with the rules of the Committee, I would
ask that all four of you please rise to take the oath. Please
raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you're about to
give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth?
Thank you. Please be seated. And let the record reflect
that all witnesses answered in the affirmative.
It's now my pleasure to introduce Commissioner Ohlhausen.
Commissioner Ohlhausen was sworn in to her position as the
Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission on April 4th,
2012, to a term that expires September of 2018. Prior to
becoming the Commissioner of the FTC, the Commissioner spent 11
years working for the Federal Trade Commission in various
capacities, including Director of the Office of Policy and
Planning and Attorney Adviser to the former FTC Commissioner
Swindle.
She has spent a number of years in the private sector
working on FTC issues and as a partner at the law firm of
Wilkinson Barker and Knauer, LLP. The Commissioner earned her
bachelor's degree in English with honors from the University of
Virginia and her J.D. from George Mason, newly named Antonin
Scalia Law School. I see somebody picked that up right away.
Our next witness, Mark Cohen, is a Senior Counsel at the
United States Patent and Trademark Office where he leads a 21-
person team focused specifically on the expertise of China.
It's got to be a full-time job with just 21 of you.
Mr. Cohen has over 30 years of private and public sector
in-house and academic experience in the China transition
economies, serving in such roles as the director of IP for
Microsoft Corporation and a counsel at the law firm of Jones
Day, a Cleveland-based company of my youth, but worked in their
Beijing office.
In addition to his position at the Patent and Trademark
Office, Mr. Cohen lectures at universities in the United States
and abroad, including Harvard, Fordham, and the China
University of Political Science and Law. Mr. Cohen earned his
bachelor's degree in Chinese studies from the State University
of New York in Albany, his master's degree in Chinese language
and literature from the University of Wisconsin, and his J.D.
From Columbia. I'm impressed.
Next, we have Mr. Sean Heather. Sean Heather is the Vice
President of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Center for Global
Regulatory Cooperation, which seeks to align trade, regulatory,
and competition policy in support of open and competitive
markets. During his 16-year career at the Chamber, Mr. Heather
has worked in a wide range of issues spanning from
international trade and antitrust to tax technology and
corporate governance. Mr. Heather is also the co-author of the
Chamber's comprehensive report on China's enforcement of its
competition laws.
Mr. Heather received his bachelor's degree in business
administration and an MBA both from the University of Illinois.
Last and definitely not least, we have Professor Thomas
Horton, professor of law at the University of South Dakota
School of Law. Professor Horton transitioned to a full-time
academic position following a 28-year career as an antitrust
lawyer where he served at both the Federal Trade Commission and
the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, in
addition to partnership at several major international law
firms.
Professor Horton earned his bachelor's degree from Harvard,
cum laude, his J.D. from Case Western Reserve University School
of Law, right there on the near east side of Cleveland where he
graduated with the Order of the Coif, and a master's degree
with honors in Liberal Studies from Georgetown University.
Before I recognize the Commissioner, thank you Mr. Horton
for going to Case. Everyone in my family either applied or went
there. I went to Kent State. You can tell why.
Your Honor.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MAUREEN OHLHAUSEN, COMMISSIONER,
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION

Ms. Ohlhausen. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Johnson, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today.
International antitrust law has been very dynamic over the
past two decades. The FTC engages in multilateral fora and
bilateral consultations. It also offers technical assistance to
build stronger relationships with foreign competition agencies
and to encourage convergence on sound economic competition
policy and enforcement. The global economy, competition, and
consumers benefit when competition laws function coherently and
effectively. Enforcement predictability also reduces the cost
of doing business and improves outcomes for consumers.
While the FTC's focus has been global, the agency has
devoted significant attention and resources to two areas that
have received particular attention in recent years: China's
antitrust enforcement and the application of antitrust
intellectual property rights. I personally spend a lot of time
on these issues. I have traveled to China seven times in recent
years to engage in dialogue, both formal and informal, on
antitrust policy and enforcement, including attending a
conference on antitrust in Asia in Hong Kong just last week.
Even before the enactment of China's Anti-Monopoly Law, or
the AML, in 2007, the FTC and the DOJ worked with Chinese
officials to promote predictability, fairness, and efficiency
in antitrust enforcement. We have also stressed the importance
of economics to sound antitrust policy.
China's AML resembles the competition laws of the United
States in many ways, including, for example, provisions on
cartel conduct and anticompetitive mergers. The AML, however,
also has important differences, including the prohibition of
unfairly high pricing and consideration of noncompetition
factors, such as the effect of a merger on economic
development.
Our engagement with Chinese authorities on the development
and implementation of the AML has produced some positive
tangible results. A good example is China's adoption of a
simplified merger review procedure last year, which saves time
and reduces costs for merging companies. We have also observed
that MOFCOM increasingly sets forth its economic analysis in
published merger decisions.
Nonetheless, our efforts with the Chinese AML agencies are
best seen as a work in progress as there is continued concern
regarding the procedural and substantive application of the
AML. Issues raised by Chinese procedures include the degree of
transparency, the opportunity to present a defense, and the
ability to be represented by counsel. Due process is a critical
element to ensure fair, transparent, and nondiscriminatory
application of antitrust laws. At the recent meeting in Hong
Kong, I was particularly encouraged to see all three Chinese
agencies acknowledge these procedural concerns.
On a substantive level, there continues to be a belief that
Chinese agencies are pursuing noncompetition objectives to
antitrust enforcement to promote domestic industries or Chinese
competitors. We take such concerns seriously and have worked
through multiple avenues, including our most recent vice
minister level bilateral meeting in April to encourage China's
agencies to ensure appropriate transparency and fairness.
So far, we have seen some promising responses, including
through the Strategic and Economic Dialogues, as well as the
U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade. In 2014,
through these dialogues, China officially recognized that the
objective of competition policy is to promote consumer welfare
and economic efficiency rather than promote individual
competitors or industries, and that enforcement of competition
laws should be fair, objective, transparent, and
nondiscriminatory. Through these dialogues, China also provided
certain commitments regarding AML enforcement procedures. We
will continue to engage with Chinese antitrust authorities on
these issues.
International convergence on unilateral conduct remains a
challenging area overall, particularly for conduct involving IP
rights. Many of the concerns about IP-related enforcement have
focused on China because its competition law prohibits unfairly
high pricing as well as places limits on refusals to deal. The
Chinese AML agencies' current draft IP guidelines reinforce
this concern with provisions that would create liability for
refusals to license intellectual property deemed necessary to
compete in a given market, as well as provisions that would
prohibit unfairly high IP royalties.
The FTC and the DOJ have voiced concerns over the potential
danger of reducing incentives to innovation, not only in China
but globally, and have thus urged caution in enforcing these
provisions. The FTC will continue to advocate for policies and
approaches that promote innovation and competition as these
guidelines continue to develop.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ohlhausen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Issa. Thank you. It's now my pleasure to introduce the
Ranking Member of the full Committee for his opening statement,
Mr. Conyers of Michigan.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Issa, and I want to put my
statement in the record.
Mr. Issa. Without objection.
Mr. Conyers. And just note that today's hearing, with these
particular witnesses, promises to be not only informative and
timely, particularly with respect to China's enforcement of its
Anti-Monopoly Law, and I appreciate your comments in that
regard. And over the last days even, Treasury Secretary Jacob
Lew, who was in China for the latest round of talks in the
ongoing U.S.-China Strategic/Economic Dialogue, makes our
discussion here so significant and important. I commend the
Chairman for it, and I leave you with this one thought. What
impact will China's alleged discriminatory enforcement
practices have on American jobs?
And I thank the Chairman for his indulgence, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman, and hopefully we'll see
the answer to that question as we speak.
With that, we go to Mr. Cohen for his opening statement.

TESTIMONY OF MARK A. COHEN, SENIOR COUNSEL,
UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

Mr. Cohen. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Johnson, Members
of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
competition law in China from the perspective of the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office. It's an honor to appear before you
today.
USPTO is engaged with China on all IP issues, including
those that involve antitrust and licensing. Last year, Under
Secretary Lee met with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang, and just
last week, I accompanied Deputy Under Secretary Slifer to
Beijing to advance talks on critical IP issues. Along with the
United States Trade Representative, Under Secretary Lee also
cochairs the IP Working Group of the Joint Commission on
Commerce and Trade, or JCCT, to engage bilaterally on
improvements to China's IP regime.
Over the years, the JCCT and related dialogues have
included several commitments on IP, including on standards,
licensing, legitimate sales of IP-intensive goods, and judicial
reform. The USPTO's China team consists of 21 people, including
experienced IP attaches in three Chinese cities. We have signed
agreements to support cooperative activities in IP with several
Chinese agencies. We also frequently meet with industry to
exchange views, educate them, and share their concerns.
In our experience, the current environment for IP and
antitrust in China has three pronounced characteristics. These
are: one, strong antitrust enforcement is counterposed against
weak IP protection; two, there's little foreign use of the IP
enforcement system while there is considerable foreign concern
about being targeted for competition law violations; and,
three, industrial policy in China makes it difficult to
legitimately license technology to third parties.
Regarding the first item, China's weak enforcement system,
Chinese IP damages are too low weakening fundamental
protections IP right holders need. IP holders who run afoul of
Chinese AML authorities often do not believe that their
legitimate rights have been protected. In summary, China is
pursuing IP abuse without first having adequately secured IP
use.
As an example of this unbalanced environment, the antitrust
fine imposed against Qualcomm for 975 million U.S. Dollars is
thousands of times more than the average damages in a patent
litigation in China. Second, surveys and press reports suggest
that many foreign companies feel targeted. While Chinese
antitrust authorities have taken pains to show that they are
enforcing their laws evenhandedly, this sense of feeling
targeted is coupled with little affirmative use of China's IP
system as well as concerns over due process and a sense that
foreigners' rights are not being adequately protected.
As for the third item, industrial policy, I share the
concerns of many here. Much of the problem with
commercialization of technology today in China is due to an
overinterventionist Chinese economy. Notwithstanding the
international consensus that IP is a ``private right,'' China's
state planners have created a wealth of interventions in IP
creation and licensing from which it is reasonable to assume
antitrust policy is not excluded.
These three serious problems highlight the challenges our
companies face: Weak IP protection, targeting, and industrial
policy. The Administration has pushed back on the more onerous
aspects of these policies. USPTO is also taking the lead on
highlighting challenges involved in licensing IP to China,
including negotiating with our Chinese counterparts, training
programs, and research.
In summary, the Administration strongly supports China's
efforts to develop an antitrust regime consistent with the
practices of other market economy countries. However, there are
many aspects of China's economy that may not be fully market
driven in the context of both IP and IP-related antitrust.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cohen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Heather.

TESTIMONY OF SEAN HEATHER, VICE PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR GLOBAL
REGULATORY COOPERATION, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Heather. Thank you, Chairman Issa and Ranking Member
Johnson, for today's important hearing and inviting the Chamber
to testify.
The Chamber's approach to antitrust is grounded in the
belief that antitrust should be transparent, fair, predictable,
reasonably stable over time, consistent across jurisdictions,
and based on sound economic analysis.
For the past several years, the Chamber has worked with
China on its Anti-Monopoly Law, and China has made some
positive progress. In part, improvements can be traced to high
level engagement between the two governments. The Chamber
welcomed the commitment by the two Presidents during President
Xi's State visit in 2015 where it was agreed, quote, ``Both
countries affirm the importance of competition policy
approaches that ensure fair and nondiscriminatory treatment of
entities and that avoid the enforcement of competition law to
pursue industrial policy goals.'' However, China's antitrust
enforcement has yet to live up to this ideal.
The AML itself allows China's agencies wide latitude to
inject industrial policy into their enforcement activity.
Further, stakeholders in China's government, not directly
charged with enforcing the AML, have the potential to weigh in
and steer the outcome of an antitrust investigation. As a
result, in many cases, foreign companies find themselves as a
victim of industrial policy goals that promote also
discrimination and protectionism. Merger reviews have created
opportunities for China's own national champions to expand and
increase their market share, have capped prices for products
and technology on which domestic companies rely, and protect
famous Chinese brands from acquisition by foreign companies.
To date, all merger transactions blocked or conditionally
approved have involved foreign companies. Similarly, AML
transactions--AML investigations have forced foreign companies
that market consumer products to reduce prices, even when such
prices appear to be the result of market forces rather than
anticompetitive conduct.
The Chamber is particularly concerned with China's ongoing
efforts to develop IP abuse guidelines under the AML. Those
guidelines endorse a broad, unbalanced essential facilities
doctrine, impose stiff Anti-Monopoly sanctions for refusing to
license IP or charging, quote, ``excessively highly''
royalties.
As drafted, the guidelines would force companies that
possess critical technologies to license their intellectual
property to Chinese competitors or to lower licensing costs to
benefit local firms. As China concludes its drafting process
later this year, the American business community hopes that
China will remove its unbalanced essential facilities doctrine,
delete provisions on excessive pricing, and eliminate
provisions that prohibit or restrict the refusal to license. We
believe such a course correction is ultimately in China's long-
term interest as it seeks to move up the value chain and become
a global innovative contributor.
Let me mention a word or two about due process. Concerns
regarding the substance of China's AML and its enforcement are
compounded by continuing concerns over transparency and due
process. Limited evidence is often presented to the target in
support of vague or novel theories of harm. The absence of an
independent judiciary, as well as potential threats of
retaliation, deters companies from seriously considering an
appeal. The result, more often than not, is an investigative
process that incentivizes the foreign target of investigation
to settle on terms favorable to the Chinese government.
Looking beyond China, the Chamber actively follows upwards
of a dozen jurisdictions annually. Many of the concerns we
discuss here today exist elsewhere in the world to varying
degrees. Today, it can be difficult to discern what is an
appropriate international antitrust norm. Take a statement from
the Korea Fair Trade Commission regarding its 2015 enforcement
plan. It stated that one of its primary goals was to strengthen
enforcement against global monopolistic enterprises holding
original technologies having a significant influence in the
Korean industry.
The wording of such a statement demonstrates how perverse
uses of antitrust can creep toward becoming an acceptable
international norm. Last year, China issued a fine to Qualcomm
for just under a billion dollars. That amount may seem like a
lot, but it is actually the third highest fine behind the
questionable fines issued by Europe against Intel and
Microsoft. China also raised eyebrows over the condition it
imposed on the Microsoft-Nokia merger, only for Korea to follow
and place significantly more questionable conditions on that
same merger.
In these examples, China's actions can be seen to further
stretch international norms while also claiming to live within
them. It also demonstrates that the world of international
trust presents problems beyond China.
In closing, the Chamber greatly appreciates the work of the
U.S. antitrust agencies and this Administration, yet more work
needs to be done. Let me conclude by highlighting some of the
recommendations from my written testimony for Congress and this
Committee to consider.
First, it is important to endorse a whole-of-government
approach wherever antitrust is misused and abused. It is
critical that competition policy advocacy, vis--vis, China
occur within the framework of the Administration's broader
economic and commercial policy toward China as set forth by the
President of the United States.
Second, Congress, through rigorous oversight support,
should support the Administration to do everything in its power
to ensure provisions of China's IP abuse guidelines are at
least as consistent with U.S., EU, and Japanese approaches.
This must be a top and urgent priority.
Finally, Congress should be more vocal in its support for
addressing these concerns through bilateral investment treaty
negotiations with China and through competition chapters in our
trade agreements.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Heather follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Professor Horton.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS J. HORTON, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND HEIDEPRIEM
TRIAL ADVOCACY FELLOW, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH DAKOTA SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Horton. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member----
Mr. Issa. Could you pull it a little closer to you so we
could hear you?
Mr. Horton. Chairman Issa----
Mr. Issa. And make sure the light is on, the little button
down in the middle.
Mr. Horton. Oh, there we go.
Mr. Issa. There we go. Thank you.
Mr. Horton. Thank you.
Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Johnson, distinguished
Committee Members, counsel, and staff members, thank you so
much for inviting me to testify here today. And thank you
Chairman Issa for your kind words about Case Western Reserve
University in northeast Ohio.
To understand China's Anti-Monopoly Law and its recent
enforcement efforts, it's necessary and crucial not only to
carefully examine the words of the Anti-Monopoly Law but to
read them in the context and light of Chinese history, culture,
and traditions. First and foremost, we must recognize that
China may be the only civilization the world has known upon
which Western thought exercised little or no influence until
modern times. China's historical culture was largely
independent of Western influences, and its responses to its
people's economic needs are often peculiar to China and sharply
differentiated from other countries.
Second, it's important to keep in mind that China's
political system does not share our values of Western legal
traditions. China is not in any sense a Western-styled
democracy, and in reality, the country still is without rule of
law.
Furthermore, the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party are
not interested in bringing about a change of allegiance by
bringing Western political systems to China. Consequently,
China's Anti-Monopoly Law enforcement activities ultimately are
not directed toward carrying out or reenforcing Western
neoclassical economic ideologies but toward helping to protect
the socialist rule of law system with Chinese characteristics.
China's determination to chart its own antitrust course
without following or adhering to Western ideologies has
resulted in four major trends during the first 8 years of AML
enforcement.
First, China aspires to protect and buttress its economy by
safeguarding what it perceives to be fair market competition in
the consumer and public interest of China's citizens.
Second, China's determined to protect at all costs its own
perceived long-term security and economic interest.
Third, China's focused on protecting its indigenous
business and entrepreneurs, including its diverse multitude of
small- and medium-sized businesses.
And fourth, China's demonstrating a strong propensity to
focus on potential barriers to entry and use of exclusionary
practices. Ironically, echoing the comments of Representative
Johnson, America would be well served by following similar
objectives in our antitrust enforcement policies instead of
continuing the current underenforcement of antitrust laws which
have led to alarming levels of concentration and diminished
competition in industry after industry.
Rather than simply criticizing China and trying to lure it
into following current neoclassical American economic models,
we should humbly ask ourselves whether we might learn from the
Chinese and their Confucian traditions and values. On one hand,
China should be lauded for promulgating an aggressive antitrust
policy that takes into account Confucian norms of ethics,
morals, and fairness, and seeks to inspire increased corporate
social responsibility. We would be well served to pursue
similar objectives.
On the other hand, as stated here by the other witnesses,
the Chinese and their antitrust enforcers are going to need to
pay more attention going forward to their own Confucian
traditions and values. Ongoing business and governmental
corruption in China must be aggressively addressed.
Furthermore, the Chinese need to acknowledge and realistically
address the pressures on their AML enforcers to aggressively
target foreign companies in order to protect and bolster
indigenous Chinese companies and businesses.
And finally, the theft of IP and IT to bolster the Chinese
economy must stop. Instead of trying to pretend that they're
acting neutrally and objectively in their AML enforcement, the
Chinese need to find better ways to focus primarily on
competition policies as opposed to industrial protectionism.
As always, the future is uncertain, but the stakes could
not be higher. Whether we like it or not, China's and our
economies are inextricably linked and positively correlated.
Both China and the West must continue our ongoing dialogues and
seek to continue building strong economic, cultural, and
political bridges. After all, much more than future
international antitrust enforcement is at stake. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Horton follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman from Georgia for his round of
questioning, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take just a
moment to sort of broaden out the picture just a little bit,
and I think it's what we're looking at and this is sort of an
open question to all.
I think we all can understand that China, and with even the
last comments Mr. Horton said, is very protectionist, very
looking after theirself, but yet at the same time wanting to
aggressively market everywhere else in the world. Okay. We can
understand that even from a capitalist standpoint in looking at
that.
The problem I'm looking at is, especially in this area of
IP, I mean, this is a country that have its own, quote, State-
owned business moving factories out of Mainland China to other
areas in the Middle East to keep their own theft from
occurring. So I think we've got an issue here, but I have just
a general question, and it was mentioned in a couple of your
comments.
In the area of trade, in the area of working with the
world, with the negotiations of the TPP and with the past few
years of the AML, what do we see in China in regard--have you
seen an uptick in the protectionism--I know I have seen in some
areas--in maybe a response to the other countries and the TPP?
I'd like to get your--just a perspective, maybe an overall
perspective on that. And anybody wants to start. Ms. Secretary
or whoever wants to start.
Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Maybe I'll take a first shot at that. Obviously,
you know, USTR is the lead on negotiating----
Mr. Collins. Right.
Mr. Cohen [continuing]. The TPP. In our bilateral
discussions, China has expressed an interest in the TPP,
although I think its primary focus is on its own internal
demands and needs. And I think in that area we do see a
heightened level of technical interest and engagement on
intellectual property, primarily because China wants to become
an innovative economy.
Mr. Collins. Right.
Mr. Cohen. And that's really shaping its engagement
globally.
Mr. Collins. And I want to just bring that up, and again,
feel free, as a matter of discussion. But you could probably--
with it being an innovative economy, I think, are we seeing
other problems here when you're looking even outside and even
internal estimates of their growth and the issues of their
economic growth, which is, at best, stagnating, at best, from
the norms of where they were basically governing. What are we
seeing when you're saying innovation and--where are we seeing
the innovation? It still seems that they're copying a great
deal and then protecting it as it comes along. Is that an
unfair statement, especially in a restrictive economy at this
point?
Mr. Cohen. I think the good news is China is interested in
innovating, and the bad news is China is interested in
innovating. The good news is that hopefully it will help
foreign rights holders of foreign companies if they can compete
equally and fairly. And in some areas, China is achieving some
measure of success. High-speed rail, for example.
Mr. Collins. Right.
Mr. Cohen. Some of the research in the life sciences, and
we've seen a lot of activity in patenting. But there is concern
that in the process of seeking to become an innovative economy,
the field won't be balanced or fair and that foreign entry
could be restricted.
Mr. Collins. Well, and I think that's what we're seeing.
Mr. Horton and Mr. Heather, I'd like to say this. The
interest is not--to me, creativity, and what we talk about in
this Committee a lot, is creativity is thinking something new.
Creativity is not seeing my pencil and then making another--
copying it and painting it red instead of yellow and calling it
creative. That's not creative. And I think that's some of the
concern.
But the other concern is using--and I'd like to hear from
the two here, is taking this idea of protection but also then
taking companies that have made innovative strides, have went
into China to actually work, becoming--where it becomes more of
an economic disincentive, they're saying you're taking over and
then we're--basically, all we're doing is rate manipulation at
that point.
Mr. Heather and then Mr. Horton, I'd like to hear your
comments on that.
Mr. Heather. Yes. In response for the Chamber's antitrust
policy, I'm not our China expert who's actually in China, but I
think if he was here today, he would share with you the way the
Chamber looks at it is outside of the antitrust realm, that
there are a range of Chinese policies that are all geared
toward kind of industrial policy means and ends. And therefore,
the antitrust law, in some ways, runs counter to those larger
policies that the Chinese government is advancing and,
therefore, opens up itself to the opportunity to advance those
industrial policy goals.
It's also important to I think note in the China context
that the three Chinese agencies, NDRC, MOFCOM, and SAIC all
have other missions within their jurisdiction that are much
more central to the way the Chinese organize and operate their
economies. And the AML function that they fulfill is kind of on
the margins of what is their core responsibility, which is more
in this industrial policy vein.
As it relates to IP protection and these things, I think
there's a number of avenues in which the U.S. Government and
the Chamber have been advocating by which to eliminate forced
transfer of U.S. companies where they go into China and then as
a condition of investing in China, as a condition of operating
in China, they are required to somehow joint venture with the
state-owned enterprise to pass off their technology in some
way, shape, form, or the other. There's a number of ways in
which we're working to try to combat that, including through
negotiations of a U.S.-China bilateral investment treaty.
Mr. Collins. Okay. Mr. Horton.
Mr. Horton. I grew up in a family where I was indoctrinated
as to the importance of the patent laws. My father has 39
patents in the ceramic engineering field, primarily for the use
in aircraft engines. And so I believe that the patent laws are
amongst the most important laws stated in our Constitution that
Jefferson wrote into the Constitution. The bad news for the
Chinese and why they're stealing IP is that their innovation is
not happening from their large state-owned enterprises and
their institutions are not producing enough good research.
They're filing more patents than anyone in the world, but most
of them are sham patents that have little value.
The good news for the Chinese and what we might think more
about emulating is that they have a growing bamboo thicket of
capitalism of small business and entrepreneurs, and really, new
innovations, new patents, new ideas come out of small
companies. They come out of the garages. They come out of the
Bill Gates working in his garage. They don't come out of the
big companies. And so the Chinese are seeking to protect their
small businesses, something we've gotten away from in the
United States with our antitrust policy where we've allowed and
even encouraged dominant firms with heavy market concentration,
who then can make monopolistic profits that they don't put back
into research. So we should emulate the Chinese in protecting
our small businesses, entrepreneurs, and doing everything we
can to encourage them.
Mr. Collins. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now stay with Georgia and go to the Ranking Member, Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Horton, are there any other lessons that U.S.
antitrust policy can take from China's antitrust enforcement
efforts?
Mr. Horton. Yes, I believe that there are. First, I think
that in areas like monopoly leveraging, resale price
maintenance, where our Supreme Court, just a few years ago in
the Leegin case, overruled on a 5 to 4 basis more than 100
years of sound antitrust policy under the name of
neoconservative economics, and in predatory behavior by
dominant firms.
I think the Chinese are very progressive, and ironically,
could end up being leaders in world antitrust enforcement if we
in the United States do not become more progressive and put
behind us the 40 years of neoclassical economics that have led
us astray and that are really a key part of what we're hearing
in today's current election cycle about all the unfairness
that's endemic in the American economy.
Mr. Johnson. What say you to that, Mr. Heather?
Mr. Heather. I think that we're talking about apples and
oranges. The Chinese system is one that doesn't have a rule of
law, which I believe Professor Horton referred to, and so I
think any discussion about what policy debate we may have in
the United States about the role U.S. antitrust law should play
in our market is not akin to what happens in China.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I guess their enforcement mechanisms,
without an independent judiciary, they're made in a different
way.
But Professor Horton, any rebuttal from you as to Mr.
Heather's comment?
Mr. Horton. Well, I think that the Chinese Anti-Monopoly
Law where it's very sound and progressive is it talks about
fairness, fairness to consumers, fairness to competitors, and a
stable economy. And we seem to think that fairness is some kind
of mushy idea that has no place in economics. In fact, fairness
is fundamental to a sound economic system, and the Chinese
recognize that. We need to get back to that.
Mr. Johnson. Now, our independent judiciary, Mr. Heather,
does it have fairness as its benchmark of making decisions or
does it--I mean, what do you say to that, to what Professor
Horton just said, the ideals that we apply our antitrust
policies? I mean, what is our--is our--is there--can we learn
something from the Chinese in terms of adopting ideals such as
fairness to consumers?
Mr. Heather. Well, given the fact that we have had the due
process concerns in China's antitrust proceedings, I think it's
ironic that we're talking about--or you're depositing the
question whether or not we can learn anything about fairness
from China. I think that certainly I expect our judiciary to
provide fairness when anyone goes before it, but I think the
question that underpins this is whether or not the Chicago
school of economics is the school by which the U.S. antitrust
laws should remain guided or be informed by.
To that point, in referencing that in the context of China,
it's one thing to make these kinds of broad statements; it's
another thing to have the rigorous economic analysis to support
them. And none of the cases that we see coming out of China has
an economic proof to go with the statements that they make.
And I think that regardless of where we want to take U.S.
antitrust laws, which have changed over the last 100 years in
terms of how they're interpreted, and I suspect they will
change over the next 100 years, there will still be a
requirement in the U.S. system to underpin that with rigorous
economic analysis because it's not just about the law, it's
about the economics.
Mr. Johnson. And our courts apply rigorous economic thought
to its decisions on antitrust policy? Yes.
Mr. Heather. I believe they are--do so in most cases, yes.
Mr. Johnson. I guess it depends on what school they are
trained from, perhaps. But let me move on.
China issued some regulations today on electronic payment
services, and as global payment networks prepare to establish
payment processing services in China, they potentially face
impediments under these new rules, which I've not seen. I don't
know if any of you all have, but the potential is there.
They will be required to implement Chinese security and
encryption standards rather than globally interoperable
security standards, which are well established and
internationally recognized. How can the U.S. continue to push
for competitive access to the Chinese market while protecting
the integrity of the international payment system in light of
divergent security and encryption standards?
Mr. Cohen, let me ask you that question.
Mr. Cohen. Well, there have been longstanding concerns
about market access for payment processing and for encryption
and security standards that have been raised for a good 10 or
15 years, and we've been raising them bilaterally as
potentially discriminatory treatment of U.S. companies and U.S.
rights holders, and in some cases, demanding forced transfer of
technology with some successes to date.
I'm not familiar with the latest rules. My office has
mostly been concerned about forced transfers of intellectual
property or adopting standards that primarily rely on China's
indigenous innovation and would thereby discriminate U.S.
innovation and U.S. technology.
Mr. Johnson. What do you say to that, Professor Horton?
Mr. Horton. Well, I would be concerned about the Chinese
interoperability standard because I do think that the Chinese
are very cognizant of their own security interest, and one of
the big problems with the IP and IT theft has been the concern
that this is going to Chinese military technology.
So I think that we should put tremendous pressure on the
Chinese to not allow their own indigenous system that they
might take advantage of to be the standard for operating in
China. I think the House here could put increasing pressure on
China, as could the executive branch, to turn their own
Confucian values around and say, you have to be fair toward the
rest of the world, not just your own consumers and public.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
Mr. Heather.
Mr. Heather. I'm unaware of the regulation you mentioned,
but our China team would be more prepared to comment and answer
questions you have that we can have followup with your staff.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Ms. Ohlhausen, I will get to you next time.
Mr. Issa. We'll now go to the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the panel for
your insight today. I wanted to give you a chance to review
some of the recent reports highlighting the problem of Chinese
companies using stolen images and deceptive advertising to lure
American consumers into buying poor quality apparel direct from
the Chinese manufacturers.
And that said, Mr. Chair, I'd like to ask unanimous consent
to be able to submit this document which depicts blatant
pictorial examples of Chinese advertising----
Mr. Issa. Without objection----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. Using stolen images.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. With unanimous consent, it will be
granted.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
Mr. Bishop. These images are so blatant and lawless, there
is no incorporation of any Confucius laws of anything,
especially ethics or fairness.
American companies are increasingly discovering that their
copyright images are being used in advertisements on sites like
Google and Facebook, are preying upon Americans and the
American consumers. When the customer receives the item, they
look nothing like the picture they saw online in the
advertisement. The clothing items are typically made of
inferior material. They are constructed cheaply. They arrive in
sizes that oftentimes are nowhere near and probably just big
enough to fit a child.
Consumers--we all know that customer service as well is
nonexistent, and the American buyer has no option whatsoever
for returning the product or getting a refund. These false and
misleading advertisements using stolen images result in
consumers receiving merchandise far below the quality they're
expecting and threaten the competitiveness and sustainability
of American clothing companies, which we all know are in great
jeopardy right now anyway trying to compete.
So I would like to, if I could, refer this question to
Commissioner Ohlhausen and Mr. Cohen, and I just would like to
know what steps you're taking to eliminate this practice by
Chinese companies in order to protect American consumers and to
protect the intellectual property of American companies and
prevent this kind of activity by Chinese companies in the
future.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Thank you, Congressman Bishop. The FTC, as
you know, in addition to our antitrust authority, is also a
consumer protection agency, and so we work internationally with
other consumer protection authorities to address these kinds of
issues. Now, there can be a challenge for how you reach a
company in another country. What is their contact with the
U.S.?
So to the extent we can reach companies that are misleading
consumers, if they have some presence in the U.S., then we can
try to bring an enforcement action. Otherwise, we need to work
with our international counterparts.
I would say our relationship with the consumer protection
authorities in China is not as developed as they are with the
consumer protection authorities in Canada and Europe and some
other more developed economies, but we continue to try to work
and build these kinds of relationships.
Mr. Cohen. So if I may, Congressman, the problem with
counterfeit and shoddy substandard goods emanating from China
is well known. Chinese exports are accountable for about 80
percent, if I remember correctly, of U.S. seizures of
infringing goods. There's a lot of litigation both within China
and outside of China due to China's manufacturing and sales of
counterfeit and substandard goods.
Under the JCCT rubric, there is a commitment by the Chinese
to work on reducing the incidence of these goods. We've been
trying to work with platforms such as Alibaba, JD.com, and
others to address this problem. The first recourse is, of
course, voluntary steps taken by legitimate platforms to take
down the goods, to respond to complaints, and to respond to the
complaints not only of consumers but of rights holders who
observe the counterfeit goods.
There's a huge magnitude to this problem in terms of the
growth of the platforms, the sales coming from overseas, the
facility and ease with which the goods can be distributed,
including by small parcels, which are hard to detect. And it's
really an issue that skips many different agencies within U.S.
Government and the Chinese Government, including our own
Customs and Border Protection, our FBI, State and local
enforcement, the USPTO, U.S Trade Representative, Federal Trade
Commission. So it requires a lot of coordinated effort,
including working with our rights holders and consumers to
address the problem. But it's going to take time and
considerable effort.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for your answer.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate all the
witnesses and your testimony today. I think this topic is
especially timely, given the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic
Dialogue that's taking place this week.
The trends that we've seen with respect to China enforcing
its antitrust laws to advance its own industrial policies are
troubling, to say the least. In fact, it's difficult to imagine
China having a truly objective antitrust law when the very text
of that law states that its purpose is to promote a socialist
market economy.
But even more telling, I think, are the anecdotes that we
see from American and European companies, which in some cases
are, frankly, shocking. We've seen reports of intimidation
tactics, bullying companies into accepting punishments without
full hearings, and even in some cases, companies being told not
to challenge their investigations or even bring their lawyers
to some of the hearings.
You know, beyond the direct impact of China's behavior on
American companies, I'm a little bit concerned that other
rising economies out there will see China's behavior and
perhaps follow suit. So the bottom line is, I think, that if
China wants to be taken serious as a leading economy, then
these issues need to be addressed or remediated.
Mr. Heather, I want to start with you. I appreciate you
being here to testify today. I know this can be a sensitive
issue within the U.S. business community and I know some folks
may actually fear retaliation for speaking up and voicing their
experiences. So I appreciate you being here to speak on behalf
of U.S. companies.
Let me start with what I mentioned before, the U.S.-China
Strategic and Economic Dialogue. What meetings and
conversations do you hope that our Administration is initiating
in that regard?
Mr. Heather. Well, I believe that the S&ED has come to a
conclusion in China I think as of this morning. I believe the
outcomes statements from those meetings were posted late this
morning. I do not believe there were any new developments
coming out of this S&ED related to competition policy. That
being said, I think the S&ED and the JCCT have been enormously
helpful in particularly addressing those egregious due process
concerns that you mentioned. In fact, I think most of the folks
I talked to would say that it's probably been a year since
those most egregious practices have been communicated back to
the United States. So there is an effective dialogue there at
the highest levels of the United States Government with China
and China has shown some responsiveness.
That being said, in my testimony I said there are still due
process concerns with a company being able to understand what
the theory of harm is against them, being able to see the
evidence China has collected so they can mount a defense and
respond to that evidence. So there remains many due process
challenges in China, but those most egregious offenses that you
refer to in your comments are things that, at least for the
last year or so, seem to have subsided and you can track that
pretty closely with these high level commitments that came out
of the S&ED and the JCCT.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Well, I'm glad to hear your perspectives on
that. Let me ask you this question, are there areas of the
United States broader economic and commercial policy toward
China that you think might be exacerbating some of the concerns
that we're talking about today?
Mr. Heather. I think the answer to that is absolutely. As I
testified, that the AML can be used as a force for good in
creating greater competition within the Chinese market, but the
legal framework that is the Anti-Monopoly Law also allows for
supporting the social development of the market economy, as
they refer to it. It carves out space for their state-owned
enterprises and does a number of other things that provide
unique twists on what antitrust enforcement would be in the
United States being consumer welfare focused.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
I move on quickly with my remaining time to you,
Commissioner Ohlhausen. In your testimony you talk about
China's agencies pursuing noncompetition objectives through
competition enforcement to promote certain industries or
particular Chinese competitors. You also talk about the fact
that the FTC is working with other agencies within our
government to advance consistent cooperation enforcement
policies.
I want to ask you in my remaining time, what is the
interaction with the other agencies? And more particularly, are
you receiving any pushback at all or a message that maybe you
need to stop or back off a little bit with respect to China for
the sake of U.S.-China relations?
Ms. Ohlhausen. We work closely with the Department of
Justice, and the Department of Commerce on these issues. And
what we try to do is give advice to the antitrust agencies in
China as fellow antitrust enforcers so that we can engage with
them on an expert-to-expert kind of dialogue. I don't think
we've gotten any pushback about what we've been doing or what
we've been saying from other parts of the U.S. Government.
Now, when I've talked to Chinese officials, we certainly
have to be sensitive to the fact that their laws do allow for
some noncompetition factors to be included. But one of the
things that I've specifically advocated, and it's consistent
with the general U.S. position, is if they are taking
noncompetition factors into account, they should be clear about
that. It shouldn't be just rolled up in a competition analysis
so that we don't know what part is competition and what part
may be some kind of an industrial policy. So at least as a
first step be transparent about the reasons for their
decisions. As a later step, it would be better to remove those
kinds of noncompetition factors from an antitrust analysis
completely.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Commissioner.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I'm going to follow up where that left off, though,
Commissioner. China is part of the WTO, right? So any
subjective, unwritten, we just win, you lose is subject to a
challenge, isn't it?
Ms. Ohlhausen. I'm not a trade expert, but I think that's
correct. Certainly, they have to make commitments.
Mr. Issa. Right. But you're an expert on unfair trade
practices.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Unfair trade practices being antitrust and
consumer protection.
Mr. Issa. Right. But as the chief watchdog of consumer
protection.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Domestically, what they're doing of injecting
nondefined subjective standards is in fact the kind of
manipulation that you investigate in private enterprises all
the time to find out how these unpublished wrong selective
interpretations go on, right?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Right. Well, certainly, in the U.S. our
antitrust law has evolved so that we only consider competition
factors in the competition analysis.
Mr. Issa. That wasn't the question.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Okay.
Mr. Issa. But I'll go to Mr. Cohen. The Federal Trade
Commission regularly goes after people with false and deceptive
practices, implying that you can win when in fact you can't.
The WTO does require that there be essentially a transparent
policy, and protectionism is inherent--not tariffs, but
protectionism is inherently barred within the WTO, and the
Administration, our government, can sue, as we are sued, if
somebody believes we've crossed that line, correct?
Mr. Cohen. As long as it offends a WTO requirement, that's
correct.
Mr. Issa. So in the case of Mr. Ratcliffe, his examples.
The example of this dialogue of antitrust being mixed with, we
just want our companies to win, that in fact could lead to WTO
action, couldn't it?
Mr. Cohen. Again, the lead agency here is USTR, which is
not represented. The WTO disciplines on antitrust are rather
limited. There are certain provisions in the TRIPS Agreement
regarding----
Mr. Issa. Actually, I wasn't talking antitrust. I was
talking about other subjective standards that are causing
determinations to be made that are inconsistent with the actual
antitrust laws.
Mr. Cohen. Perhaps if there are external influences that
are inconsistent with the WTO requirements, such as national
treatment or most favored Nations treatment in investment or
market access, and those could be cognizable carried issues.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Let me follow up with this sort of a
general question, but I think it's directed to the Commissioner
primarily. Is it fair to say that active engagement--and I'll
use a term that's my term, not yours--calling out China for its
double standards on intellectual property and on antitrust,
calling them out in a respectful way, but consistently and
aggressively, if you will, at least behind closed doors, isn't
that an essential part of what we have to do at a minimum to
keep China's inherent policies from tipping the scales against
us?
And I want to be careful. I'm not necessarily an expert on
Confucianism, but it does appear as though China only does that
which we push hard to make them live up to. Is that a fair
statement somewhat in your estimation?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Well, I do think it's been important to have
an honest but respectful exchange with the Chinese officials
about where there might be deficiencies in their system or
where there have been some inconsistencies. So for example,
when the U.S. Chamber put out their report in 2014, the Chinese
agencies had a press conference where they pushed back and they
said, no, we are not administering our law in an unfair way.
But what was important is they then continued to engage with us
and we saw not just words but deeds followed on by that to have
some improvements.
Mr. Issa. And you keep using the word ``respectful,'' and I
think that's critical. This is a large trade partner, but I'm
going to ask respectfully each of you to answer yes or no. Is
it true that China is abhorrent in their respect for
intellectual property both patents and particularly copyright
and trademarks?
Commissioner?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Are they--I'm sorry, I missed the word.
Abhorrent?
Mr. Issa. Abhorrent was the word I used, but deficient,
quite deficient by international standards. Is that fair to
say?
Ms. Ohlhausen. I think it's fair to say that they're weak.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Would you go further, Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes. They are somewhere between weak and
abhorrent. Some areas they're improving, but the track record
is pretty bad.
Mr. Issa. And I'll go with the ``improving,'' but I'll
stick with the ``abhorrent'' too.
Mr. Heather, you certainly represent a huge amount of
companies that are constantly frustrated. Would you use the
word abhorrent, deficient, regardless of improving below
international standards of many developed countries?
Mr. Heather. I won't worry about the adjective. I will just
simply say, yes, China's enforcement of intellectual property
rights is substandard.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Horton, Professor Horton?
Mr. Horton. I would say seriously deficient. Addressing
your comment quickly, the United States enabled China to get
into the WTO, the United States has been China's best economic
ally in promoting its growth and helping it. And the United
States is still the greatest economic engine on the face of the
Earth. So if the United States stands up and tells the Chinese,
look, you have to treat us with the same kind of fairness and
equal rights that you want to instill in your own Anti-Monopoly
Laws, that's what it's going to take if you want to continue
having shipload after shipload of goods come here into the
United States.
Mr. Issa. So we should speak regularly and affirmatively if
we're going to go have them behave?
Mr. Horton. I would say we should followed Teddy Roosevelt
and speak softly and carry a very big stick.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I now go the gentleman from Georgia for a second round.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Ohlhausen, what has been the relationship between the
FTC and, if you know, the Department of Justice in terms of the
Chinese antitrust enforcement authorities? Have they reached
out? What is the relationship between your agency and DOJ, if
you know, and the Chinese enforcement agencies? And if you
could describe that relationship, if any.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Certainly. We signed a memorandum, the DOJ
and the FTC in 2011 signed a memorandum of understanding with
the three Chinese antitrust agencies. And what that does is
establish a framework for cooperation and dialogue between the
U.S., the senior competition officials in the U.S. and in the
Chinese agencies.
We also developed a guide for case cooperation on
particular cases where we are investigating, the U.S. agencies
are investigating and the Chinese agencies are--or a Chinese
agency, usually MOFCOM, is investigating, to allow us to talk
about it or coordinate in some way. So that's some of the more
formal ways that we do this.
And under the memorandum of understanding we have regular
high level meetings. We also have a lot of informal engagements
and talks. And so, for example, as I mentioned, I've been to
China on numerous occasions, often to meet with these officials
and to talk with them, to further understanding, to raise
important concerns that we might have about their enforcement.
Mr. Johnson. So would it be safe to say that improvements
are being made in terms of Chinese acknowledgment of American
ideals in terms of antitrust enforcement? And also with respect
to intellectual property, if you could comment about that.
Ms. Ohlhausen. So I think there are improvements being
made. I don't think we are close to saying all the problems are
taken care of. I do think that there has been progress. It's
been slow, it's been very incremental. And one of the things
that we often try to talk about or I often try to talk about is
why these approaches, the U.S. approaches are not not just good
for the U.S., but they're good for the Chinese economy.
Certainly, the Chinese officials rightly are caring about
the Chinese economy and their growth and their innovation. And
so I think it's incumbent on us to explain to them why our
approach will lead to the best outcomes for their economy and
for their movement from a manufacturing economy to an
innovation economy. So protecting IP rights can help their own
industries advance, their own industries invest, and have them
become stronger players in an innovation model.
So I think that's an important part of the dialogue. And
when we point to the problems with them devaluing IP rights,
it's not just that it may hurt U.S. companies, but it may hurt
their own economy in the long run.
Mr. Johnson. So this kind of dialog between an advanced
Nation such as America and a developing Nation with respect to
China, is this the way to go or should we--you said carry a big
stick, Professor Horton. Is there a different way of
approaching this than the way that we're doing it now? Would
you recommend another approach, Professor Horton?
Mr. Horton. Well, first we have to recognize that we're
dealing with essentially a dictatorship. The Chinese Communist
Party is not in any way, shape, or form a democracy as we know
it here in the United States. And that kind of government goes
back thousands of years in China. So we're coming to any
negotiations with China from a very different perspective and
standpoint.
Putting ourselves in the Chinese Communist Party leader's
shoes, they see all the changes that are transpiring in the
world. They fear what was happening in Tiananmen Square, they
fear the spread of democracy in China. And so on the one hand
they're trying to tamp all of this down while at the same time
creating this economic miracle that can help keep them in power
by giving more money and goods to the Chinese citizens.
So I think on the one hand we need to step back and say,
we're dealing with the Chinese from a very strong position. We
have a very sound fundamental democracy. We have a very sound
fundamental economy. We have excellent allies throughout the
world. We have excellent trade relations. So we should not be
intimidated by China's growth or it's 1.5 billion people. We
should go into any negotiations with the Chinese and say, look,
you know, we helped defeat the Japanese in World War II to
liberate your country, we've been good allies with you, we've
helped build your economic miracle, but you have serious,
serious problems in terms of dealing with the rest of the world
and it's in your interest, as Commissioner Ohlhausen said, to
step up to the plate and recognize this if you want to go
forward as a sound economic partner throughout the world.
Mr. Johnson. All right. I thank you, Professor Horton.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And I'll be brief the second round.
Mr. Cohen, you were shaking your head during quite a bit of
that in a positive way, so I thought I'd follow up a little
bit.
There is a government in China that looks out for China. Is
it fair to say that two of the challenges businesses face, one
of them is a Chinese centric, how do the Chinese view
intellectual property? How do the Chinese view competition?
Which is sort of a business-to-business one. And then there is
the government's desire to, if you will, protect its progress.
Used to be it's 10 percent, but whatever number it happens to
state that it can achieve that. Is that fair to say that we
have two pots there to deal with?
Mr. Cohen. I think that's a fair assessment. In fact, in
innovation we see state-driven innovation and private sector
innovation. The type that Professor Horton has mentioned is
another example of that, one coming from the top down and one
from the bottom up.
Mr. Issa. So when we have, as Commissioner Ohlhausen is
dealing with, government-to-government activity, I presume that
we're dealing then with two sets of problems. One is that which
the government controls directly, which is their policy and
procedures, their execution of laws, and then that which really
has more to do with the very strong provinces and more local
authority that often it's like pushing a string, in my own
words, that you can't necessarily expect the government to
control, but they can attempt to make a difference. Is that
sort of a fair assessment of the China that we are dealing with
that which they control, that which they influence?
Mr. Cohen. There is--I mean, China is not a unified state,
it's not a Federal system, but, you know, there is such a
saying that the emperor is far and that in the provinces
there's a little bit less control. But people still roughly
follow national guidelines and the structural weaknesses such
as the intervention of the party is pervasive. The courts are
no more or less independent than any part of China because the
party is still very active there serving its interests.
Mr. Issa. Well, you know, there's a lot of lawyers here at
the table. So isn't it true, as it was more than a decade ago
when I was with the late Henry Hyde in China, that they have
practically no lawyers educated in the sense that we think of
members of the bar?
Mr. Cohen. The legal community has been under a lot of
attack in China. They have educated a lot more lawyers, but
many of the human rights lawyers have been thrown in jail, many
of the outspoken lawyers have suffered repercussions. But at
the same time the courts are proceeding well in a technical
sense. So you have a very interesting moment in time where the
courts are under pressure, yet at the same time, technically,
they're improving their expertise in a range of areas.
Mr. Issa. When I was there with Henry Hyde who made a major
address, the number at that time was barely into double digits,
sort of 10 percent of judges actually were lawyers. The court
system was being administered by people who had not been
trained in the law.
Mr. Cohen. I think that's no longer the case.
Mr. Issa. So it's risen?
Mr. Cohen. It used to be the case that the judges were all
former military officials. They since have had to take an exam
and they've gotten legal training and in many cases they not
only have basic law degrees but graduate----
Mr. Issa. So that's a good news statement.
Mr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Last question. I started with you, Mr. Cohen, and
I want to follow up one more time. We, the United States, lead
the way toward most-favored Nations and then WTO assert--
ascension for China in the hopes that they would, after
receiving it, then comply better with what they were not
complying with ahead of time. And we talked about antitrust
laws getting mixed with other noncompetitive or foreign
competition, just waiting.
What kind of a grade would you give China on how well we
achieve that goal by giving them WTO in hopes that they would
live up to a standard you're supposed to have before you become
a WTO member?
Mr. Cohen. That standard was to have a rules-based trading
system, a transparency, independent courts, at least that, I
think, were the aspirations. That is still very much a work in
progress.
Mr. Issa. Okay.
Professor, as a Case Western graduate like my brother, who
did get admitted, last question for the whole panel, for you,
you see China and you have some serious doubts, and you were
very outspoken in that. Is it fair to say, though, that
disengagement would in fact, by definition, allow them to keep
doing what they're doing? Engagement with some of the caveats
that you presented here today is ultimately the answer for how
we have our largest trading partner do better.
Mr. Horton. I think the Chairman's comments today have been
quite astute. We have no choice but to engage the country that
has approximately 18 to 20 percent of the world's population.
China is not going to go away any time, it's going to
increasingly influence what's happening throughout Asia and the
world. And we should not be afraid of engaging with China.
We have a very strong, fundamentally sound democracy and
economy. We have nothing to fear from strongly engaging the
Chinese, and over time, perhaps head being them toward the
course of democracy. You know, we remember when communist
China--or communist Russia broke up. How did that happen, over
night? No, I think it was decades of public pressure and subtle
pressures and just the people there seeing that there's a
better way of life. And the Chinese are traveling all over the
country. You can look here in this hearing today, they're here
by the dozens. And they see that United States open ideal of
democracy and freedom of speech, freedom of religion. These are
wonderful guideposts for the future. And let's hope that, over
the coming decades, the Chinese will slowly begin to realize
that and move closer to a democracy.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
In closing, I guess I'll own up to the fact that I made my
first trip to Hong Kong as a buyer in 1982 and made several
hundred trips before I retired to come to Congress. I have
great respect for the Chinese people. I had great respect for
the Hong Kong business model and the governance that they
managed to turn into a world standard of best practices. I
appreciate the fact that the Chinese think of things in 10,000
years. We think of things in our couple hundred years. And
apparently, that's one of the reasons they're in less of a
hurry than we are to achieve the goals. And I don't say that to
be pejorative. I have great respect for where China has come so
far.
But this concludes our hearing for today. I want to thank
all of our witnesses. You were all incredibly good. I want to
particularly thank the Chamber for representing so many
companies who, by definition, would prefer to have the Chamber
speak on their behalf than to speak individually.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses and
additional materials for the record.
And with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:25 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
