- REGISTER'S PERSPECTIVE ON COPYRIGHT REVIEW

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REGISTER'S PERSPECTIVE ON COPYRIGHT REVIEW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-22

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-408 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

APRIL 29, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     1
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary    54

WITNESS

The Honorable Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and
Director, United States Copyright Office
Oral Testimony.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Tom Marino, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................    43
Material submitted by the Honorable Judy Chu, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    58
Material submitted by the Honorable Ted Deutch, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Florida, and Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    70
Material submitted by the Honorable Doug Collins, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia, and
Member, Committee on the Judiciary.............................    72

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Maria A.
Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Director, United States
Copyright Office..........................................85

deg.OFFICIAL HEARING RECORD
Unprinted Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

List of material submitted for the Official Hearing Record.......    92

http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103385

REGISTER'S PERSPECTIVE ON
COPYRIGHT REVIEW

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 29, 2015

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Tom Marino
presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Smith, Chabot, Issa,
King, Gohmert, Jordan, Poe, Marino, Labrador, Farenthold,
Collins, Walters, Buck, Ratcliffe, Trott, Bishop, Conyers,
Nadler, Lofgren, Jackson Lee, Chu, Deutch, Bass, DelBene, and
Jeffries.
Staff Present: (Majority) Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff &
General Counsel; Branden Ritchie, Deputy Chief of Staff & Chief
Counsel; Allison Halataei, Parliamentarian & General Counsel;
Joe Keeley, Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual
Property, and the Internet; Kelsey Williams, Clerk; (Minority)
Perry Apelbaum, Staff Director & Chief Counsel; Danielle Brown,
Parliamentarian; Norberto Salinas, Counsel; Jason Everett,
Counsel; and Maggie Lopatin, Clerk.
Mr. Marino. The Judiciary Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
We welcome everyone this morning to our hearing on the
Register's Perspective on Copyright and Review. And I know we
will get a very thorough, in-depth analysis of this.
I'm going to turn first now to Ranking Member Conyers for
his statement.
And Chairman Goodlatte will arrive shortly to give his
opening statement.
And, with that, Ranking Member Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Marino.
And to the Committee that will be coming in soon and to all
of our interested friends that are in the audience. You know,
in the Declaration of Independence, our Founders--wait a
minute--okay.
Today's hearing culminates the Committee's 2-year-long
examination of the Copyright Act, a process that has involved
19 hearings and 99 witnesses. Our current Register of
Copyrights here today makes 100 witnesses. It's a particularly
fitting occasion that Ms. Maria Pallante, the Register of
Copyrights, testifies at this final hearing, as she was the
first witness to testify at the beginning of the process. Over
the course of this review, we've identified several priorities
that I think we should consider. First, if our Nation is to
have a strong copyright system, we, in Congress, must
restructure the Copyright Office.
The Office examines the Register's copyright claims,
records copyrighted documents, and administers statutory
licenses. It provides expert copyright advice to Congress as
well as various Federal agencies concerning trade agreements,
treaty negotiations, and court proceedings. And the Office
recommends much needed improvements to the copyright system.
Nevertheless, the existing Copyright Office is ill-equipped
financially and structurally to handle certain challenges
presented by technological developments and the growing demands
of the copyright system. Essentially, the Office needs to
modernize and become more user-friendly and efficient.
I thank Ms. Pallante for acknowledging the Office's
limitations in her post-hearing response to my February request
about her views on reorganizing the copyright letter. Her
thorough response included different alternative proposals to
help Congress determine how best to approach restructuring the
Copyright Office. Now I welcome other stakeholders in the
copyright community to submit to us their views and proposals
to help bring the Copyright Office into the 21st century.
The 2-year review has highlighted several other areas where
the copyright community can find common ground and which
Congress should address promptly. A forum to resolve small
claims should be established. Fortunately, the Office has
already submitted a legislative proposal for addressing the
need.
With respect to music licensing, the Office recently issued
a report recommending reforms. For me, that's a very important
area. Pending actions in the courts and by the Department of
Justice will provide additional guidance to Congress as it
considers reforming music licensing. The Fair Play Fair Pay
Act, H.R. 1733, which I support, is one legislative proposal to
address music licensing, the AM/FM royalties for musicians,
which is not paid. The issue of orphan works must also be
addressed. The Copyright Office will soon be issuing a report
which will provide Congress a much needed framework for a
legislative solution. As more copyrighted content continues to
move to the Internet, current criminal enforcement laws must be
updated to deter copyright infringement while encouraging new
technological platforms which utilize the licensing copyright.
These are a few of the copyright-related issues that have
come to our attention over the last 2 years that Congress
should address without delay. For areas which are not ripe and
need more detailed discussion, we should request that the
Copyright Office issue reports and submit legislative proposals
on which we can act in the near term.
And, finally, this review has confirmed that strong
copyright protections are integral to a strong and vibrant
copyright system. I've noted many times during this Committee's
review that we must ensure that the copyright system treats
creators fairly and fosters their continuing creativity.
Whatever changes Congress makes to the Copyright Act must
promote creation among artists and protect their rights. Strong
copyright protections will also foster a marketplace for
content that consumers will enjoy as well as encourage
technological innovation that can be used to watch the content.
I thank the Chair for holding today's hearings.
And I welcome and look forward to hearing from Register
Pallante.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Congressman.
I want to welcome our distinguished witness here today.
And if you would please rise and raise your right hand, I
will swear you in. Do you swear that the testimony you're about
to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth so help you God?
Ms. Pallante. I do.
Mr. Marino. Please let the record reflect the witness has
answered in the affirmative. Please have a seat.
I'm going to begin by introducing the witness today. She
has been to our Committee numerous times. And we look even more
forward today to having her here, the Register of Copyrights,
Ms. Maria Pallante.
And, in her role as Register, Ms. Pallante leads the legal
policy and business activities of the United States Copyright
Office. Prior to being named the 12th Register of Copyrights,
Ms. Pallante served the Copyright Office in a variety of roles,
including Deputy General Counsel, and then as Associate
Register and Director of Policy and International Affairs.
During her career, she also spent several years as
intellectual property counsel and director of licensing for the
worldwide Guggenheim Museums. Register Pallante is a 1990
graduate of the George Washington University Law School and
holds a bachelor's degree in history from Misericordia
University.
Ms. Pallante, welcome back, and we are extremely pleased to
have you here today. Your written statement will be entered
into the record in its entirety. And I ask that you summarize
your testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help you stay within
the time limit, you're used to the lights in front of you. I'm
not going to go through that ordeal.
And would you please begin.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MARIA A. PALLANTE, REGISTER OF
COPYRIGHTS AND DIRECTOR, UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE

Ms. Pallante. Thank you. Good morning. Vice Chairman
Marino, Ranking Member Conyers, and Members of the Judiciary,
it's a great honor to be appear before you again this morning
to discuss the copyright law and copyright administration. I
wish to thank this Committee for its work of the past 2 years.
As I believe you know, the review process represents the most
comprehensive focus on copyright issues in the United States in
over four decades. I also want to thank the Committee's
thoughtful policy and oversight counsel for the important and
very helpful insights they have shared with my office in our
work.
And I want to recognize my own staff for their dedication
and enthusiasm at every turn, both in the complex portfolios
that they carry and the numerous and respectful interactions
that they have on a daily basis with so many stakeholders. The
Committee's review process was designed to sort through the
many competing equities that make up the public interest in the
digital age. Balancing these equities is more challenging than
ever before. But it is tremendously important. In fact,
Congress has amended the Copyright Act multiple times since
1790, each time ensuring that it is strong, flexible, and
consistent with our cherished principles of freedom of
expression. These are the themes that have come through in
abundance this time as well, both from Members of this
Committee and the many talented witnesses, all 98 of them, that
have appeared before the Committee.
Before turning to the issues, I would like to highlight
some of the recent efforts of my office. In the past 4 years,
in support of the Committee's work, we have published seven
policy studies, and we have two forthcoming. With respect to
Copyright Office technology, we completed and published a
proactive report and recommendations on current challenges and
goals, drawing on public inquiries, stakeholder meetings, and
expert research. In the area of copyright administration, we
published a major overhaul of the Compendium of Copyright
Office Practices, the first one since 1988, setting forth new
legal guidance in the area of registering digital authorship.
And, on the subject of document recordation, we released a
major report assessing how the Office records copyright
transactions for the public. This report is the foundation for
transforming the database that we have from a paper-based
process to an innovative and interoperable platform for the
digital economy. In all of this work, we solicited the
participation of the public, including scholars, librarians,
public interest organizations, bar associations, and the
content and technology sectors. I am grateful to these
important communities for participating in our work and for
providing critical legal and practical perspectives.
I have been especially inspired by the stories of authors
across the country, many of whom took time to talk with me
personally, including songwriters, recording artists,
producers, photographers, graphic artists, book authors,
dramatists, and independent filmmakers, all of whom want to be
credited and compensated for their work. As Register, it has
become clear to me that the intelligent and connected world we
live in depends heavily upon the creativity and discipline of
authors.
My staff and I have reviewed all of the witness testimony
of the last 2 years and we've divided our recommendations into
four categories: Eight issues that are ripe for legislative
action if the Committee so chooses; four issues that require
foundational analysis and public study to assist you; a number
of issues that are not as urgent; and overarching matters
related to the Copyright Office itself. These are all further
highlighted in my 32-page written statement. But I will
highlight just a few of them here.
Starting with the first category, if the Committee is
prepared to act, it is in a strong position to develop or
advance legislation now or in the very near feature in these
areas: One, overhauling the music licensing provisions of the
Copyright Act; two, codifying a resale royalty act for visual
art; three, creating a tribunal for small copyright claims;
four, enacting felony streaming provisions; five, updating the
outdated exceptions that libraries, archives, and museums use;
six, creating a framework to use orphan works; seven, updating
the exceptions for persons who are blind or visually impaired;
and, eight, shifting the regulatory presumption in the section
1201 rulemaking.
I will not go into detail about updating library exceptions
or the exceptions for persons who are blind or visually
impaired. But I will sum them up by saying that while some have
opposed amending them because they would prefer to rely upon
fair use, there is virtually no dispute that these sections are
outdated to the point of being obsolete. Many individuals who
need them do not have clear guidance about what they can and
cannot copy, access, adapt, or share without permission. The
provisions do not serve the public interest, and it is our view
that it is untenable to leave them in their current state. We
have studied them extensively, and we will be providing
appropriate revisions to the Committee.
Likewise, it is clear that we have an orphan works problem
and that most people want a framework that removes egregious
damages for good-faith users but also establishes a reasonable
payment mechanism for copyright owners who reappear. The
Copyright Office has studied this issue for 10 years, and we
will be releasing an updated proposal again soon.
Turning to music, we recently released a major study of the
licensing landscape. Our music community is struggling, as the
Committee knows, to apply outdated practices, many of which are
government-mandated. We have proposed a series of balanced
changes to promote more efficient licensing practices, greater
parity among competing platforms, and fair compensation for
creators, including greater latitude for rights holders to
negotiate licenses in the free market. The groundwork has been
laid for a follow-on process under the oversight of this
Committee, and my office remains available to assist you.
With respect to small claims, we also believe the case has
been made. In our 2013 report to the Committee, we noted the
daunting challenges faced by copyright owners seeking to pursue
small copyright claims through the Federal court process. And
we recommended the creation of an alternative but voluntary
tribunal for this purpose. Although modest in economic value,
these claims are not small to the individual creators who are
deprived of income or opportunities when their works are
infringed.
Likewise, we think defendants should be able to raise
appropriate defenses in the small claims context. I hope you
will give serious consideration to our proposal.
And I want to discuss section 1201. This rulemaking is ripe
for congressional attention and, in fact, is already receiving
congressional attention. The anticircumvention provisions have
played an important role in facilitating innovation and
providing consumers with a wide range of content delivery
options. At the same time, it has become obvious that the
regulatory process can be burdensome for some proponents,
especially when trying to renew the exemptions that we granted
previously. We are therefore recommending a legislative change
to provide a presumption in favor of renewal in cases where
there is no opposition.
For other aspects of section 1201, we are recommending a
comprehensive study, including the permanent exemptions for
security, encryption, and privacy research. The rulemaking has
always been a good barometer for public policy concerns. For
example, in the 2010 rulemaking, my predecessor, Register
Peters, observed that Congress did not anticipate the types of
computer security concerns that have arisen since enactment of
the DMCA and suggested that the 3-year exemption process is a
poor substitute for what is needed in this area.
We are also recommending appropriate study of section 512
of the DMCA. These notice and take-down provisions were
innovative in 1998, and they have largely served stakeholders
well. But there are challenges now that warrant a granular
review. Legitimate questions are coming from all quarters.
However, a core question is how individual authors are faring
under a system that requires sending notices of infringement
over and over and over again without relief.
All other policy issues, those ripe for action and those
ripe for study, are discussed at length in my written
statement. However, I want to flag just two that we have
reviewed extensively, the fair use doctrine and the ``making
available'' right. In studying all the relevant scholarship,
legislative history, and jurisprudence, we have concluded, as
have others, that in each case, the best course of action would
be to leave these provisions untouched.
I will end with Copyright Office modernization. We have
greatly appreciated the Committee's deliberations and public
discourse on this topic. We have worked to be transparent about
systemic deficiencies and future expectations. It's an exciting
opportunity to rethink the Copyright Office in the 21st
Century. And at the request of Ranking Member Conyers, I have
elaborated on these issues and my perspectives in a recent
letter. I believe the Office requires more secure legal footing
and greater operational independence in order to carry out its
duties effectively and to reflect the incredible significance
of the copyright system in the digital age. Thank you, Mr. Vice
Chairman for the privilege of testifying.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pallante follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Ms. Pallante.
We will now proceed under the 5-minute rule with questions
for the witness. And I will be begin by recognizing myself for
5 minutes.
And, Ms. Pallante, I think you know where I'm coming from
when I say this: If we could just take exactly what you said
and not have a hearing and do it, we would be fine. But we have
to have a hearing.
Ms. Pallante. I'm all for that.
Mr. Marino. And we will proceed that way.
I first want to thank you for your diligent work in
advising this Committee in our extensive oversight. Your
insight is an invaluable process that helps us get through
this. Your frameworking of the system the way it is and where
it should be is very remarkable. And I've never heard such a
precise, accurate, complete report to Congress done in less
than 10 minutes. So I thank you for that.
As we move forward, wrapping up through this review, it is
clear that several changes must be made to bring the Copyright
Office and copyright law into the 21st century. And I know no
one is going to do it better than you. We have to modernize the
Copyright Office, being chiefly--that's the number one thing
among what has to be done.
But, first, I would like to request that I be able to enter
a statement from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce that outlines
their views on copyright reform, which includes their echo of
support for restructuring the Copyright Office. Do I hear any
objection? Hearing none, then so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Ms. Pallante, the idea for an efficient,
searchable database seems to have a lot of support. Can you
tell us what you believe you and your team would need in terms
of resources, personnel, et cetera, in order to create and
maintain such a database that will get us into the second half
of the 21st century?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Mr. Marino. So I agree that the
Copyright Office database is a key piece of the digital
economy, and we have actually several databases that are not
connected. So one thing we have to do is make sure that the
registration database--that is, when people apply for
registration and receive certificates--is connected to the
recordation database, that reflects later transactions in the
marketplace, including licensing of those works. And then that
database, that chain of commerce needs to reflect metadata and
connect to private sector databases where people can be found
and licenses can happen.
So, in terms of resources, I would say two things: We
should look at the fee schedule that we currently have, and we
should figure out what, if anything, the Committee would like
us to do in terms of charging for capital expenses. Right now,
our statute allows us to charge for cost only, not future cost.
That's something that has come up in our appropriations
hearings. It's an interesting question. Obviously, it would
have to be carefully calibrated to be reasonable. Beyond that,
some degree of taxpayer support I think is important because I
don't think you should put the database and the cost of the
databases on the backs of copyright owners alone. So many user
communities and aggregators also use--the general public uses
the databases. So, that said, I think that the lion's share of
it can be through fees.
Otherwise, I think in terms of technology, we have to have
the ability to focus our own staff on our technological needs
and not have what we need diluted through, perhaps, what the
Library, as a bigger agency, needs. That's been a big problem
for us.
Mr. Marino. My next question, on the issue of depositing
their works for purposes of registration, I'm told there are
limited instances in which a party can simply apply and produce
a copy in digital form. Is this true?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. So it's a vestige of the relationship of
the Copyright Office to the Library. And, in analog days, when
one registered and provided a physical copy, the Library became
the archive for that copy. Today, we don't need preservation-
quality works to register them. We need a data-driven system
where people can register on iPads and other mobile devices. So
that is true.
Mr. Marino. And, in 50 seconds, my last question, can you
describe the system used for parties to register in order to
receive the safe harbor under DMCA?
Ms. Pallante. Are you talking about our database?
Mr. Marino. Yes.
Ms. Pallante. So that has been pending for some time. We
have a rudimentary version of it that has been in place since
1998, when the DMCA was enacted. Three years ago, we did a
rulemaking and provided guidance as to how to update that so
it's more interactive and interoperable. And, because our IT is
managed by the Library of Congress, it is one of many projects
still pending in that office.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. And we've come in under the wire by
15 seconds.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, the
Ranking Member, Congressman Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Marino.
And I want to congratulate you, Ms. Pallante, you took 35
pages and boiled them down to 10 minutes in a very excellent
way.
In your written statement and oral statement, you suggest
that there are policy issues that warrant studies and analysis,
including section 512, section 1201, mass digitization, and
moral rights. I would like the Copyright Office to conduct and
complete reports on those policy issues, and we'll work with
the Chairman on making a formal request. Is that compatible
with all of our discussions and all your writing?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you.
Mr. Conyers. Okay. A strong copyright system requires a
strong Copyright Office, obviously. And there's consensus to
restructure the Copyright Office to bring it into the 21st
century and to strengthen the copyright system. We think it
hasn't been given the appropriate attention considering its
importance. You already provided a response to my February
request for your views on restructuring the Office. And I've
got a couple followup questions.
In your letter, you urge Congress to decide soon on the
organizational structure of the Office. What kind of a
realistic timeline for Congress addressing the restructuring do
you have and why?
Ms. Pallante. That's an excellent question, Mr. Conyers. I
think, ideally, you would do it in this Congress. And my reason
for saying that is because----
Mr. Conyers. As soon as possible.
Ms. Pallante [continuing]. Because we have a situation
where we need to map out the next decade really. And we either
have to do that in the current structure, where, for example,
we're making IT investments for the copyright system through
the Library's central IT governance process, or we're doing it
in a way that's more targeted to the copyright system. That's
not theoretical. We actually have a recordation system that is
paper-based. We've done all of the analysis for that. We're
ready to bring it online, and we need to know whether we're
doing that in our own IT infrastructure and subject to our own
IT needs or through a general agency model. I also think that
some of the policy issues that are interesting to this
Committee--small claims, orphan works--would be greatly
improved if you could structure the agency itself properly.
Mr. Conyers. Very good. I'm going to combine my last two
questions because I know the light is going to flash. The
Copyright Office provides an impartial voice for copyright
policy in Congress and the Administration. How would it
continue to do so under the different approaches you've
suggested as an independent branch? And, finally, how would the
different approaches you suggested in your letter affect your
Office's future funding? And would this impact fees for the
copyright community?
Ms. Pallante. So it's a big question, obviously. We've been
in the same structure for--two big questions--we've been in the
same structure for 118 years. We have been a department of the
Library of Congress, so not a subagency, not an agency. During
that time, we have served the Administration, and we have had a
very close relationship with Congress on copyright policy,
every major revision since we were created in 1897.
Interestingly, although we perform executive branch
functions and serve Congress, our legal status is unclear.
Recently, the Department of Justice, in a music case, in a CRB
case, said that when the Library of Congress is performing
copyright functions, it is clearly in the executive branch.
What we are asking you to do is to codify the structure that we
are all comfortable with and have known for over a century,
which is an independent structure where we are impartially
serving everybody. In that model, the President would appoint
the next Register, the Senate would confirm the position, but
the Congress would decide the term, and the person would be
free to advise Congress as well as the Administration, without
interference, in the way that it always has worked. It doesn't
disrupt the Administration or their IP experts but, in fact,
confirms the coordinating role that now occurs.
In terms of funding, we are two-thirds fee-funded right
now. As I said, we might be able to look at charging for
capital costs. Big copyright owners, large ones, have indicated
they're willing to do that if they get services back that
reflect that investment. But, no doubt, there will be some
capital improvements. What I would suggest is that those
capital improvements are a great investment in the digital
economy, though.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you so much. This is your third time
before us. And each time is as good as it gets. And it gets
better. I welcome your coming before the Committee so much.
And I appreciate your testimony.
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California,
Congressman Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Pallante, it's good to have you here again. I want to
pick up where the Ranking Member left off because I think it's
very important. When you came into office, as you know, I was
extremely pleased. You talked in terms of things that must get
accomplished. But today's hearing brings us a lot of
information about studies in which you want to do more studies.
And you already are a fairly independent agency, in spite of
your lack of certainty in certain areas. How do we get you from
studying to proposing? And how do we get you from proposing to
doing?
Ms. Pallante. Well, we would love to be able to be more
hands-on and help the copyright system function. So that is the
vision that I think----
Mr. Issa. No, I'm talking about in your organization. I'm
not talking about your affecting--because you've been very
good, and your predecessor was, in telling us what we ought to
do in copyright law. And I appreciate that. But I looked to the
Constitution before I came in. And I'm okay with our role.
What is it going to take for you to come from studies to
real, concrete proposals, dollars and cents, ``this is what we
need''? Look, you're the chief executive of an agency. Once the
laws are set--and they are currently set--when you fail to
perform, you have two choices, as a member of your board, so to
speak, you have two choices: Come to us and tell us you don't
have a solution or come to us and tell us you do have a
solution. You've come to us with studies. My question today--
and I'm not trying to be in any way the bad guy here. I support
you. I thought you started well, but now I'm beginning to see,
after 3 years, a pattern of we have these studies and we want
more studies. When are we going to see, beyond your desire to
be an independent agency and have that codified, when are we
going to see solid proposals not on what we do but on what you
can do or what you cannot do?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Mr. Issa. We have proposed
recommendations for technology infrastructure and technology
recommendations that are fairly precise. Those were done with
the full public participation of the copyright community. And
we published that in February. And that was also referenced by
the GAO recently. So I think we have been fairly proactive
about saying what we need. We need our own technology
enterprise architecture, distinct from the Library. We need our
own technology infrastructure, our own technology staff. And we
need to make sure we have targeted IT investments that are not
synergized with the Library mission. So we have been actually
very precise about that.
In terms of fees, we have been very precise that we need an
updated fee allocation so we can begin to charge for capital
costs.
In terms of authority, I am not the chief executive of the
agency. I'm the head of a department which is run by the
Librarian of Congress. So the question, I think, that we are
asking you is: Do you want us to put further investments in
that structure, or do you want to give us the authority legally
to do something different?
Mr. Issa. Okay. Let me read you back your own words because
I think you've given us a lot of what I asked for: One, you
don't have enough money to update the Copyright Office to the
level that the IT system needs; two, you don't have internal
expertise to update the Copyright Office to that level; and,
three, the Librarian is not going to give it to you, nor do
they have it. Is that pretty close?
Ms. Pallante. Almost. What I'm saying is that we don't have
the authority to have our own IT staff or control.
Mr. Issa. I left that part out.
Ms. Pallante. I would love to----
Mr. Issa. I left that part out because if I understand
correctly, you need more money and you need a working IT system
and you lack the expertise in-house and you believe that it
does not exist within the Library system.
Ms. Pallante. It does not. And we do not have the authority
to duplicate it.
Mr. Issa. So the request here today--and I know my time is
expiring, Mr. Chairman--the request I see here today, the solid
proposal that I want to go away from this with is: One, you
need more money; two, you need an IT system that works; and,
three, we have to figure out how we structure your getting that
IT system that works, either, A, making sure the Library has
it, or, B, finding an agency or a structure that would cause
you to do so. Is that correct?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. Except I would say this. That the IT
system being divorced from the head of the Copyright Office has
been a terrible model.
Mr. Issa. No, no, I understand that. I understand that you
are looking at a structural IT system that meets your needs.
Ms. Pallante. Correct.
Mr. Issa. I cannot presume today that we would do anything
except find a way to work it under the current structure,
albeit, independent of the Librarian's needs. So, given that,
that is what you're asking for?
Ms. Pallante. I think that's accurate.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Chairman, I have a hundred more questions.
But that is the best answer that I could possibly hope for on
one of the root problems that we have in having the Copyright
Office meet the 21st century needs. And I thank you for your
indulgence. Thank you.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York,
Congressman Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin by thanking Chairman Goodlatte for
conducting the comprehensive review of copyright law and of the
Copyright Office that we are now concluding. Over the course of
these 20 hearings, we have learned a lot about what is working
and also what needs to be improved. It's now our task to put
this knowledge into action.
Fortunately, the Copyright Office has helped guide us
through these difficult issues. And I appreciate all the
assistance that you, Ms. Pallante, and your staff have provided
us throughout this review process. I particularly appreciate
your call for the United States to join 70 other countries
around the world in providing fair compensation to visual
artists through a resale royalty and your comprehensive report
on music licensing.
Along with my colleagues Marsha Blackburn, John Conyers,
and Ted Deutch, I recently introduced the Fair Play Fair Pay
Act to correct several longstanding injustices that plague
music creators. This legislation would ensure that all artists
are fairly compensated regardless of where their music is
played or when it was recorded and would create a technology-
neutral system whereby Internet radio is on an equal footing
with AM/FM, cable, and satellite services.
Ms. Pallante, you mentioned in your testimony that music
licensing issues are ripe for action. Do you believe that
Congress should move forward with legislation, such as the Fair
Play Fair Pay Act, to enact the full public performance right?
If so, why do you believe this is an urgent matter that
Congress should address?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. I think that the Fair
Play Fair Pay Act is an excellent legislative framework. It
reflects a lot of the findings of our study. On the public
performance right for terrestrial radio, in particular, which I
understand to be the focus of your question, I'll say this,
it's indefensible as a matter of law and, frankly, embarrassing
as a matter of policy that the United States does not pay
public performance--for the public performance of terrestrial
radio to the creators of the music. We are out of step with the
entire rest of the world.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I think it's very well put, very
eloquently put.
Similarly, do you believe it's important for Congress to
take action now to enact platform parity, where all radio
services play by the same rules? If so, why?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. That was one of the major conclusions of
our study. I think it was a conclusion that everybody knew was
a long time coming. We have been regulating the music industry
for a century. We, therefore, have all these disparate rates
and grandfathered clauses that are really, really difficult to
apply, do not serve the digital economy, do not serve new
entrants to the digital marketplace, definitely do not serve
creators. And beginning to look at parity across platforms is a
crucial first step.
Mr. Nadler. It's a first step toward?
Ms. Pallante. Toward a balanced music bill that reflects
the 21st century.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Switching topics, do you think that the time is ripe for
legislation on the issue of resale royalties for visual
artists? In your testimony, you mentioned that several of the
recommendations in your past reports have been included in the
bill I introduced this Congress, the American Royalties Too Act
of 2015. Can you explain why this bill would be a good
foundation, in your opinion, if the Committee were prepared to
act?
Ms. Pallante. I think it's an excellent foundation. And we
really enjoyed doing that study because we, again, are out of
step with about 70 countries around the world in the way that
we treat visual artists. They operate differently under the
Copyright Act from others in that their works are unique. And
the value of their works is tied to the uniqueness, not the
proliferation of copies, as in a book or a film where you're
pricing it according to those copies. So we would really like
to see visual artists generally fare better under the Copyright
Act because their contributions are critical to our heritage
and to the digital economy. We just recently issued a Federal
Register notice asking for even more information about how
photographers, graphic artists, and illustrators are faring
under the Copyright Act as a follow-on process to your request
for that study.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Going back to music, online music
service providers today struggle to obtain accurate and
comprehensive ownership information about the music on their
services. Often such information is incomplete, not up to date,
simply unavailable, or not in a format that is universally
useable. The lack of ownership information prevents artists and
composers from being paid in a timely manner. It also
disincentivizes new service providers from entering the digital
music space because of the threat of statutory damages for
failure to appropriately license or pay creators and other
copyright holders when they don't know who they are. What
reforms do you think might be appropriate to remedy this
situation?
Ms. Pallante. Yes, so, again, another major focus of our
public process was data. Data is everything to the digital
music marketplace. In some instances, there is data. And, in
some instances, there is a lack of coordination of data. In
other words, sometimes there's data missing. Sometimes it's the
coordination of existing data that's the problem. So we
proposed a central authoritative public database. We
recommended that it be operated by a nonprofit entity that is
government mandated, along the lines of SoundExchange.
Licensees could pay royalties for the unidentified works into
that entity, and that would solve their exposure to liability.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Let me just thank you for your
testimony and for your work.
And I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte [presiding]. Thank you, Register Pallante.
I'm going to go ahead and give my statement since I'm late
getting here, and then I'll go straight into my question, but a
brief statement.
Two years ago, this Committee began the first comprehensive
review of our Nation's copyright laws since the 1960's. During
these 2 years, we have had a total of 20 hearings with 100
witnesses, had hearings that covered broader topics, such as
the role of technology and copyright in our economy, to more
specific topics, such as the scope of copyright protection and
fair use.
Our first witness was the Register of Copyrights, Ms.
Pallante. She returns this morning and has given her
perspective on what the Committee has learned over the past 2
years and to update us on the in-depth studies that the
Copyright Office has completed during this time. The Committee
recognizes the strong, in-depth analysis routinely conducted by
the Copyright Office. The Committee has always expected the
advice of the Register being provided to Congress on copyright
policy issues and the role of the Copyright Office itself to
come from her independent perspective without filtering or
direction from others. The Committee welcomes her
forthrightness about the challenges her office faces, as well
as what options Congress should consider in order to meet her
legal requirements and the needs of the copyright community.
As the copyright review hearing process proceeded, each
witness was essentially limited to speaking on the topic of
that particular hearing. However, there are a few participants
in the copyright system that care about only one copyright
issue. Over the next several months, the Committee will be
reaching out to all stakeholders to invite them to share their
views on the copyright issues we have examined over the course
of our review so far as well as any others. Even since we began
our review, there have been several new Copyright Office
studies, new technologies, court decisions, and even changes in
business models. So we look forward to hearing from
stakeholders on all of these important issues. During this
process, we also encourage all participants in the copyright
system to continue their dialogues with each other. Progress in
copyright policy requires all parties to work together.
Although it is certainly easier to discuss copyright policy
with a traditional ally, copyright policy will not advance
unless the lines of communication are open among all
participants.
Finally, I'm going to my questions.
You recently released a comprehensive music study,
recommending a series of changes to the music licensing system
to improve it. Is improving the existing music licensing system
preferable to shifting it to a free-market system with robust
antimonopoly controls so that market forces determine prices
rather than the government?
Ms. Pallante. The goal is most definitely ultimately the
free market. I would completely agree with you on that. What we
did was take a century-old regulatory process and try to move
it in that direction incrementally but also progressively. So
if you want to completely dismantle all regulation, many people
would be very supportive of that. I think our concern would be
the timetable for doing that and how small actors would fare
without the regulatory protections that have served them and
consumers fairly well.
Mr. Goodlatte. Smaller copyright owners and users have
indicated that they struggle with a complex copyright law that
is difficult to navigate. Is overall clarification of the
existing statute just as important as updating the statute
itself?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. There is no question that copyright law
touches everybody, everybody in a modern culture, in a modern
nation, in modern global world. And it's unlike other laws in
that respect. It affects everybody. So that is something that
our Office would presumably be able to help the Congress with
by taking on more of the education and guidance role.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Committee has heard numerous and
sometimes conflicting comments about copyright remedies that
range from a not very functional system to extreme financial
penalties divorced from actual harm. Does this wide range of
comments simply reflect different opinions? Or can everyone's
comments all be accurate, indicating that we have a remedy
system that is not focused properly?
Ms. Pallante. Everybody is right. I think our remedies are
critical to the functioning of the Copyright Act. You can't
have exclusive right, a system based on exclusive rights
without meaningful remedies. They would be hollow without
remedies. Can we provide more guidance to courts? Possibly. Can
we make licensing work better so that we're not in litigation
and so that remedies play a more productive role rather than a
hammer? Yes. But whether it's actual damages, injunctions, or
statutory damages, they have been with the Copyright Act since
1790 in some instances. So it's very, very, I would be very,
very careful about amending that quickly.
Mr. Goodlatte. This Committee traveled to New York City for
a field hearing on first-sale issues. There are clear
differences between analog and digital items. But how should
the law treat mixed goods?
Ms. Pallante. This is a great instance of our Copyright Act
intersecting with what our consumers want. And we do live in a
global marketplace. People do want to obtain the best prices
and the best goods. There is a lot to be said for that model.
And I think our stakeholders who are copyright owners are
adapting to that. So I would probably monitor that situation at
this point. I don't see a need for congressional legislation,
anyway, at this point.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. Those are my questions. We are
going to have to stand in recess for the speech by the Japanese
Prime Minister.
However, we do have time to take one more.
And so the Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Lofgren, for her questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate this hearing. And I just wanted to make a
quick statement. In your testimony, there's some things I agree
with. There's some things that are reminiscent of SOPA. And I
just want to state for the Netroots that, to the extent that
there are SOPA-like elements, I'm still against them.
I want to talk about the IT system. I agree that the IT
system needs to be updated. But I want to talk about the whole
idea of having taxpayer money allocated to this function. I
realize from your testimony the constraint really has been
created by us because of the forward funding. But the USPTO
budget is $3.2 billion, and it's 100 percent fees. And it just
seems to me that that ought to be the model here. Your budget
is much smaller. But there is no reason why the taxpayers
should be funding this any more than the taxpayers should be
funding the Patent and Trademark Office. I just think that it's
possible to do. We have very successful industries in the
content area. And I just am eager to work with you to explore
that further.
I also want to talk on section 1201. And I was looking up
and down the dais here, realizing there's only a few of us left
who were actually here when the DMCA was adopted. And 1201
caused me a lot of heartburn at the time. And it still does.
And so here is one of the questions I have--and I had then--
which is, do you believe that fair use is a defense to
circumvention under 1201?
Ms. Pallante. I do not believe that the way you enacted the
statute, that chapter 12 is subject to section 107. It is not
part of the core Copyright Act. So, no, not legally.
Ms. Lofgren. I agree with you. And it's a major problem.
Because without a fair use exception, the digital locks could
be used to eliminate a fair use or an otherwise authorized use.
Digital locks could be used to perpetuate only monopolistic
practices, not content at all. And so I'm hopeful that as you
are thinking about 1201, that we think, not just about the
exceptions--and I think your idea about forwarding the
approval--of prior approval, but as the exemptions have
proliferated, I think it tells us something about the
underlying defect in the statute.
Now, sometimes when you say this, people assume, well,
you're for infringement. I'm not actually for infringement. But
I am for eliminating monopolistic practices that hide behind
copyright. And I am for not using copyright to cripple
technology innovation that has nothing to do with protecting
copyright. And I'm also for making sure that the fair use
exception is not destroyed through misuse of technology.
Now, I was interested in your cybersecurity exception issue
and the need to expand it. In your mind, what would a
cybersecurity exception look like? What would it encompass?
Ms. Pallante. I would really want to talk to experts in
that area before commenting on that.
What I can say with confidence is that having cybersecurity
research needs subject to a 3-year exemption process under the
DMCA conducted by the Copyright Office and the Library is
probably not the best way to go for the Nation.
Ms. Lofgren. I very much agree. I recently met with some
researchers, academically based, and I think they had probably
been over to the Copyright Office as well. And they are good
guys. They are exploring cybersecurity issues. And to do so,
they have to actually do some breaking. And we want them to
because we want to find out what the holes are. But they're
very concerned. They're a law-abiding group. They don't want to
be behind a law violation. Have you set up a group that would
help you to think about this exception?
Ms. Pallante. Nobody has asked us to look at the exception,
but we would like to do that. And it would be an interesting
group because it would be very much in need of technical
experts and security experts and people who are really looking
out for the security interests of the United States.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I see my time is about to expire. And the Committee needs
to get over to the floor to listen to the Japanese Prime
Minister.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentlewoman.
And the Committee will stand in recess until noon. And we
thank Ms. Pallante for her patience.
[Recess.]
Mr. Goodlatte. The Committee will reconvene.
When the Committee recessed, Members were asking questions
of our star witness, and we'll resume by recognizing the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First I'd like to enter into the record statements from the
Copyright Alliance and Creative Future
B1 deg. on their
support for a strong copyright system. I'd also like to enter a
statement from Sound Exchange
B2 deg. into the record.
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, they will be made a part
of the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you for holding this important hearing
today. After speaking with so many diverse stakeholders from
the Los Angeles region and throughout the country, it's clear
to me that we have to bring the Copyright Office into the
modern age. We need a Copyright Office that serves the needs of
owners, users, and the American public. And that includes
giving the Office independence and sound legal ground to
perform its core mission to administer the Copyright Act and
resources to invest in a workable IT infrastructure that makes
sense for a creative future. I look forward to working with
you, my colleagues, on the Committee, the Register, and the
impacted stakeholders to produce a viable solution.
Register Pallante, you and your team have done such a great
job despite the challenges you faced from limited resources,
staffing issues, to outdated technologies. It seems to me that
you're faced with the challenge of running an analog office in
a 21st century world. In addition to this, you're limited in
your decisionmaking, given how the Office is currently
structured under the Library of Congress.
When Professor Brauneis last testified in the Committee, he
urged Congress to give serious thought to the vehicle of an
independent agency.
What are your thoughts to creating an independent agency
instead of placing the Copyright Office within the Department
of Commerce or the Patent and Trademark Office?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Dr. Chu, for the questions, and
thank you for recognizing my staff as well. I don't know how
I'm so lucky to have the staff that I do.
I think that those questions go right to the heart of what
copyright is about. So if the Office is in the Commerce
Department, it clarifies a few things. It clarifies what the
Department of Justice has said is the case, which is namely
that we are by and large an executive branch agency when we are
performing copyright functions. And since all we do in my shop
in the Library is copyright functions, it's clear that we are
the part of the Library that is engaged in executive branch
functions.
So the question becomes, does it matter? And what does that
mean for the Library, and what would one lose if we were in the
Commerce Department?
I think the principal thing that you lose as the Congress
is the unfettered and impartial advice of the Copyright Office,
which you have had since 1897. I think this Congress and all
Congresses before it have been very hands-on in copyright
policy. The House in particular has led the way in discussions
about what a balanced Copyright Act should look like from the
very beginning. And I personally would be heartbroken to see
that part of our job compromised, diluted, or even eliminated
by putting us only in the executive branch.
That led us to the conclusion that an independent model
would really honor what we have always been, and that means
that we have served Congress impartially, and we have also,
though, supported the Administration. In treaties, in trade, we
work with the Department of Justice very carefully because we
administer the law. And we didn't want to disrupt what's
already the case in the Administration, meaning that the
Congress has provided that the Register has a statutory
relationship with the Under Secretary, who heads the Patent and
Trademark Office, and a statutory relationship with the IPEC,
that is in the Executive Office of the President. The only
issue is that the Register is not at the same level and runs
the copyright system and the Copyright Office. So, in looking
at potential conflicts with the Library, because the Library
has a library mission and a library view of copyright law, in
the future and looking at the kinds of resources and focused
technology and staffing that we need, it led us to believe that
separating it out but honoring the tradition as leanly as
possible was the right answer.
Ms. Chu. Thank you for that.
I'd also like to ask a question about the small claims
process that could be an alternative to Federal court. I hear
from so many small business owners, and the general consensus
is that going to Federal court is very, very costly. And that
is why I believe we must establish a small claims court for
creators that need it the most.
Can you discuss how a system could be established and how
it will function alongside the Federal court system?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. Thank you.
So this Committee requested a report from us, and we did a
very public study for over 2 years about what a small claims
process could look like. The overwhelming response of the
creative community is that they are priced out of Federal
court, even where statutory damages are available. And, without
meaningful enforcement or resolution of contractual issues in
cases, not necessarily full-blown major precedent-setting
litigation, but just trying to resolve gridlock and claims,
they need something else. And the small claims process that we
developed constitutionally would have to be voluntary. Both
parties would have to agree to it. We think both parties would
in the circumstances that we've laid out. It would be capped at
$30,000. That's certainly up to the Committee to change or
amend or further deliberate on. We thought that number came out
of our process. And we think it's critical because we don't
want a Copyright Act in the 21st century that provides
exclusive rights and no way to effectively enforce them,
license them, protect them, and monetize them.
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Trott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Trott. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to thank our witness this morning, Ms. Pallante.
I've been looking forward to your testimony. I'm new here in
Congress, but everyone I've spoken with has commented to me on
how insightful, helpful, and pragmatic some of your suggestions
and insight has been for this Committee, and one of the few
people that I've heard about since being here that everyone
says great things about, and it doesn't happen too often in
this town.
Ms. Pallante. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Mr. Trott. So thank you for being here.
I agree with your earlier comments about how you envision
reorganizing the Copyright Office and the independence and the
autonomy you need.
At a high level, what additional costs--you know, how much
do you think it would cost to do it. Particularly how much in
technology needs to be invested, and what's the cost there? Do
you envision the new Office, as reorganized, would be giving
guidance on issues that come up, and would you also envision
new positions like a chief technology officer? At a high level,
you know, what's it look like, and how long would it take to
accomplish?
Ms. Pallante. Thank you. Thank you for your kind words
about the Office.
I think you have a big opportunity here to be innovative
and create something that you haven't really had before in the
Federal Government. So small, nimble, innovative, forward-
thinking, flexible agency. Independent, in so that it can serve
the Congress as well as the Administration, protecting the
impartial role that we've always had. To do that, I have said
that we need to have a staff that is probably more and more
data- and tech-driven. Right now I have created a CIO position.
I did that last year and hired a deputy as well to begin to do
more planning and take more direct responsibility.
What I think you need to know is that when the GAO came in
and audited the Library's IT and they found severe
deficiencies--it's a public report--that was not unknown to us.
A lot of people knew about it. But, unfortunately, I think in
making the 39 recommendations to the Library that they made,
they also said you shouldn't have multiple CIOs in one agency.
You shouldn't have multiple tech staff in one agency. And,
although they didn't say it that precisely, it's very clear
from reading the report that that's their recommendation.
What I said is: It hasn't worked. We've been in the
Library's IT system for quite some time. We are not a primary
customer. The Library's mission is their first and foremost
mission, and I think it should be. But it makes it impossible
for me to move forward if the steps I've taken to develop a
small IT staff with hopes of building out a better one--and the
IT staff includes data people, which are really business
people. So what kind of metadata are they using in the music
community? And these are our customers. It's hard for me to
build that out if we're getting the opposite suggestion from
auditors.
And, to be fair to the Library, they're in a difficult
position because they're being told from me that's not going to
work and from the auditors that that's what they should do. So
that's why I asked this Committee to please weigh in on it.
Mr. Trott. And the timing, how long do you think once we
have plan in place and you get some direction and the budget if
you had to----
Ms. Pallante. It's a great question. I've thought about
this a lot and I've talked to the stakeholders about this. I
hope this isn't too simplistic. I would hope the Committee
would do what it thinks is right for the copyright system by
elevating it appropriately to reflect the significance of the
system so that it's no longer just a department in the Library.
And then I would suggest that you have an effective date
that allows you a transition plan to figure out what part of
the budget should come from fees, what the 3- to 5-year costs
are, what the long-term costs are. And I think it's an exciting
situation because I think in a modern government you should
expect a lean, small agency to borrow and purchase services
from across the government. Like, the Office doesn't need to
have its own HR department. It doesn't necessarily need to
create data standards from thin air. So I think it could go
actually fairly innovatively because our customers are in that
space now.
Mr. Trott. Great. Well, thank you. I agree with everything
you said, and the only disappointment is, with all those tech
savvy people, you're going to need you probably don't need
someone like me that has Betamax and tape cassettes still.
So, you know, one of the things that I've--since I've been
here there have been a number of groups have come and talked to
me about the performance rights issue. And there was an earlier
question, and I can't discern necessarily whether you think the
fair play legislation that's been introduced is going to solve
that problem, but, you know, how should I approach that?
Because you have the strain necessarily between the
broadcasters and then, you know, the artist who, you know,
believe in a willing seller/willing buyer concept.
How should that be looked at by Members, in your opinion?
Ms. Pallante. Well, almost always our Office finds the
right balance in these discussions because almost always
everybody has a legitimate point of view. I have to say, our
Office has been looking at the public performance right for
over 20 years, and it is an example of an issue where we are
just on the wrong side. We are out of step with virtually every
industrial country in the world, and it is, as I said earlier
to Mr. Nadler, it's just frankly indefensible as a matter of
policy that we are not paying creators when their songs are
played on radio. They're subsidizing the profits of
broadcasters in that particular issue. There are plenty of
issues where broadcasters have legitimate rights and they
should be looked at, but that is not one I agree with them on.
Mr. Trott. Great. Thank you for being here today.
I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, first I'd like to join the chorus of voices
heaping praise on Ms. Pallante and her office. Thank you for
your leadership, your thoughtful, very thoughtful, analysis of
these issues and the tireless efforts that you and your staff
put in in really strengthening the intellectual property of our
country. We appreciate it.
I want to follow up on this issue of independence, and the
understanding that I have that a lot of us I think have come to
conclude, certainly from today, that the Register would be in a
better position--significantly better position if it gained
more independence through Copyright Office modernization, which
I think is one thing where there's broad agreement and I hope
that we move forward on.
But following up on this issue, when you were here with us
last, you somewhat reluctantly discussed the challenges created
by the fact that the Copyright Office is forced to rely on
technical infrastructure at the Library of Congress, including
its network servers, telecommunications and security
operations, in spite of the vastly different mandates that the
Library and the Copyright Office have. And you touched on that
a bit here today.
It seems to me like your inclusion under the umbrella of
the Library of Congress, however well intentioned, is hampering
the work that you do beyond simple technical challenges. It's
not just about the technical issues. And I'm sure that--and I
acknowledge that your response has been somewhat limited here
today, but I will simply say on your behalf, if I may, that
it's hard to see how the Copyright Office can rise to the many
challenges of the 21st century work that you do without
dramatically more independence and dramatically more
flexibility. I would just make that point.
I also wanted to follow up on Mr. Trott's last point. One
of the primary recommendations of your recent music licensing
study is that Congress should adopt a uniform market-based rate
setting a standard for all government rates, and I agree with
that. And when the Music First Coalition showed me this graphic
that we're about to hold up that depicts the current system for
the various forms of radio, it solidified for me how
unnecessarily complex and, in fact, as you've just pointed out,
how unfair the current system is. You spoke about the--I mean,
your words, that it's indefensible that we don't pay creators
when songs are played on the radio. I wholeheartedly agree with
that.
Do you agree that all forms of radio should be governed by
the same fair-market-value rate standard?
Ms. Pallante. I do. And I think what we're suggesting in
our report is that we move toward the free market and we not
subsidize or grandfather in oddities that are a reflection of a
century-old system that's been cobbled together.
Mr. Deutch. Great. And, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to submit
for the record a considerably smaller version of this graphic
that I presented.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Collins [presiding]. Oh, without objection, but the
bigger version will be fine as well.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
And, Ms. Pallante, when you appeared before the Committee
in March of 2013, you and I had an exchange about how to keep
the copyright review effort timely and relevant, and you said
at the time that although we love the trade associations that
visit us on a daily basis----
Ms. Pallante. We do.
Mr. Deutch [continuing]. As we all do, getting around them,
as you said then, sometimes in getting to other kinds of
creators would really by instructional. So, you said, I would
also probably recommend that if we were to have roundtables,
that we get of Washington a little bit, go somewhere where
people make from a living from writing songs at their kitchen
table.
I wonder if you've had an opportunity to follow through on
that and meet with real working creators outside of Washington.
Ms. Pallante. Yes, in fact, and I remember that exchange.
In fact, that's been the most inspiring part of the work for me
for the last 2 years. I have met with recording artists across
the country in multiple cities, and to the Recording Academy's
credit, they did not filter or script those meetings. I think
there was some squirming at times, but it was a very inspiring
set of meetings because I was really hearing from creators
about why they make the livings they make, why they care about
culture, why they care about creativity; how incredibly
disciplined they are and trained in their various disciplines;
and how they really just want to make sure that they are
credited and compensated fairly.
Mr. Deutch. And, ultimately, as we go about our work here,
it is that commitment to their craft, the discipline that they
exercise, that not only wants them to be compensated, but I
think requires us to fairly compensate them, ensure that they
are fairly compensated for the work that they do.
Ms. Pallante. I agree with you.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Miss, Pallante. I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Gentleman yields back.
And now, at this time, the Chair recognizes himself for his
questions. And before I start I want to ask unanimous consent
to--and put into the record Intellectual Property Guidelines
for the 114th Congress. It's an open letter.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Collins. Ms. Pallante, you're back, and it's good to
have you here.
Ms. Pallante. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Your staff and you, we have probably developed
a very good relationship I feel like, and it's because I think
of your frankness. I think it's because of your staff's
willingness to be open about where you are in the situations
that you're facing. I think also, just as a little bit for
those who've been here for the hearing as well, I think the
good part about it it is time for us to act. It is time for
Congress to act. You have gave ideas and you have laid it out
fairly well, and I do appreciate that. And we're going to talk
about a little bit of that today in my time of questioning.
But one of things I want to go back to, it's been mentioned
a lot, is the copyright in the music marketplace that we have
spoke of before. Those guiding principles, as you know, and
most everybody in this world and hopefully in this room know
that I introduced the Songwriter Equity Act, along with my
friend from New York as well, to make modest fundamental
changes to section 114 and 115 of the Copyright Act, and I
believe it comports with the principles of fair compensation
that you talk about.
Do you agree that the Songwriter Equity Act is ripe for
congressional consideration and passage?
Ms. Pallante. I do. It's a great framework. It reflects
everything we said in our report on those issues. What we
provided you with is a bigger ecosystem with more issues. We
gave you all the music issues in one bundle.
Mr. Collins. Yes, you did.
Ms. Pallante. We thought that would be more fun for you. We
obviously defer to you. If you want to pull out some issues
that are more ripe than others.
Mr. Collins. Well, and can I just--because we've had this
conversation. And I think sometimes that getting this whole
thing--we've looked at this sort of ball of copyright, and I
think one of the things is what is putt read out there? Where
are we going with this so that the community, not just music,
but publishers, everything--and writers all look at this. And
so I am anxious to sort of see where we're going, and I
appreciate your comments on that.
If we don't act, do you see a down side in the marketplace
on these issues, especially from the songwriter and creator
standpoint?
Ms. Pallante. I'm sorry. One more time.
Mr. Collins. If we don't act, if Congress doesn't act, we
continue to sort of move--do you--what kind of downside do you
see from your position.
Ms. Pallante. Oh, we are already torturing our music
community, right, on music issues. So I don't know if your
question's broader than music, but in that space alone----
Mr. Collins. It is.
Ms. Pallante. So, in general, the fundamental principles of
the Copyright Act are strong. We have a duty to protect
exclusive rights, provide flexible exceptions, but limited, and
to provide meaningful enforcement. So many of the provisions
that we have now are from the analog world or older, from the
turn of the century. And we're trying to reinforce the
incredible creative output of the United States. And to do
that, we owe all creators, all investors in the marketplace and
the public a strong Copyright Act.
Mr. Collins. Okay. One of the things--and you've always
been very blunt, and I appreciate that. And for anyone who
would take your bluntness to be anything else, consider it--you
know, I would just say to them, this Congress, and especially
this Congressman, would take to grass the exception if anyone
was to say anything about that. So I'm going to ask direct
questions; we've talked about this. On administering, because,
in your report, it's very broad, especially for music, and
we're not even touched the other parts, and I believe that
leads to something that I said in one of these hearings
earlier, that I'm very concerned your department would have a
trouble handling that given the current structure.
So if the Copyright Office was not located in the Library
of Congress, you know, and did not act as a subdepartment under
the authority of the Librarian of Congress, could you more
effectively administer and sustain our national copyright
system?
Ms. Pallante. There's no question.
Mr. Collins. And, again, I don't think that's a fault of
anyone. I think it's the development of the process. But you do
report to the Librarian of Congress. Correct?
Ms. Pallante. Absolutely. My whole staff does.
Mr. Collins. And really from a constitutional perspective,
does that not at times lead to a conflict, inherent?
Ms. Pallante. Yeah. It's a very interesting constitutional
question. So, legally, there are potentials for conflict all
the time. The Library has a library mission. The Librarian's
being asked to oversee two very different missions at the same
time. There's an accountability question. The Librarian is
appointed by the President and, therefore, can appoint inferior
officers like the Register. That's the legal accountability.
But the practical accountability is that Librarians serve
multiple Presidents generally, and so the accountability as a
practical matter is less clear. After the--there was a case
where the Department of Justice basically said you are in the
executive branch, not the legislative branch, which opens the
door for us not to be able to serve Congress the way we have in
the past. So that's why we're asking for a secure legal
footing.
Mr. Collins. Well, and I think that is something that we
will have because I am concerned about sometimes basically you
getting contradictory directives from the Librarian's mission,
and no offense to them. I think they have that perfect mission
to do. They need to encourage--but when we talk about IT, we
talk about all these other things, you are in a different
situation. I want you to continue, you and your staff, to keep
that fight going because you do have Members who are intensely
interested in what's going on there because I believe it is the
very underpinning of our foundation for the next generation of
economic development and also the creators that have been
around forever. So I do appreciate that.
With that, my time has expired, and I recognize the
gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you for your presence here
today, and I know that Members have been going in and out
because we've been detained in other meetings, and in fact
there is one overlapping now. But I think it's very important
to, one, emphasize how important copyright and intellectual
property is to this Committee, to this Congress, and to the
Nation, and I might say that you are particularly important
today because the prime minister of Japan in his speech just
finished and indicated his commitment to protecting
intellectual property, of which I think he received a standing
ovation. So you might want to use that quote or comment on how
important it is to do that.
Let me go to the whole question of finance and staffing. In
your testimony, you mentioned that the Copyright Office has one
of the smallest staffs within the government generally, and so
I would be interested in how that's impacting on your work, and
as we're going forward, have you looked at--I know you looked
at the President's budget, but we're getting ready to go
forward. We are absolutely opposed to sequester. We think it
has had a dastardly impact. But I'd like to know presently what
your situation is with your copyright staffing.
Ms. Pallante. Thank you, Congresswoman Jackson Lee.
I think we should be lean and innovative, and I think when
we add staff, they should be the kind of staff that can take us
into the 21st century. That said, we've lost over 100 people
since 2007, and we only--you know, we have under 400 FTEs
filled now. That's just way too small to do the kind of complex
work that we do, and it's much smaller than the staff that
previous Copyright Offices had when they were doing less
complex things. So, while I think we should stay small, I think
we are cut to the bone at the moment.
One thing that has been rather frustrating for me is that
in my conversations with the community, the tech sector, and
the content industry, it became clear that we should have more
hands-on technology expertise. So I took the step of hiring the
first Copyright Office CIO, chief technologist, and filled that
position last year, and then hired a deputy as well for the
purpose of figuring out what our infrastructure should be, what
our databases should look like, what our enterprise
architecture should be, and then to build out the kind of staff
that we need slowly, but using our budget allocations.
What was frustrating for me is that because best practices
in the Federal Government generally avoid duplication, when the
Government Accountability Office audited the Library and made
its 39 recommendations about how to fix that very severely
deficient system, one of the things they said was that there
shouldn't be multiple CIOs. There shouldn't be duplications of
staff. So I am really caught in a bind on this, and I really am
asking the Committee to help because I frankly think it's
ludicrous that the Copyright Office wouldn't have data experts
and IT staff.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I'm going to follow up on that line of
questioning.
Let me just quickly ask this question about modernizing the
Office with the structure of greater legal and operational
independence. And what should Congress consider in that new
structure?
And let me get in another question as well because I think
this goes to how you do your job. And I like the word ``lean
but effective.'' I like to say that. Lean and ineffective or
with the shades down and the doors locked are not helpful to
creating the economic engine that you want to create. So the
other question I would have, I'm wearing my Homeland Security
hat, we just passed two cybersecurity initiatives last week,
when I chaired the Transportation and Security and
Infrastructure Committee, we recognize, and I know that
number's gone up, 85 percent of the cyber ownership is in the
private sector, but the private sector submits through the
copyrighting process their data.
So the question I'd ask is the question about legal and
operational independence, but also how important it is to have
a tech-savvy office----
Ms. Pallante. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. That puts for you, the
government, an infrastructure to protect the intellectual
property that you are now the custodian of or the requests that
come in, the applications that come in. If you would include
that in your coming together of your answer and the kind of
investment and planning you think we need for a tech-savvy
office that is 21st century.
Ms. Pallante. Thank you so much for the question. That is
exactly the crossroads that we find ourselves at. How do we
build out the tech-savvy office that actually not just serves
the digital economy but interacts with it in a way that
facilitates it? So when people are submitting to us for
registration digital works, they want them to be secure. They
want them to be effective for registration purposes. And they
want the technology to accept the data that they're sending us
and the files, not to not recognize it because we're using
antiquated technology. I don't think that's too much to ask
when people are seeking legal protection and, hence, remedies.
They then want the chain of commerce to reflect the entire
copyright transaction. So people register with us, and then
later they might license their works. And then we record those
licenses, and the metadata should be the same global
identifying information that is used in the private sector.
That is exactly the vision that you should expect for the 21st
century Copyright Office.
And as to cost, we, as I said, are two-thirds fee-funded
now, but that is because we are also intertwined in the
Library's IT. That could be viewed as a subsidy. My argument
would be that that is not a subsidy that is working for the
copyright community. And so, as we look at the proper ratio of
taxpayer investment and fees, we should go back to what you
just said and think about what it takes to invest in the
economic engine that is the Copyright Act for this country.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And do you think the operational and legal
independence would help you as well as you look forward just
restructuring or structuring the Office?
Ms. Pallante. Yeah. I think it's essential because if you
don't have that directive, you have an agency that is being
required to find synergies even though the missions are
different and to use IT investments for multiple competing
purposes. And even in the system we have now where people are
paying us for services, nonetheless the money needs to be
allocated in this kind of central IT environment, and it hasn't
worked, and I hope that the Library makes all the improvements
it needs to make for the national Library, but I don't think
it's fair or logical to ask the Copyright Office to wait until
that happens and then to expect that it will work.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, and I thank you. I saw the
Chairman with the gavel up. I'd ask unanimous consent for an
additional minute just to pose a follow up on the questions
that I just gave her.
Mr. Collins. At this point, we have a hard meeting coming
up at 1 o'clock they're going to have to clear the room for. So
at this point----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thirty seconds then?
Mr. Collins. How about 15?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay. But she'll have to ask her question.
We know that Korea and Singapore have strong copyright
protections. Should we have that in the TPP?
Ms. Pallante. Strong copyright protections in the TPP?
Should we have strong copyright protections in the TPP?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. We know Korea and Singapore have----
Ms. Pallante. We should most certainly have strong
copyright protections as negotiating goals of the TPP.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And the Congress--you're asking us on some
of the items that you've just said to help you with the tech
and the funding, staffing, and the operational control.
Ms. Pallante. Yes. You are our oversight Committee. We need
you to direct us.
Mr. Collins. And the gentlelady----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Had a wonderful Georgia 15
seconds.
With that, the gentleman from New York is now recognized.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank the Chairman, and I thank the Register
for your testimony here today----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back.
Mr. Jeffries [continuing]. And your----
Mr. Collins. Thank you. Since the time is expired, that's
wonderful.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you for your testimony here today, and
for your thoughtfulness on a whole host of these issues.
Let me just begin by just trying to get a deeper
understanding of your perspective as it relates to the need for
independence.
I think the three things that have been under consideration
in terms of a different model from the current one, would, one,
obviously, involve a Presidential appointment but the Office
remaining within the Library of Congress; two, taking the
Office out of the Library of Congress and placing it perhaps
within another department, most often discussed is the
Department of Commerce; and then, three, creating an
independent agency.
It's my understanding, of course, that you strongly support
the third option, an independent agency. Is that correct?
Ms. Pallante. That's correct.
Mr. Jeffries. And so that would involve both a Presidential
appointment----
Ms. Pallante. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries [continuing]. Of the director. Correct?
Ms. Pallante. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And, presently, you're appointed by the
Librarian of Congress. Is there a fixed term to that
appointment, or do you serve at the pleasure of the Librarian?
Ms. Pallante. Serve at the pleasure of the Librarian. The
Librarian has the power to appoint and remove the Register and
the entire Copyright Office staff, actually.
Mr. Jeffries. Now, in the context of an independent agency,
would you suggest, or is it your view, have you given any
thought to whether a fixed term would be appropriate connected
to the Presidential appointment to establish and embed the
independence of the agency?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. So that's a great granular question. My
understanding is that in order to make it an independent
agency, which is a way of saying that you are preserving the
role that the agency would play with Congress, because if the
agency is in the executive branch fully, completely, it will be
subject to the normal clearances of executive branch agencies
when it speaks to Congress. So, in order to preserve that 118-
year tradition, the President would appoint the Register or the
director, the Senate would confirm the position, that's the
accountability that you need because the system is so
important. But, by Congress setting a fixed term, Congress is
saying you're not serving at the pleasure of the President
completely. You're serving subject to a term that Congress has
enacted. That's point number one to make it independent.
Point number two is that you would specify that that
agency, when called by Congress, will speak impartially and
freely.
And, thirdly, you will decide what the regulatory powers of
that agency are. Could just be registration, recordation,
statutory licenses. It could be small claims. You could add
things over time, but it's completely in your discretion.
Mr. Jeffries. And, in your view, is that important, given
the long tradition and involvement in Congress with respect to
copyright and the fact that our authority to create an
intellectual property system in fact traces back to Article I,
section 8, clause 8, in the Constitution?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. And, you know, you didn't have a
Copyright Office the entire time, but you have had one since
1897, and copyright policy has always been very hands on in
Congress. It has the only position in the government that
allows the kind of balancing of equities that is essential to a
good Copyright Act. The Supreme Court has affirmed this
multiple times that it is in Congress' power to do that and to
decide the overall regime. So I would be personally quite
heartbroken to see that dissipated. I think it served the
Nation well, and I think that an agency that continues to serve
Congress but also continues to interact in a coordinated manner
with the Administration is a great model for the 21st century.
Mr. Jeffries. And in order to have sort of a modern, fully
functional, first-rate, 21st century Copyright Office, how
important is the budget autonomy that would be provided in an
independent agency context that might not necessarily exist if
you were to be resident within the Department of Commerce or
even remain within the Library of Congress even as a
Presidential appointee?
Ms. Pallante. I think it's crucial. So you have never had a
Register tell appropriators directly and freely what the Office
needs because that's not how budgets work in the Federal
Government. You wouldn't have it in the Commerce Department
either. What you will always have, unless you give budget
autonomy, meaning that the head of the Office can tell the
appropriators what the needs are and then have a direct
conversation. If you don't have that, you will always have
Copyright Office needs being weighed along things that are not
about the Copyright Office.
Mr. Jeffries. As my time expires, one last question. With
the leadership of my good friend from Georgia, Representative
Collins, in a bipartisan way, several of us have become
interested in resolving inequities that exist in the
compensation of songwriters. And Congressman Collins touched on
this to some degree, but I just wanted to ask one followup
question. You mention that music licensing issues broadly
defined are ripe for congressional action. Do you think that
there's room for us to precisely consider the dynamic that
songwriters find themselves in in terms of their compensation
or perhaps moving toward a willing buyer/willing seller
standard, and also allowing the rate courts to have an
opportunity to consider how artists are compensated on the song
recording side and factoring in what is fair?
Ms. Pallante. Yes. So we thought those provisions in the
Songwriter Equity Act were right on the money. I think we have
talked extensively today about why a willing buyer/willing
seller is the right move toward the free market. A better
reflection of it than a regulated rate, but the issue about
what the courts are allowed to consider is a crucial one, and
we are fully supportive of changing that.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Collins. I thank the gentleman from New York.
As we get ready I just want to--something that was brought
up is your office has been since 1897. I think what's amazing
is, is some of our creators, and especially in the music
community are still dealing with laws that were created only 15
to 20 years after that. That seems to be ripe, if not overripe,
for a change. But I also want to remind--you also represent a
vast industry that is--that is growing and changing. I hold in
my hand here something that I found over the weekend. And if
you look through these, here is something that you've heard me
mention before about why songwriters matter. These are
handwritten songs and poems that were written from my wife's
grandfather and her brothers.
Ms. Pallante. Is that right?
Mr. Collins. They're somewhere in the neighborhood of 50 to
60 years old. They were written probably at a kitchen table or
on the side of the road. But, for everyone who is here, and for
the reason that operate your office and what you do every day,
there's a book to be written, there's a song to be sung.
There's these creative rights that I believe the Copyright
Office is there to protect, not to inhibit but to promote
creativity like's in this folder right here.
And, with that, that concludes today's hearing. Thanks to
the witnesses for attending.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses and
additional materials for the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:53 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.

]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Maria A.
Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Director, United States Copyright
Office

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the Official Hearing Record*

Letter from James H. Billington, The Librarian of Congress

Letter from Ruth Vitale, Executive Director, CreativeFuture;
and Sandra Aistars, Chief Executive Officer, Copyright
Alliance

Letter from Rick Swindelhurst, President, Fairness in Music
Licensing Coalition (FMLC)

Letter from Michael Beckerman, President & CEO, Internet
Association (IA)

Recommendations of the Library Copyright Alliance (LCA) on
Copyright Reform

Letter from Christopher J. Dodd, Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer, the Motion Picture Association of America, Inc.
(MPAA)

Letter from Daryl P. Friedman, Chief Industry, Government, &
Member Relations Officer, The Recording Academy

--------
*Note: The submitted material is not printed in this hearing record but
is on file with the Committee and can also be accessed at: http://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103385.

[all]
