- HEALTHY COMPETITION? AN EXAMINATION OF THE PROPOSED HEALTH INSURANCE MERGERS AND THE CONSEQUENT IMPACT ON COMPETITION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEALTHY COMPETITION?
AN EXAMINATION OF THE PROPOSED
HEALTH INSURANCE MERGERS AND THE
CONSEQUENT IMPACT ON COMPETITION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
REGULATORY REFORM,
COMMERCIAL AND ANTITRUST LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-47

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-274 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law

TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania, Chairman

BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice-Chairman

DARRELL E. ISSA, California          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                  Georgia
MIMI WALTERS, California             SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
DAVE TROTT, Michigan                 DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan                SCOTT PETERS, California

Daniel Flores, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Tom Marino, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Regulatory
Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law...........................     1

The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the State of Georgia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law     2

The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary    22

WITNESSES

Mark T. Bertolini, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Aetna,
Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    27

Joseph Swedish, President and CEO, Anthem, Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    38
Prepared Statement.............................................    40

Tom Nickels, Executive Vice President, American Hospital
Association (AHA)
Oral Testimony.................................................    54
Prepared Statement.............................................    56

Andrew W. Gurman, M.D., President-Elect, American Medical
Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    75
Prepared Statement.............................................    77

Jaime S. King, Professor of Law, University of California,
Hastings College of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................   114
Prepared Statement.............................................   116

Edmund F. Haislmaier, Senior Research Fellow of Health Policy
Studies, The Heritage Foundation
Oral Testimony.................................................   131
Prepared Statement.............................................   133

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Jr., a Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia,
and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law...................................     6

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from Mark T. Bertolini,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Aetna, Inc...............   156

Response to Questions for the Record from Joseph Swedish,
President and CEO, Anthem, Inc.................................   159

Response to Questions for the Record from Tom Nickels, Executive
Vice President, American Hospital Association (AHA)............   164

Response to Questions for the Record from Edmund F. Haislmaier,
Senior Research Fellow of Health Policy Studies, The Heritage
Foundation.....................................................   167

HEALTHY COMPETITION? AN EXAMINATION OF THE PROPOSED HEALTH INSURANCE
MERGERS AND THE CONSEQUENT IMPACT ON COMPETITION

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law

Committee on the Judiciary,

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:09 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Thomas Marino
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Marino, Goodlatte, Collins,
Waters, Ratcliffe, Bishop, Johnson, Conyers, DelBene, Jeffries,
Cicilline, and Peters.
Staff Present: (Majority) Anthony Grossi, Counsel; Andrea
Lindsey, Clerk; and (Minority) Slade Bond, Counsel.
Mr. Marino. The Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law will come to order. Good
afternoon, everyone.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time. We welcome everyone to
today's hearing, and I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
We are here today to examine the proposed mergers between
the health insurance companies Aetna and Humana, and Anthem and
Cigna. Collectively, they currently provide health insurance
products to over 85 million Americans, and they are among the
largest health insurance companies in the country.
Undoubtedly, it should be determined whether these
transactions have the potential to significantly alter the
competitive landscape of the health insurance industry. In
examining this industry, it is important to note that the
health insurance market includes a number of different
products. There are insurance products for individuals and
families that can be purchased directly from the marketplace,
insurance that companies purchase to offer to their employees,
and government-funded insurance that private companies help to
administer.
These insurance products are often local in nature, since
patients generally visit the doctors and hospitals near where
they work and live. However, these products are often provided
by insurers with a strong national or regional presence.
Aetna, Humana, Anthem, and Cigna essentially all offer the
same variety of health insurance products. However, each
company has a particular business line that they emphasize or
specific geographic markets in which they operate.
Aetna is a significant provider of commercial health
insurance, Humana places a strong emphasis on its Medicare
Advantage products, and Anthem and Cigna largely operate in
different geographical regions.
Following the announcements of the proposed mergers,
several commentators issued statements raising concerns about
the two transactions. Associations representing hospitals and
doctors are among that group, and they are urging the
Department of Justice to review thoroughly the proposed deals.
They appear before us today to express those views and provide
additional detail regarding their concerns.
We are not here today to issue any definitive judgments
about whether DOJ should take any particular actions regarding
these mergers. Instead, the hearing serves as a public and
transparent platform from which we will hear from those who
believe the deal will benefit consumers, and those who believe
the merger may negatively impact competition within the health
insurance marketplace.
I look forward to today's discussions, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust
Law, Congressman Johnson from the State of Georgia, for his
opening statement.
Congressman?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing.
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to consider the
effects of Anthem's proposed acquisition of Cigna, and Aetna's
proposed acquisition of Humana, on consumers' access to health
insurance coverage that is both affordable and effective. I
have long supported vigorous enforcement and promotion of
competition in the health care industry for both providers and
insurers. However, as George Slover, Consumers Union's senior
policy counsel, noted in his testimony before the Senate
Judiciary Subcommittee on Antitrust and Consumer Protection
last week, over a century of experiences demonstrate that ``you
cannot run the health care system on competition alone and just
allow the free market to go where it will.''
Enactment of the Affordable Care Act was recognition that
competition alone did not ensure accountability in the health
care marketplace, greater savings to consumers, or equal
treatment of consumers by insurance providers. Smart health
care regulation was critical to keeping premiums down, to
ending discrimination against Americans with pre-existing
conditions, and to ensuring the common good for millions of
consumers. After all, what good is having numerous options for
health insurance providers, if none will provide coverage for
treating your child's condition?
It is also clear that the Affordable Care Act both depends
on and promotes competition in the health care marketplace, as
Professor Tim Greaney noted in our recent hearing on
competition in the health care marketplace. Professor Leemore
Dafny, a leading health care economist, has also testified that
the smart regulation inherent to the Affordable Care Act
promotes competition in the insurance industry through a number
of mechanisms, including product standardization and plan
certification, which reduced the hurdle to entry posed by the
need to establish a credible reputation, and via health
insurance marketplaces, which reduce marketing and sales costs,
thereby raising the likelihood of entry.
The health insurance marketplaces were explicitly designed
to facilitate competition among insurers. We also know that
since the first open enrollment period began in October 2013
for consumer exchanges, millions of Americans who were
previously uninsured now have access to affordable care. The
Affordable Care Act has already expanded coverage, savings, and
protections for millions of American consumers while promoting
new competition.
The Department of Health and Human Services reported in
July that the law had slowed the growth of health care premium
costs as new competitors enter local markets and price
competitions intensify. This report on competition in health
insurance marketplaces also indicates that competition has
intensified across the country, as the number of health
insurance issuers have increased in the most counties since
implementing the Affordable Care Act. Not only has this
increased competition arrested the growth of health care
premiums, the influx of new plans in local markets increases
the pressure on incumbent insurance issuers to moderate the
costs of premiums.
It is critical that we ensure that the number of new
competitors in every market continues to grow, to drive down
costs, and ensure that health care markets are delivering the
best and most health care choices in every county and for every
health care product in America.
I look forward to learning how the proposed transactions
will achieve these vital policy objectives. With that, I yield
back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the full Judiciary Committee
Ranking Member, Mr. Conyers of Michigan, for his opening
statement.
Congressman?
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome the witnesses, numerous but necessary for
this important hearing, and I also welcome those concerned
enough to attend this hearing about to take place.
We are talking about what we do with the second largest
health insurance company and the fourth largest health
insurance company, the third largest and the fifth largest. If
consummated, these mergers will result in the number of large
national health insurance companies going from five to three,
leaving just UnitedHealthcare, Anthem, and Aetna.
Proponents of these mergers make a number of arguments in
their favor, centering on the potential for efficiencies and
enhanced consumer services these mergers are said to offer.
Moreover, they contend that the lack of overlap between the
merging firms in most geographic markets means that there
should be little risk to competition in allowing these mergers
to proceed.
As we hear from the heads of the two acquiring firms as to
why these mergers benefit competition and consumer welfare,
however, we should keep in mind a few considerations. Begin
with the two proposed mergers coming at a time when the health
insurance markets seem to be already heavily concentrated.
According to the 2015 study of competition in health insurance
markets conducted by the American Medical Association, health
insurance markets in seven out of 10 metropolitan statistical
areas are already highly concentrated. In almost 40 percent of
the metropolitan areas studied, one health insurer controls
more than 50 percent of the market, as was the case in 14
States.
Moreover, according to the study by the Commonwealth Fund
published last month, 97 percent of markets for Medicare
Advantage, a program through which private insurers provide
some Medicare benefit, are highly concentrated.
Prior instances of consolidation among health insurers led
to increased premiums for consumers. In fact, there is no
evidence that past health insurance mergers produced any
savings that were passed on to consumers.
In addition, lack of competition among health insurers
could diminish the quality of care that patients currently
receive. In light of this broad concern about further
consolidation in an already heavily concentrated industry, we
have a duty to carefully examine some specific concerns that
have been raised about these two proposed acquisitions.
For example, consumer groups fear that the Aetna-Humana
transaction may result in a lessening of competition in
Medicare Advantage markets. The combined Aetna-Humana would
become the largest Medicare Advantage insurer with overlaps in
a large number of geographic markets. Moreover, merger critics
assert that neither traditional Medicare nor health plans
offered by providers are meaningful substitutes for Medicare
Advantage plans, meaning that the potential for competitive
harm in Medicare Advantage markets is great.
Now with respect to the Anthem-Cigna merger, the American
Hospital Association in particular notes that Anthem's
affiliation with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield system may
raise competitive concerns, in the event the merger is
consummated. The association asserts that the merger could
further entrench the already dominant position that many Blue
Cross Blue Shield plans have in many States.
Also, there may be a national market for health insurance
for large employers. Reducing the number of national
competitors from five to three would undermine competition in
that market.
Finally, we must address the issue of whether divestitures
are a sufficient remedy for the anticompetitive effects of
these mergers. Because of the high barriers to entry into the
health insurance business, critics contend, competition is
unlikely to be restored once lost through consolidation.
So I hope that all of our distinguished witnesses will take
this opportunity to address these and other concerns they may
have. Accordingly, I look forward eagerly to their testimony
and thank them for appearing today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that a letter from
U.S. PIRG and a statement from Consumers Union be entered into
the record, without objection.
Mr. Marino. So granted.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the
full Judiciary Committee, Mr. Bob Goodlatte of Virginia, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, this past July, Aetna announced its intent to
merge with Humana, and Anthem similarly proposed to merge with
Cigna. These firms represent four of the five largest for-
profit health insurance companies in the country.
Currently, the Department of Justice is reviewing the
deals. Its review will involve a detailed, fact-specific
analysis that will likely take more than a year to complete.
Unless the Department of Justice seeks to enjoin one or both of
the transactions, nearly the entire antitrust review process
will take place outside the public view.
In contrast, today we have before us the two CEOs of the
acquiring companies who will state their cases for the mergers.
They sit at the same table as some of the most vocal critics of
the deals, and each will have an opportunity to respond to our
questions about their views and the impacts of the prospective
transactions. Through this record, the public will better
understand the asserted merits and concerns regarding the
proposed mergers. Furthermore, the record created today will
assist the Committee in administering its oversight of the
antitrust enforcement agencies.
Lurking behind the antitrust review of these deals is the
question of how much influence Obamacare had on the proposed
transactions. This issue is of keen interest to the Committee
and we have conducted several hearings on the broader issue of
Obamacare and its impacts on consolidation and competition in
the health care industry.
Certainly, the Affordable Care Act has had a profound
effect on the health insurance industry. The law greatly
diminished the flexibility of insurance companies to manage the
risks of insuring patients. Coupled with these rigid parameters
are requirements on how insurance companies can allocate funds
for medical claims and other expenses. In many respects, health
insurance under the Affordable Care Act resembles more of a
commodity than the nuanced and diverse product base that
existed prior to the law's enactment.
Many commentators speculated that these constraints,
together with the significant regulatory burden placed on
insurers, would cause greater consolidation in the industry.
The Affordable Care Act put into place incentives for insurers
to increase in size so they can better manage costs and the
heavy regulatory burden and operational constraints imposed by
the law.
Indeed, at our most recent hearing focused on consolidation
in the health care industry, we heard testimony that insurers
are leaving the market, insurance policy coverage is narrowing,
and consumers are ending up paying more for less. These are
hardly the results that Obamacare proponents promised.
In addition to learning about the specifics of the proposed
mergers and the concerns raised by critics of the deals, I look
forward to hearing about the role the Affordable Care Act
played in these mergers and in the insurance market generally.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for continuing the Committee's
series of hearings on competition in the health care industry.
I look forward to today's discussion on the pending health
insurance mergers, and I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman.
Without objection, other Members' opening statements will
be made part of the record.
I will begin by swearing in our witnesses before
introducing them.
Would you please stand and raise your right hand?
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give before this Committee is the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have responded in
the affirmative.
Please be seated, and thank you.
I am now going to introduce all the witnesses. I will go
through each of your bios, and then we will get back to your
opening statements. If I mispronounce your name, please correct
me.
I think I can get this one right. Mr. Bertolini is the
chairman and chief executive officer of Aetna. Mr. Bertolini
joined Aetna in 2003 and served as the company's president from
2007 until 2014. Prior to joining Aetna, Mr. Bertolini held
executive positions at Cigna, and NYLCare Health Plans, and
SelectCare, Inc. He earned his undergraduate degree in business
administration and finance from Wayne State University and an
MBA in finance from Cornell University.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Swedish is the president and chief executive officer of
Anthem. Mr. Swedish has served for more than 40 years in
leadership positions within the health care industry, including
25 years as a CEO for major health systems. Mr. Swedish earned
his bachelor's degree from the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte and his master's degree in health administration from
Duke University.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Nickels recently became the executive vice president of
government relations and public policy at the American Hospital
Association (AHA). He has been with the AHA for over 21 years,
recently serving as the association's senior vice president for
Federal relations. Mr. Nickels earned his bachelor's degree in
English and philosophy from Dickinson College and his J.D. from
New York University School of Law.
Welcome, sir.
Dr. Gurman is the president-elect of the American Medical
Association. He is an orthopedic hand surgeon from Altoona,
Pennsylvania.
Welcome, sir, from one Pennsylvanian to another.
Previously, he served as speaker and vice speaker of the
AMA House of Delegates for 8 years. Dr. Gurman earned his
bachelor's degree from Syracuse University and his medical
degree from the State University of New York.
Professor King is a professor of law and the associate dean
and co director of the University of California, San Francisco,
and the University of California, Hastings Consortium of
Science, Law and Health Policy. Professor King's work has been
published in numerous scholarly journals, including the UCLA
Law Review, the Yale Journal of Health Policy, Law and Ethics,
and the American Journal of Law and Medicine, among others.
Professor King received her bachelor's degree, cum laude, from
Dartmouth, her J.D., cum laude, and Order of the Coif, from
Emory University, and her Ph.D. in health policy from Harvard
University.
Welcome.
Mr. Haislmaier is a senior research fellow of health policy
studies at the Heritage Foundation. He is widely considered an
expert on health care policy, an industry he has been studying
since 1987, and frequently testifies between State and Federal
legislative committees. Mr. Haislmaier earned his bachelor's
degree in history from St. Mary's College in Maryland.
Welcome.
Each of the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety. I ask that each witness
summarize his or her testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help
you with that, there is a timing light in front of you, and the
light will switch from green to yellow, indicating that you
have 1 minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns
red, it indicates that your 5 minutes have expired. As I do
this just customarily, because I know you are concentrating on
giving your statement, I will politely, nonchalantly, raise the
gavel, to give you a little indication to please wrap up,
before slamming it down.
Mr. Bertolini, please?

TESTIMONY OF MARK T. BERTOLINI, CHAIRMAN AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AETNA, INC.

Mr. Bertolini. Good afternoon, Chairman Marino, Ranking
Member Johnson, other Members of the Committee. Thank you for
inviting me here today to talk about Aetna's proposed
acquisition of Humana. My name is Mark Bertolini. I am chairman
and CEO of Aetna.
There is no doubt that health care is under dramatic change
at this time, and I think that change is good and long overdue.
Health care costs are unaffordable and we are now beginning to
focus on how we improve quality of care to reduce redundancy,
waste, and improve the overall affordability of care.
To that end, the Aetna acquisition of Humana is about two
companies coming together to offer a large number of consumers
a broader and higher quality array of more affordable products.
After the acquisition, Aetna will have a product portfolio
balanced more evenly between commercial and government
products, such as Medicare and Medicaid.
Today, the market competes on price and choice of doctor.
This will not change. But to win in the market, we believe
consumers should also be able to pick products that are focused
on improving the health of the member.
The CDC has a term called Healthy Days. It is a simple
survey that an individual takes to determine if they are having
a healthy day. Both companies see this as an important metric.
We both are committed to offering products and services that
will help our members improve the number of healthy days they
enjoy each year.
I would like to address the competition and choice issues
directly. First, it is important to point out that of the 54
million beneficiaries in Medicare today, 37 million, or 68
percent, receive their care through Medicare fee-for-service,
while the remaining 17 million, or one-third, receive their
care through Medicare Advantage, M.A., the private Medicare
option delivered through health plans.
Post acquisition, we believe that robust choice and
competition will remain in the Medicare market. After the
transaction, which is largely about Medicare and very little
about commercial, only 8 percent of Medicare beneficiaries will
receive their health benefits from Humana or Aetna, meaning
that 92 percent of all beneficiaries will receive their health
benefits from either Medicare fee-for-service or other M.A.
plans.
There are 143 health care companies offering M.A. plans
with new entrants coming into M.A. Twenty-eight new health
plans have joined in the last 3 years, of which 15 are owned by
hospital systems.
All health care is local, and today, M.A. is available in
3,100 of the 3,200 counties across the country. Beneficiaries
have an average of 18 M.A. private health plan options from
which to choose. And even in nonmetro or rural areas, there is
an average of 10 plan options to choose from.
On the commercial side of the market, Humana represents
less than 2 percent of the market and has no national employer
market presence--zero. Today, Aetna represents under 12 percent
of the commercial market. Nationally, there are 400 insurance
companies operating in the commercial market, with the Blue
Cross Blue Shield plan being the largest insurer in more than
30 States.
After the transactions, other companies will have 87
percent of the commercial enrollment. On public exchanges,
Aetna and Humana overlap in only eight States. In those States,
there are an average of 10 other competing insurers, so we
believe there will be no material change to the competitiveness
of the commercial health insurance market as a result of our
transaction.
In regard to the price of our products, premium prices are
driven by the underlying cost of care, such as hospitals,
doctors, and prescription drug costs, which make up nearly 85
percent of premium prices. They are not derived in the
abstract.
Given that this transaction is largely about M.A. prices,
protection is even more assured because the government
establishes M.A. rates based on the cost of health care in each
county. Insurance companies offering M.A. plans must bid
against the government benchmark as set forth in each county
and are incentivized to be competitive. Hence, many companies
offer zero dollar premium plans to consumers. In fact, M.A.
premiums have decreased by 10 percent since 2010.
Certain medical societies have opposed our deal out of
concern that it will affect the income of doctors. We believe
that there will be no material effect on revenue for doctors as
a result of the acquisition. However, we are committed to
payment reform and believe the system must move from a fee-for-
service model to a value-based model payment. We are working
collaboratively with providers to align incentives around
payment models that will reward the overall health of the
individual that many providers support.
In closing, Aetna's acquisition of Humana is about creating
positive change in the health care market. It is about being
part of an effort to build a modern health care system built
around the consumer. We believe that our acquisition will
improve competition in the Medicare marketplace by providing
affordable and higher quality products.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bertolini follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Marino. A good standard to set, Mr. Bertolini. Right in
on time.
Mr. Swedish?

TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH SWEDISH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ANTHEM, INC.

Mr. Swedish. Thank you, Chairman Marino, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am Joseph Swedish,
president and chief executive officer of Anthem, and it is my
honor to appear before you today. The work of this Committee
and the dialogue we engage in will help shape the future of
health care in America. I appreciate the opportunity to
contribute Anthem's perspectives and experience.
Several Committee Members represent communities served by
Anthem's local health plans, and the Committee as a whole has
been an influential advocate for positive change in health
care. So I would like to begin by thanking you for your
dedication, leadership, and partnership, and by reinforcing
Anthem's commitment to continue our proud 75-year history of
providing high-quality, affordable health benefits to the many
local communities and diverse populations we serve.
My written testimony details the complementary nature of
Anthem's and Cigna's businesses, the market dynamics impacting
this transaction, and our commitment to working cooperatively
throughout the review process.
But I would like to focus my remarks today on the most
important beneficiaries of these proposed transactions--
consumers. Health care is undergoing an unprecedented
transformation. And while affordability, access, and quality
are goals unanimously shared by our health care system, they
are not universally enjoyed by consumers.
Together, Anthem and Cigna have the resources and
capabilities to offer a broader portfolio of products and
services to keep health benefits more affordable and promote
accountable, higher quality health care for consumers. Simply
put, the combination of Anthem and Cigna will allow us to
provide better health insurance to more people.
We will keep health care affordable by more efficiently and
effectively addressing the number one cause of rising costs in
health care, the cost of care itself. Our combined analytic
capabilities will empower better informed decisionmaking
between patients and physicians and help safeguard affordable
access to remarkable new clinical discoveries, treatments, and
technologies.
Our combined health and wellness expertise will help fill
gaps in recommended care and more proactively engage consumers
in managing their own health conditions. We will expand access
to a broader network of hospitals, physicians, and health care
professionals so consumers receive the highest quality care
available when and where they need it, and, finally, improve
quality by expanding our innovative, value-based accountable
care models that today represent more than $50 billion in
reimbursement tied to better value, quality, and outcomes for
members.
Much of the attention around this acquisition focuses on
competition. This is, certainly, an essential part of the
dialogue. As a baseline, it is important to recognize that
health care is fundamentally local, locally based, locally
delivered, and locally consumed.
Across the many diverse localities and business segments in
which Anthem and Cigna operate, there is robust and growing
competition. Given the very limited and in most areas no market
overlap between Anthem and Cigna, competition will no doubt
continue to flourish after the transaction is completed.
There are many calculations, analyses, and opinions being
expressed about what this transaction will mean for
competition, but the true question to be asked is, what will
this mean for the consumer? The simple answer is Anthem and
Cigna together mean better health insurance for more people.
Throughout my 40-year career in health care, I have worked
diligently to instill a culture of innovation and collaboration
across the many organizations I have led, and the combined
company will be no exception.
Separately, Anthem and Cigna have made meaningful progress
in improving affordability, access, and quality for consumers.
Together, we can and will do much more.
We embrace the responsibility of this transaction and look
forward to working with you and the entire health care system
to expand access to affordable, high-quality health benefits.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your comments and questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Swedish follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Nickels?

TESTIMONY OF TOM NICKELS, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION (AHA)

Mr. Nickels. Thank you, Chairman Marino, Ranking Member
Johnson, and other Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here today. My name is Tom Nickels. I am executive
vice president of the American Hospital Association. On behalf
of our 5,000 hospitals and health system members and the
patients we serve, I appreciate the opportunity to testify
today.
Anthem's proposed acquisition of Cigna and Aetna's proposed
acquisition of Humana would further concentrate an already
heavily concentrated health insurance industry by eliminating
two of the largest five insurers and result in negative
consequences for both health care consumers and providers.
Many consumer groups and provider organizations have
already expressed significant concerns about these massive
acquisitions, and we believe both deals merit the highest level
of scrutiny from both Congress and the Department of Justice. I
would like to focus on some of our specific concerns with each
deal and take issue with a number of claims some are making to
try to defend the proposed acquisitions.
First, the insurers claim they are seeking to acquire
companies that have complementary business lines and that there
would be no overlaps leading to increased market consolidation.
We are very skeptical of these claims.
In addition, given Anthem's affiliation with the Blue Cross
Blue Shield system, we are concerned about the negative
consequences for consumers and health care providers that could
result from further entrenching the powers of the Blues' plans
that currently dominate the insurance market in nearly every
State.
Second, the insurers say that all health care is local.
However, they cite national statistics on the number of
competitors instead of the actual competition in local markets.
According to our analyses, which are done in the same manner
and with the same data that the DOJ will use in making
competitive assessments, more than 800 markets for the Anthem
deal and more than 1,000 markets for the Aetna deal lack
sufficient local competitive alternatives.
In addition to the lack of competition in local markets,
there are high barriers to entry in the commercial insurance
market. For example, insurers point to Oscar as a new
commercial health insurance company. However, it is one of only
two for-profit companies that were not already insurers to
enter State marketplaces so far. It also has penetrated only a
single urban market and lost a reported $27.5 million last
year. The company's founder recently described entry into the
insurance market as ``daunting.''
Meanwhile, the Aetna-Human deal would affect Medicare
Advantage plans in more than 1,000 markets that serve more than
2.7 million seniors. These markets would become even more
concentrated, and 97 percent are already highly concentrated.
The potential for further concentration would threaten the
fiscal protection the Medicare Advantage program provides for
enrollees and would likely result in higher out-of-pocket costs
and fewer benefits and even narrower networks.
Just yesterday, the GAO released a report urging CMS to do
a better job of ensuring that networks are adequate.
Third, we are very concerned that both of these deals could
derail the momentum hospitals have led to improve the Nation's
health care delivery system. Despite claims that commercial
insurers are fostering innovation, they continue to benefit
financially from both squeezing provider payments and riding
the wave of hospital efforts that are resulting in more
efficient and higher quality care.
There is no evidence that larger insurers are more likely
to implement innovative payment and care management programs.
In fact, concentrated delivery system reform efforts have
tended to emerge from other sources, such as provider systems
and nonnational players.
Fourth, we are concerned that any potential benefits the
insurance companies realize from these deals will not be passed
on to consumers. Insurers do not have a good track record of
passing any savings from an acquisition on to consumers, and
there is no reason to believe these transactions would be
different.
Fifth, if these deals are allowed to close, the negative
impact on providers and consumers could be enduring.
Consolidation that occurs now is unlikely to be undone if it
later proves anticompetitive.
Lastly, it is unlikely that divestiture agreements can be
reached to reduce the anticompetitive impacts. It is also
unlikely that other competitors have the capacity to enter
these markets as the scope and scale of the acquisitions are
unprecedented.
In conclusion, some have compared the insurance deals to
those in the telecommunications arena because of the size and
potential to contort the market and harm consumers. DOJ was
ready to challenge the telecommunication deals, and it also
should be ready to challenge these insurance deals, if it finds
that these transactions threaten the vitality of our health
care system and the health and welfare of consumers across the
Nation.
We look forward to working with the Subcommittee to make
sure that consumers continue to have access to high-quality,
affordable health care in their communities. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nickels follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Dr. Gurman?

TESTIMONY OF ANDREW W. GURMAN, M.D.,
PRESIDENT-ELECT, AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION

Dr. Gurman. Good afternoon. I would like to thank Chairman
Marino, Ranking Member Johnson, and the Subcommittee for
inviting us to participate in this oversight hearing on health
insurance mergers and their impact on competition.
Physicians want to participate in a health care delivery
system that allows us to deliver high-quality and efficient
care to our patients. We believe that competition is an
excellent prescription for achieving that goal. Competition
among health insurers can lower premiums, enhance customer
service, and spur innovative ways to improve quality while
lowering costs. Patients benefit when they can choose from an
array of insurers who compete for their business by offering
desirable coverage at affordable prices.
Consolidation, on the other hand, compromises the ability
of physicians to advocate for their patients. In practice,
market power allows insurers to exert control over clinical
decisions, which undermines the doctor-patient relationship and
eliminates crucial safeguards of patient care.
This underscores what ultimately is at stake here--the
health and safety of America's patients.
Our annual study of commercial health insurance markets,
which was provided to you, utilizes metrics set by the
Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission to
classify market concentration. The results point to a near
total absence of competition among health insurers with 70
percent of markets rated as highly concentrated.
Meanwhile, a recent Commonwealth Fund study indicates that
competitive conditions in Medicare Advantage markets are even
more dire. And in the national market where large employers
purchase coverage, the proposed mergers being examined today
would pare the five national players down to three.
We believe that there must be a rigorous review of proposed
mergers according to the federally established standards to
determine their effects on competition and their consequences
for patient care.
In 2010, the DOJ found that the proposed Blue Cross merger
in Michigan would have resulted in ``the ability to control
physician reimbursement rates in a manner that could harm the
quality of health care delivered to consumers.'' The same
analysis should be applied to pending mergers.
Competition, not consolidation, has been shown time and
again to benefit patients. One study found that increased
competition among insurers was associated with more generous
prescription drug benefits.
According to several studies, past mergers led to increased
health insurance premiums. In the wake of a 2008 merger in
Nevada, premiums spiked by almost 14 percent. ``If past is
prologue'', notes Professor Leemore Dafny, ``consumers can
expect higher insurance premiums'' due to consolidation.
Irrespective of premium hikes, lower physician rates in and
of themselves can also harm patients by artificially degrading
available care. This is the essence of monopsony power, whereby
market control suppresses the quality or quantity of services.
Our analysis of the commercial market share effects of the
proposed megamergers reveal that they would enhance market
power in as many as 97 metropolitan areas within 17 States. The
Anthem-Cigna merger alone would enhance market power in 85
metropolitan areas within 13 States, while the Aetna-Humana
merger would combine two of the four largest Medicare Advantage
insurers to form the largest such entity in the country. This
is in addition to the impact on the national market if the so-
called big five becomes the big three.
We are at a critical decision point on health insurance
mergers because, once consummated, there is simply no going
back. Post-merger remedies are likely to be both ineffective
and highly disruptive. You cannot unscramble an egg.
Thus, we believe that the time for heightened scrutiny and
careful consideration is now, before proposed mergers take
effect and patients are irreparably harmed.
The solution lies in more, not less, competition. It begins
by recognizing that coordinated care does not require massive
consolidation. The good news is that there are steps that
regulators and lawmakers can take right now to ease barriers
and foster competition. These include facilitating new entry
into hospital markets and eliminating program integrity and
antitrust roadblocks to physician innovation.
We look forward to working with the Subcommittee to advance
a vision for the future of American medicine in which
competition, when allowed to flourish, can promote the delivery
of high-quality, cost-effective care.
Thank you, sir, and thank you to the Committee for your
continued efforts on this issue. And I have to tell you, having
first visited this Congress as a 10-year-old schoolboy, what a
thrill it is for me to be here today. Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gurman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Marino. Thank you, sir.
Professor King?

TESTIMONY OF JAIME S. KING, PROFESSOR OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW

Ms. King. Chairman Goodlatte, Subcommittee Chairman Marino,
Committee Ranking Member Conyers, and Subcommittee Ranking
Member Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee, I very much
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the potential impact
of the proposed mergers on consumers, competition, and the
American health care system.
After decades of increased consolidation in provider and
insurer markets, resulting in ever-escalating health insurance
premiums and health care expenditures, the American public has
begun to demand more accountability for health care costs from
their providers, insurers, and policymakers.
Reform efforts, big and small, have started to shift the
playing field for providers and insurers. And in many ways, the
proposed mergers appear to be more about staking out territory
and acquiring leverage in the new health care economy than
anything else.
How the dust settles in our health care system will have
significant implications for the lives of all Americans, the
efficient functioning of our economy, and the well-being of our
Nation. We must be cautious and deliberate in our actions.
Policymakers and government agencies charged with
overseeing the health care system must be both exacting in
their analysis of the proposed mergers on existing product and
geographic markets. But they also have to have the vision to
see the broader picture of how these mergers will affect
consumers across the Nation and the health care system as a
whole, in the years to come.
The proposed mergers present several risks to tens of
millions of affected consumers in an array of private insurance
markets throughout the country, including individuals, small
group, large group, self-insured, and Medicare Advantage
markets. A recent study by the Government Accountability Office
found that market share was highly concentrated into the top
three insurers in individual, small group, and large group
markets in 37 States.
In reviewing the proposed merger, the Department of Justice
will consider whether the mergers will likely lead to increased
premiums, reductions in quality and innovation, or other harms
to competition and consumers.
In terms of premiums, as we have heard before, the research
consistently found that increased premiums occurred in the wake
of an insurance merger. While there is some evidence that
consolidation among insurers can result in reductions and lower
provider reimbursements, no evidence has ever found that those
savings were returned to consumers. So basically, physicians
will make less money and consumers will continue to overpay for
health care.
This is a trend that the American consumer can no longer
sustain. Private insurance premiums are at their highest levels
in history, almost approaching $17,000 for the average family.
Some have argued that the medical loss ratio will prevent
consolidated mergers from increasing premiums, but the MLR
depends on competition to function. And in markets without
competition, the MLR can be gameable. Because it limits
administrative costs to the percentage of total premiums, in
the absence of competition, insurers have incentive to go ahead
and allow provider reimbursement rates to grow and increase
overall premiums, thereby increasing their overall share of the
pie.
Moreover, the MLR does not apply to enrollees in self-
insured plans, which make up over half of the private insurance
market, leaving them still at risk of premium increases.
In terms of the potential negative impacts to quality and
competition, I want to say a little bit about Medicare
Advantage and the health insurance marketplaces. America is not
getting any younger and a strong presence in the Medicare
Advantage markets will be an important point of leverage for
health insurers in the future.
Unfortunately, these markets are already highly
concentrated throughout the country, with 97 percent of
counties exceeding merger guideline standards for high
concentration.
Medicare Advantage was designed to operate in a competitive
market, and incentives to promote quality and innovation in
those plans will not function in the absence of competition
from other Medicare Advantage plans. There is evidence that
consumers differentiate between these products and traditional
Medicare, and they have been treated as separate markets by the
FTC in the past.
Similarly, this effect on quality and innovation can also
occur in markets subject to the medical loss ratio. Not only
would mergers eliminate key potential competitors in these
markets, but they also may serve to chill the incentives of
these established insurers to expand their territory into the
space and increase competition. The same can be said for the
State health insurance markets.
Insurers may try to overcome these potential
anticompetitive effects by claiming that their mergers will
produce procompetitive effects, efficiencies. Things like
consumer engagement and helping with the transition to value-
based goals and plans will be beneficial, but they also have to
be merger-specific. They have to show that they will occur in
the absence of a merger. They also have to show they will be
cognizable and cannot be achieved through anticompetitive
means.
So in conclusion, the insurance companies today have argued
that all insurance, like politics, is local. But just as we
know that the broader political climate and decisions made in
Washington have great effects on all of us back at home, the
same is true of health insurance. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. King follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jamie S. King, Professor of Law,
University of California, Hastings College of Law

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Haislmaier?

TESTIMONY OF EDMUND F. HAISLMAIER, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW OF
HEALTH POLICY STUDIES, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Haislmaier. Mr. Chairman, thank you, Members of the
Committee, as well, for inviting me to testify today.
In response to the Committee's invitation, I conducted an
analysis, which I have presented in my written testimony, of
the markets for the respective products of these companies. I
will simply make a few observations here in my oral testimony,
most of which are also in my written testimony.
My analysis used enrollment data, looking at all of the
country by State. It was divided for geographic presence--I
give the reasons for that--and also by product line. This is
for the comprehensive insurance market.
There are five market segments. I looked at individual,
fully ensured employer group coverage, Medicare Advantage,
self-insured employer group plans for which an insurer provides
only administrative services, and Medicaid managed care.
In looking at the specific mergers, as I noted, nationally,
40 percent of Humana's business is in the Medicare Advantage
line. That is 40 percent of their total enrollment. When you
look at the two companies on a national level, it seems fairly
obvious to me that Aetna's acquisition of Humana is principally
about acquiring Humana's Medicare Advantage business. It has
been noted by others, I believe, when you combine those two
companies, the net position would be that the company would
have 25 percent, roughly, of the national market. That, of
course, will vary substantially by State. I break out in the
table the State variation.
One of the points that I make in the table and in the
testimony is that in most States, the effect even in that
market will be relatively small. There are some notable
examples of exceptions, where both carriers have a substantial
presence already in the Medicare Advantage market that would be
made even bigger.
Aside from Medicare Advantage, my analysis found few other
places that would result in any significant additional
concentration in other States or product lines. The one
exception being Georgia, where Humana already has 58 percent of
the individual market, and merging the two would bring that up
to 65 percent.
But by and large, there is not a lot of overlap, as you can
see in the table.
With respect to Anthem's proposed acquisition of Cigna, one
needs to start by understanding the unique features of each
company. Eighty-four percent of Cigna's covered lines are
administrative services for self-insured employer plans. In
fact, I have a Cigna card because my employer is self-insured
and uses Cigna.
Anthem, however, is a collection, really, of 14 Blue Cross
plans. So in those States where Anthem operates a Blue Cross
plan, virtually anything Anthem does in terms of an acquisition
will take a big insurer and make it bigger. There is almost no
way to escape that, and that is true in the self-insured
market, in this example.
Outside of those 14 States, though, I found very little
evidence that there would be any significant impact. In most
States, there would be no impact whatsoever because Anthem
simply lacks a presence and, as I said, Cigna's presence is so
concentrated in one market subset.
Beyond that, I also looked at another acquisition, which I
thought we were going to talk about--I will briefly mention
that--of Centene's acquisition of HealthNet. That is simply, as
I describe in the testimony, an insurer expanding its
footprint. HealthNet only operates in four States, and Centene
does not operate in three of those four with any significant
presence.
Now Chairman Goodlatte had mentioned and I was asked to
comment on some of those effects that might be behind this from
the Affordable Care Act. I do believe some of those provisions
in the Affordable Care Act may be responsible for some of the
thinking behind the mergers. Certainly, the Affordable Care Act
makes the administrative services business for fully insured
employer plans a more attractive business for the insurer. That
is also likely to grow as employers attempt to evade the cost-
increasing mandates in the Affordable Care Act.
The other problem, of course, is that a lot of what the
Affordable Care Act does is to limit choice and competition in
standardization to treat insurance like a commodity and
insurers like commodity producers. So from that perspective, it
is not terribly surprising that you would see insurers behaving
like commodity producers or regulated utilities and merging for
scale.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify. I
hope the information I presented is helpful to the Committee in
understanding the markets involved and the companies involved.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Haislmaier follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Marino. Thank you.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions, and
my colleagues will then follow.
Mr. Bertolini, some time ago we heard testimony that
insurance policies are becoming narrower and, as a result,
consumers end up paying more for the services or drug out-of-
pocket expenses, et cetera. Would you comment on this potential
trend and how your merger would impact the breadth and services
of drugs covered under your policies?
Mr. Bertolini. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your question.
As I mentioned earlier, health care premiums are not
established in the abstract. They are directly related to the
underlying costs. So in places where we have narrower plan
designs or narrower networks, those are designed to try to
impact the cost of care. And largely, the people who buy those
policies are the people who are using those providers already
and using those services. So it relies on broader breadth of
product across multiple competitors in order to be able to
provide enough services for everybody in a market. But when we
look at the people who choose our plans, particularly on the
public exchanges, they are choosing our plans because they are
using those providers and they need the benefits that we cover.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Swedish, can you respond to that also?
Mr. Swedish. Yes. I will maybe take a little different tack
in that we work very collaboratively with the physician
community, particularly focusing on buildout of provider
collaboration models.
A great example is our pursuit of value-based payment
methodologies. In doing so over the last couple of years, now
53 percent of our payment to providers is based on value--i.e.,
outcome-driven. In that regard, in answer to your question,
together with the provider community, we are looking at
building out more affordability for our members, particularly
in the area of controlling drug spend, which is escalating at a
phenomenal rate.
Just last year, you know that pharma pricing increased 13
percent. We believe that is escalating year over year.
So, again, working in collaboration with providers in a
value-based arena, we believe we can demonstrate increasing
affordability to our members.
Mr. Marino. I am going to stick with you for a moment, Mr.
Swedish. I am from a very rural area, the 10th Congressional
District of Pennsylvania, a lot of farm people, a lot of blue-
collar workers. What impact is your merger going to have on the
cost of health care for these individuals, and accessibility?
Mr. Swedish. Absolutely, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are three main elements regarding the combination of
two companies that are very complementary. The core elements
are affordability, access, and the pursuit of increased
quality, quality of safety, quality related to service. In that
regard, we believe that the combination will translate
especially to affordability as our two organizations, number
one, leverage the combined assets, especially in and around
data access, creating better health care analytics, and then
build out evidence-based protocols with our provider partners;
and number two, then what savings we can create in terms of
efficiencies of operations. Those savings then will go to the
consumers by way of better premium support.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Mr. Haislmaier, as you heard, I represent a very rural
area, and I continually hear from my constituents, physicians,
hospitals, that Obamacare is just driving the price up
astronomically to the point where some of the hospitals and
physicians believe they cannot stay in business and my
constituents cannot afford the payments associated with that.
I know you talked a little bit about how Obamacare does
have an impact. Would you expand on that somewhat, please?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, the legislation subsidizes some
people, but the number of people it subsidizes is only a
fraction of the number of people whose coverage was
artificially--the cost of which was artificially increased by
regulation.
So in other words, I did this analysis separately a few
months ago, and we published it in connection with the court
case, and we did it by State, I should say, too. But when you
look at the number of people in the individual and small group
markets that are subject to the ACA regulatory requirements
that drive up the cost of coverage, that number is about three
times the number of people who actually got a subsidy to offset
those increases. In other words, only about one-quarter of the
population that the additional costs were imposed on actually
qualifies for a subsidy through the exchange to help them with
it.
So I think what you are hearing from your constituents are
those other people who are small-business owners typically or
individuals who are self-employed who make too much money to
get a subsidy on the exchange who are complaining because they
saw their premiums go up, but they did not get any help with
paying for that extra cost.
Mr. Marino. Right. Thank you.
My time has expired. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member, the gentleman from Georgia, Congressman Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Haislmaier, to what do you attribute the decline in
double-digit premium increases in this country over the past
few years?
Mr. Haislmaier. I am sorry?
Mr. Johnson. To what do you attribute the decline in the
double-digit premium increases?
Mr. Haislmaier. Decline in double-digit premium increases?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Haislmaier. In what sector, sir?
Mr. Johnson. So you do not recognize that premiums costs,
the rate of escalation in premium growth has declined since the
passage of the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, no, actually, it has not. My
colleague has done data on that that we published on premiums.
I would be happy to have him share it with you, but it all has
been published on the growth in premiums.
Mr. Johnson. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Nickels, Mr. Bertolini has testified that there are new
market entrants, including providers, that are offering health
insurance products that produce meaningful competition to
health insurance companies, and that is one of the reasons why
they would justify the merger. What is your response to that?
Mr. Nickels. Yes, it is correct that there are more
hospitals coming into the market. Although to refer to that
statistic, I think there were 15 new hospital plans in the last
3 years, so that is not a huge number. But there are some that
are coming in. Some are interested. Consumers are interested in
these kinds of options.
But again, we are at the infancy stage here, and these
plans pale in comparison to the size of these potential
mergers.
So is it a positive step? Yes. But it should not be used to
justify these mergers because, again, these are fragile
entities that are just getting into the market right now.
Mr. Johnson. All right, thank you.
Mr. Bertolini, several of your fellow witnesses cite a
Commonwealth Fund study published last month that found that 97
percent of Medicare Advantage markets are highly concentrated
and characterized by a lack of competition. What is your
response to that finding?
Mr. Bertolini. Congressman Johnson, I can only comment on
the data that we have about the markets that we are in. In
those markets, after the acquisition, 8 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries will select our products. Ninety-two percent will
not. In markets where we have nonrural areas, 18 competitors,
and in rural areas, 10 competitors, we continue to see people
entering the market. And our comment around 15 being provider-
owned is not about whether or not they justify the mergers, but
they do justify the fact that barriers to entry are not as high
as others would comment, and it is rather lower barriers to
entry, as a result of the opportunities afforded by government-
funded programs like Medicare Advantage.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Thank you.
Professor King, all the way through Emory University just
outside of my district, welcome.
Ms. King. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. I would like to ask you, why is the medical
loss ratio insufficient to guarantee that premiums will not be
raised after consolidation? You explained it, but I want you to
put a little bit more meat on that explanation.
Ms. King. Absolutely. So the medical loss ratio is a key
tool toward constraining insurer premiums and insurer profits
and keeping the cost to health care down. But it is
insufficient on its own, especially in the absence of
competition, to maintain costs in this market and promote
quality.
So medical loss ratio, first of all, does not apply to
about half of the privately insured individuals in the market
who get their insurance from self-insured providers.
Mr. Johnson. Okay, I understand.
Ms. King. So if it does not apply to them, then premiums
can go up, and it is not going to protect them.
Mr. Johnson. A merger, a consolidation, would lead to those
self-insured plans----
Ms. King. Being exposed to higher premium increases. That
is right.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Let me stop you.
Do you, Mr. Swedish, or you, Mr. Bertolini, disagree with
that?
Mr. Swedish. Yes, sir, I would like to address that for
just a moment.
There is a complementary nature in the combination of our
two companies. The fact is that Cigna presents a very large
engagement in the administrative services only marketplace,
meaning that we are supporting very large employers in national
accounts. Those are the organizations that demand that level or
type of service and product offerings.
We believe that what is critically important for the
Committee to understand is that there are many competitors in
that space; number two, that these are highly sophisticated
buyers of administrative service only arrangements; number
three, because it is ASO, the savings go back to the employer.
What is fascinating is that what we have found with respect
to large employers is that there are at least 130 unique health
benefit companies serving that sector of the marketplace. In
2014, there were 30 new companies competing in that market.
Finally, the GAO report found that an average of 11 insurers
compete for large group customers.
So in any event, we believe it is highly competitive and,
quite frankly, serves that marketplace very well, in terms of
the competitive environment that we function in.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Congressman Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a concern for me, and I know the Chairman has
spoken to this, being from a rural area. But there is also the
issue of mergers and also leverage and nonleverage. The people
at the bottom of the line who get caught in this are the actual
folks who are your customers and also customers, frankly, of
the hospitals and doctors, as well. It is not good--like in my
district, we have had this happen on a couple of occasions--
when the two are not able to negotiate. So we end up sending
out letters to 38,000 and 40,000 people saying teachers in your
area will not be able to use your local hospital because we
cannot come to a satisfactory agreement. Although they are
covered for the entire year, their contracts do not overlap
with the hospitals, so insurance companies and hospitals
negotiate on a different timetable then actually was sold, the
policy, which, again, no one, frankly, understands.
I have been listening to this debate today. The really
interesting part, Mr. Bertolini and Mr. Haislmaier note in
testimony that Humana has 58 percent of the individual market
in Georgia and that number is expected to rise to 65 percent
after the merger closes.
Tell me why I should not be concerned about this level of
concentration and how we can ensure consumers not only in
Georgia, but I am concerned that the Ninth District of Georgia
has a sufficient number of insurers to choose from in this
process.
Mr. Bertolini. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.
The market currently has 10 competitors and choices for
people to choose from, so concentration is one measure of
whether or not there is a problem from a competitive
standpoint, and we will cooperate with the Department of
Justice in reviewing that opportunity and those issues.
In regard to your comment about provider and health plan
negotiations, I would state that the current fee-for-service
payment system that causes providers and payers to have this
conversation is why our health care costs are so high. Unless
we change that dynamic to a different payment model focused on
outcomes and on whole case and improving the health of
individuals, this kind of dynamic will only continue and will
leave the member in the middle.
Mr. Collins. I think they are already left in the middle. I
do want to continue on that, and I understand that there are
choices, but those choices seem to be narrowing more and more,
especially with the different plans. When you get to a market
share of close to 65 percent, that does tend to at least look
like you are cutting off avenues, especially where there is a
possibility of not being able to buy across State lines and
other things like that, you are taking an area--I mean, in this
hearing just recently, we talked about this. It is not just
this market but the PBM market, which I have a great deal of
problems with because basically they are bent on destruction
and killing the independent pharmacies.
But as we look at this, why would this not be a concern? I
know there are options out there, but do you understand the
perception from the community that there is? I agree with you
on outcome. I agree with you that we need to change some of the
cost systems here. But when we look at this, I mean, Aetna and
Humana are going to have 36 percent of the fully insured market
in my area.
I am just trying to get a grip on how you can explain that
as being good when we, frankly, see problems in this all the
time.
Mr. Bertolini. Obviously, we have a Department of Justice
review going on. To the degree that divestitures are required,
we will make those.
So we understand that there are some markets, a handful or
so of markets where we have this kind of overlap that we are
prepared to deal with appropriately. Most often, what we see
happening now is that provider systems buy these capabilities
from us when we decide to divest them.
So I think we can actually create more competitors as a
result of this combination.
Mr. Collins. Okay.
Mr. Haislmaier, would you like to respond to that?
Mr. Haislmaier. No, I think that is a fair
characterization. I was simply pointing out the extent to which
concentration did or did not exist, Georgia being an example
outside of Medicare Advantage where this merger would produce
concentration.
As Mr. Bertolini has said, that may be something that will
be remedied by the State or Federal Government in insisting on
a divestiture.
There is a much larger issue about competition that is not
part of this hearing, which is sort of that the whole business
model of everybody needs to be updated, but that would be a
topic for another day.
Mr. Collins. I appreciate that, but I think it is part of
this hearing. I think that is the issue. All companies, not
just in this industry, there are others merging as well. You
have a lot of good folks sitting behind you and also outside
this room who can tell the antitrust, they can tell the letter
of law. The problem many times is not, are we following ``the
letter of the law'' in mergers? It is the actual effect on the
market, the actual perceived effect on the market, when dealing
with hospitals or dealing with doctors.
That is the concern that I have, the leverage issue. I have
no problem with business models. They all change over time. But
when you have a group that really is, frankly, at the mercy of
the bigger players, and in my area that would be insurance
companies and hospitals--you know the old proverb says, when
elephants fight, the only thing that loses is the grass, okay?
And the grass is the people that you serve.
I yield back.
Mr. Marino. The Chair recognizes the Congressman from
Michigan, the Ranking Member of the full Committee, Congressman
Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank all the witnesses, too.
Professor King, I am going to ask you several questions,
and then I have a couple for Dr. Gurman. So pick your
responses. You do not have to try to cover everything in all of
the question.
What are some of the negative effects of existing high
levels of concentration in health care markets? Number two,
what did studies of prior health insurance mergers reveal about
their effects on competition? And why do you think the
Department of Justice is keeping a close eye on the overarching
impact of transactions for the entire health care system? And
finally, is there any evidence that any savings from post-
merger efficiencies are passed on to the consumers?
Take your choice.
Ms. King. Okay. There is a lot there.
So in terms of negative effects of prior mergers, this is
one of the things that the FTC and DOJ look at when they look
at horizontal mergers. They look at what has happened in the
past.
That is why Professor Leemore Dafny last week said that if
past is prologue, here is what we anticipate that we will see.
There have been two retrospective studies that have looked
at health insurance mergers. I am sure you have seen these. One
looked at Aetna and Prudential, and the other looked at
UnitedHealthcare and Sierra. Both of them found, in the wake of
those mergers, that there were significant price increases. The
Aetna-Prudential merger came down with 7 percent premium
increases, and then the UnitedHealthcare and Sierra came down
with almost 14 percent increases in premiums in the wake of
those mergers.
One thing I want to emphasize about those mergers is that
those were mergers where divestitures were used. So in those
instances, it is not always easy to determine which markets are
likely to see price increases and then target those
appropriately.
They did use a divestiture in Texas in the Aetna merger,
and they found that that was an effective divestiture in that
space. But nonetheless, premiums did increase in numerous,
numerous affected markets as a result of those.
So I think that is what we are seeing. We are also seeing
in those mergers, in those prior mergers, that there was no
impact on quality so quality of care did not increase. The
promises that were made initially about how many improvements
were going to happen and the things that the consumers were
going to see as benefits in those spaces did not materialize.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you so much.
Ed, write some more to put in the record on this, because I
wanted to ask our Dr. Gurman before time runs out to explain
how health insurers' monopsony power endangers the quality of
health care available to consumers.
Mr. Bertolini and Mr. Swedish both contend that health
insurance markets are flush with competition not only from
traditional health insurance companies, but from new market
entrants.
What is your response to those two questions?
Dr. Gurman. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. First of all, it is an
honor to dialogue with you.
The effects of mergers, which cause increased consolidation
and not competition, are severalfold. As Professor Dafny said,
the past is, unfortunately, prologue. So we have an ample
historic record to show what has happened in the past.
When there is monopsony power exercised, what happens to
physicians is that if they are paid less than competitive
rates, there is a downstream effect on patients, because
physicians do not have the financial resources to invest in
infrastructure, to invest in technology, to invest in staffing,
patient education, customer service aspects of medical care.
And they spend less time with their patients because they are
dealing with all of the other regulatory issues.
So the effect of monopsony is not only on physicians but it
also is on patient care.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
Let me close with this one question. Professor King, did
the studies of prior insurance mergers reveal the effects of
competition on consumers?
Ms. King. They did. In terms of price and premium
increases, they did. Are you asking about overall health of
consumers and their outcomes?
Mr. Conyers. Well, if the Chairman will let me squeeze it
in, yes.
Mr. Marino. Go ahead.
Ms. King. I do not know of any studies. That is a great
question, in terms of how their outcomes faired. But I know
that overall quality of care in what was measured in those
regards was not. There was no effect found.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you so much. And I thank all the
witnesses.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Congressman Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Chairman.
As I noted in a recent hearing that we had in here on
competition in the health care marketplace, the Texans that I
represent have, in most cases, been adversely impacted and, in
many cases, to a devastating extent, impacted by the perversely
named Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
The folks in my district, certainly, have not found this
law to provide affordable care or care that protects their
interests with respect to choice, with respect to quality, with
respect to cost.
Health care is incredibly personal, and I think we need to
keep that in the forefront of our mind as we talk about these
mergers today.
So conversations about the health care marketplace can get
technical very quickly, so I want to begin with a very basic
question for both Mr. Bertolini and for Mr. Swedish. I ask that
you answer these quickly because I want to get to a number of
questions.
So, Mr. Bertolini, in a nutshell, how do you think the
merger between Aetna and Humana will benefit my constituents?
In other words, specifically, how will it impact their premiums
and their deductibles and the quality of care that they
receive?
Mr. Bertolini. Thank you, Congressman Ratcliffe.
Our deal is largely a Medicare Advantage deal, so those
prices are set by CMS and by the government, so we see no
commercial impact in the State of Texas. So this is largely
around prices that get set by the Federal Government, which
have gone down 10 percent since 2010 while trend has grown up
20 percent. So we have actually created savings for those
members through that time frame, those beneficiaries.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay.
Mr. Swedish, same question for you.
Mr. Swedish. Certainly, thank you, Mr. Ratcliffe.
The combination, we believe, will lead to better value for
consumers through three core elements: provider collaboration,
consumer focus, and affordability.
The second point is that our combination is highly
complementary in the sense that both geography and product
focus is perfectly aligned in terms of maximizing the strengths
of both companies in terms of how we are going to better serve
the marketplace, whether it is small group, large group, the
individual markets, other elements, core elements of the
services we provide.
Finally, let me underscore that health care is unique,
because it is highly localized, and there is a competitive
nature in each one of those localized markets, which,
obviously, we believe we will be a very effective competitor in
those markets, bringing value to our members.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Swedish.
Dr. Gurman, do you want to comment on that? My question for
you actually tied into that. The district I represent, the
Fourth Congressional District of Texas, includes a very rural
area, so I would like you to address how the proposed merger
would affect quality and affordability of health care delivery,
specifically in rural areas like many of the parts that I
represent.
Dr. Gurman. Thank you, Congressman.
First of all, in respect to what you said earlier, our
analysis of the Aetna-Humana merger in the commercial market
space says that for combined HMO-PPO and point of service
plans, as well as in those individual considerations, that
Texas is one of four States where there would be an effect. We
are not talking about Medicare Advantage. This is commercial
insurance. This is all in my written testimony. I will be happy
to follow up with your staff, if you need more information
about that.
In response to your question regarding how this affects
rural areas, I talked before in response to Mr. Conyers about
the effect on patients. What happens, though, in consolidated
markets, particularly when the consolidation goes to a company
which is far away is that my ability to advocate on behalf of
patients can be compromised. Every once in a while, you get a
patient who has an unusual medical need, care need, whatever.
When I talk to the medical director who is local, he knows that
Andy Gurman is a reasonable guy who is dedicated to his
patients, I hope he knows that, and we can have a discussion
about what we are going to do, what resources we are going to
mobilize, to take care of this patient's particular needs.
If the medical director that I am talking to is in Timbuktu
somewhere as part of a megamerged conglomerate, I do not have
that personal relationship and it becomes much harder to do
that.
The other problem is that if there is severe monopsony or
market control, narrow networks sometimes are a consequence
with that. If I make too much noise, I may find that I am not
in the network.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Haislmaier, I want to quickly get to you. One of the
stated benefits of these mergers has been the efficiencies that
are expected to reduce costs to customers, in particular. With
respect to past health insurance mergers, do you have any data
that supports whether or not the savings have actually been
passed on to customers?
Mr. Haislmaier. No, I do not.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So do you have any concerns that these
mergers will present additional barriers of entry into the
health care marketplace?
Mr. Haislmaier. As I pointed out in my testimony----
Mr. Marino. The gentleman's time has expired, but you can,
please, answer that question quickly.
Mr. Haislmaier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I pointed out in my testimony, I am not saying that
these are great, and I am not saying that they are terrible
either. I am saying that they are what they are. What they are
is a combination of companies, and they do have more or less
effect depending on the product line and the place where the
combination is taking place.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New
York, Congressman Jeffries.
Mr. Jeffries. I thank the distinguished Chair, and I also
want to thank the witnesses for your testimony here today.
Dr. Gurman, I believe on page 6 of your testimony, you
cited a 2015 study by the Association of American Medical
Colleges that the United States will likely face a physician
shortage between 45,000 and 90,000 over the next 10 years. Is
that correct?
Dr. Gurman. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. I think you also cite projections by the
Department of Health and Human Services that suggest a similar
shortage is likely to occur of primary care physicians in the
United States over that same time period. Is that right?
Dr. Gurman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. As we see the health insurance market
consolidate and merge, what is your view as to how these
mergers and consolidations are likely to impact what is
anticipated to be a physician shortage across the country that
I think many would find interesting to know is particularly
acute in rural America?
Dr. Gurman. Thank you for that observation. It is of great
concern. It is of concern to me as I get older and I want to
know who is going to take care of me. It is of concern because,
as markets consolidate, there can be a detrimental effect on
physicians and physician practices. This can influence the
career choices that people make, either to go into medicine or,
once in medicine, what specialties to take.
So our concern is that competition is better for patients,
it is better for physicians, it is better for everybody,
whereas consolidated markets give monopsony power to the
insurers and makes it harder for the physicians and less
attractive for physicians, particularly in primary care.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you.
Professor King, I think you noted in your testimony that
there is no evidence that savings or efficiency that result
from these type of mergers in the past have resulted in those
savings being transmitted to consumers. Is that correct?
Ms. King. Yes, it is correct.
Mr. Jeffries. And that analysis is based on a study of
mergers within the insurance industry that have taken place in
the past. Could you elaborate on that?
Ms. King. Yes, that evidence is based on Professor Dafny's
research that she did several years ago, and also a 2015 study
that came out by Trish and Herring, just recently in 2015. They
found in that study that they were able to suppress or push
down provider reimbursement rates, which, as we noted, can
compromise quality in some instances, but that the increase in
margins on insurance were almost exactly met, which means that
provider insurance profits went up but there was no
transferring back to payers.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you.
Mr. Haislmaier, I believe in response to a previous
question, you indicated that you are unfamiliar with any
evidence that these savings have ever been passed on to
consumers. Did I hear your testimony correctly?
Mr. Haislmaier. Yes, that is unfamiliar. That does not mean
it does not exist. It just means I am not familiar with it.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. But you are an expert in this industry.
Mr. Haislmaier. Yes, I think the question is really a bit
off-topic because I am not expecting a great deal in the way of
savings out of these mergers to start with. So saying, what do
you do with the money that is saved, if there really is not a
lot of savings? I mean, I am looking at these as really a lot
of overlap where you are just consolidating two into one.
This is not dissimilar to previous mergers. I mean, Aetna
in 2013 bought Coventry. There was very little overlap between
those two companies. There were States where Coventry had a
presence and Aetna did not, and vice versa. We are not going to
see much change.
Mr. Jeffries. But should there not be a reasonable
expectation that to the extent these mergers are going to be
evaluated by the Department of Justice, presumably to determine
whether there would be some public benefit or public detriment,
that there would be some benefit inured by the consumers that
we on this panel and those Members of Congress throughout these
hallowed halls represent?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, the issue is not that they have to
show benefit. The issue is, is there something detrimental
about it? The presumption is that as long as there is nothing
detrimental about it, you can go about doing your own business
and dealing with whom you want and merging how you want.
The same is true on the hospital sector. I mean, look, this
is kind of why I am in the middle here, because we have the
monopsonists complaining about the monopolists, and the
monopolists complaining about the monopsonists. I mean, you are
looking at hospitals consolidating so that the insurer has no
choice but to deal with one system.
So the issue from a regulatory consumer perspective is not
whether they provide good. The issue is, do they do harm?
Mr. Jeffries. My time has expired. But I would just note in
closing, Mr. Chair, if you would permit me, that the two
companies that are before us today and these distinguished
gentlemen, of course, these are publicly traded companies,
which means they have a fiduciary obligation to their
shareholders. And I think the notion that the mode of analysis
should simply be whether it is likely to result in detriment to
the public is a misplaced way to approach public policy here,
and I respectfully yield back.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Rhode Island, Congressman Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for coming before the Subcommittee and sharing your
perspectives this afternoon, and for providing your written
testimony.
Given the size of the parties that are involved, these
mergers will, of course, impact the lives of millions of
Americans. It is very important that Members of this Committee
fully investigate and evaluate the consequences that these
proposed mergers will have on consumers, particularly, of
course, the patients.
My sense is that, broadly speaking, the proponents of the
mergers have claimed that the consolidation will result in a
better consumer experience by providing improved quality of
care and at a reduced cost. More specifically, this claim
arises from the idea that the merged insurers will realize
savings from increased efficiencies and will pass these savings
on to consumers.
However, I must admit after reviewing the testimony, I am
skeptical. If insurers are allowed to merge, they may, in fact,
become more efficient, but the question really is, what
evidence is there that these savings will be passed on to
consumers and to patients? And what will be the impact on care?
As has been mentioned, Dr. Dafny of Northwestern University
noted in her testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee
that if you look at the studies on insurance mergers that have
occurred already, they have led to increases in premiums even
as many of these insurers pay lower rates to health care
providers.
So what I am really interested to hear from Professor King,
if you could begin, is there any evidence that mergers of this
magnitude and in this sector will actually produce cost savings
to the ultimate consumer or patient?
And to Mr. Haislmaier's point, even though there might be
no evidence of detriment, is there any evidence of a benefit
when the market shares are as big as these proposed mergers
will result in?
Ms. King. So to answer your first question, there is no
evidence that these the savings in premiums are passed on to
consumers. I looked really hard, and I found none.
In terms of a detriment, a potential detriment, all of this
is always going to be predictive. The FTC and the DOJ have to
look at this potential merger and decide, is it likely to
increase market power or entrench market power in these ways? I
think the things they are concerned with: Is it likely to
increase premiums? Is it likely to result in a loss of quality
or innovation? And is it likely to harm competition?
I think that what we have seen is that, historically, yes.
Historically, prices are increased. Historically, we have seen
no impact on quality in terms of it increasing or decreasing,
but no evidence that it increases.
In terms of harm to competition, you have to think about
the fact that we are hoping to promote entry into these
markets. And Mr. Swedish and Mr. Bertolini have said how
important it is to be in the Medicare Advantage market, how
important it is to be in the self-insured national market.
These are places they would like to expand and grow.
What they are doing is they are engaging in a merger to
enter that space instead of entering it on their own and
increasing competition in that space. I think that is something
that we should really be thinking about. Is that a potential
harm to competition, that instead of going into these areas on
their own, they are attempting to acquire somebody who is
already there and successful?
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Bertolini and Mr. Swedish both contend,
at least in their written testimony, that health insurance
markets are flush with competition not only from traditional
health insurance companies, but from new market entrants, as
you just mentioned, which include Accountable Care
Organizations and other health care providers. Can you just
respond to that assertion? Is that a sufficient safeguard
against some of the concerns the Committee is expressing?
Ms. King. Are you asking me?
Mr. Cicilline. Yes.
Ms. King. I am sorry. I thought you shifted. Can you ask
the question again? I apologize.
Mr. Cicilline. They both sort of make the argument that
health insurance markets are flush with competition not only
from traditional health insurance companies but from new market
entrants, which include Accountable Care Organizations and
other health care providers.
Ms. King. Okay. So my sense of this is that we are
definitely starting to see in certain markets, in the exchanges
and in some other spaces, new entrants. We are certainly
starting to see that from integrated delivery systems and
larger provider organizations.
But I am from California, and this is a little bit like
saying we have had 2 rainy days and that is going to overturn
the entire drought, right? It is not going to happen that way.
This is encouraging. It is good to see new entrants into the
market, but it is not by any stretch changing dramatically the
amount of consolidation that we are seeing across the board.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Marino. Seeing no other Congressmen or Congresswomen,
this concludes today's hearing.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for attending.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses, or
additional materials for the record.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:38 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from Mark T. Bertolini,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Aetna, Inc.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from Joseph Swedish,
President and CEO, Anthem, Inc.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from Tom Nickels,
Executive Vice President, American Hospital Association (AHA)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from Edmund F. Haislmaier,
Senior Research Fellow of Health Policy Studies, The Heritage
Foundation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
