- INTERNATIONAL CONFLICTS OF LAW AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR CROSS BORDER DATA REQUESTS BY LAW ENFORCEMENT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNATIONAL CONFLICTS OF LAW AND THEIR
IMPLICATIONS FOR CROSS BORDER DATA
REQUESTS BY LAW ENFORCEMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 25, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-84

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-827 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum,

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 25, 2016

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     1

The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3

WITNESSES

David Bitkower, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General
United States Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    14

Brad Smith, President and Chief Legal Officer, Microsoft
Corporation
Oral Testimony.................................................    57
Prepared Statement.............................................    60

The Honorable Michael Chertoff, Co-Founder and Executive
Chairman, The Chertoff Group
Oral Testimony.................................................    72
Prepared Statement.............................................    74

The Honorable David S. Kris, former Assistant Attorney General
for National Security, United States Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................    80
Prepared Statement.............................................    82

Jennifer Daskal, Assistant Professor, American University
Washington College of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    84
Prepared Statement.............................................    86

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................     5

Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................   109

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Questions for the Record submitted to David Bitkower, Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General United States Department of
Justice........................................................   128

Response to Questions for the Record from Brad Smith, President
and Chief Legal Officer, Microsoft Corporation.................   130

Questions for the Record submitted to the Honorable Michael
Chertoff, Co-Founder and Executive Chairman, The Chertoff Group   138

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable David S.
Kris, former Assistant Attorney General for National Security,
United States Department of Justice............................   140

Response to Questions for the Record from Jennifer Daskal,
Assistant Professor, American University Washington College of
Law............................................................   143

INTERNATIONAL CONFLICTS OF LAW AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR CROSS BORDER
DATA REQUESTS BY LAW ENFORCEMENT

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 2016

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Bob
Goodlatte, (Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Chabot, Issa, King,
Jordan, Poe, Marino, Gowdy, Collins, DeSantis, Walters, Buck,
Ratcliffe, Bishop, Conyers, Lofgren, Johnson, Chu, DelBene,
Jeffries, and Peters.
Staff Present: Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General
Counsel; Branden Ritchie, Deputy Chief of Staff & Chief
Counsel; Zachary Somers, Parliamentarian & General Counsel;
Kelsey Williams, Clerk; Jason Herring, Counsel, Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations;
(Minority) Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief
Counsel; Danielle Brown, Parliamentarian & Chief Legislative
Counsel; Aaron Hiller, Chief Oversight Counsel; Joe
Graupensperger, Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Crime,
Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations; and Veronica
Eligan, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good morning. The Judiciary Committee will
come to order, and without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare recesses of the Committee at any time.
We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on
``International Conflicts of Law and Their Implications for
Cross-Border Data Requests by Law Enforcement,'' and I will
begin by recognizing myself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will examine international conflicts of law
and how these conflicts impact law enforcement access to data
both here and abroad. This is an extremely important issue that
affects individuals, technology companies, law enforcement, and
the economy. In the digital age, where the Internet knows no
boundaries, U.S. technology companies have flourished
internationally and provide services to customers and
subscribers around the world, but there is a growing tension
between U.S. law and foreign law, and U.S. technology companies
are caught in the middle.
U.S. law places restrictions on access to data by foreign
countries, making it difficult if not impossible in some
instances to obtain evidence of crimes or terror plots carried
out by their own citizens in violation of their laws. This has
provided an incentive for foreign governments to enact their
own legislation to address the problem. Some foreign
governments have enacted laws requiring U.S. technology
companies as a requirement for doing business there to comply
with that government's requests for data.
Alternatively, other countries are considering legislation
that would require U.S. providers to locate servers in that
country to ensure that country's jurisdiction over the U.S.
provider. This is sometimes referred to as data localization.
The disparity between U.S. and foreign law has similarly
created a conflict with regard to what law governs requests by
the U.S. Government to U.S. companies for data stored in
foreign countries.
Certain foreign countries prohibit the removal of data from
their boundaries in contravention of their law. U.S. law, on
the other hand, makes no distinction between data stored
domestically versus data stored abroad, nor any distinction
with regard to the nationality or location of the customer.
The result of these conflicts is that U.S. technology
companies find themselves with a Hobson's choice: either comply
with U.S. law, or comply with foreign law. But it is
increasingly impossible to comply with both. This is an
untenable situation for U.S. tech companies. This conflict also
thwarts timely access to information by foreign governments,
and has the potential to create additional barriers for U.S.
law enforcement.
Current U.S. law requires foreign governments who want
access to content maintained by a U.S. technology company to
make a government-to-government request for the data.
This is generally accomplished through the mutual legal
assistance treaty, or MLAT process, but frankly, the MLAT
process is slow and cumbersome. It has been reported that an
MLAT request takes, on average, approximately 10 months. This
is clearly causing serious frustration from foreign governments
who have legitimate interests in their own public safety.
For example, a foreign government may be investigating
criminal activity that has occurred wholly within that
government's borders by its own citizens, but because the
perpetrators are utilizing the email services of a U.S. email
provider, that foreign government cannot get access to email
content for evidentiary purposes, except through the MLAT
process, which takes entirely too long. The current arduous
MLAT process likewise poses significant hurdles to the U.S.
Government obtaining information stored abroad from U.S.
companies, and is not designed to carry the heavy burden of
these types of cross-border data requests.
It is abundantly clear that Congress must find a
legislative approach that embraces the modern manner in which
data is stored and acquired internationally.
One such approach could be bilateral agreements between the
U.S. and foreign countries that work to resolve or waive these
conflicts of law. Earlier this month, it was reported that the
U.S. and the United Kingdom recently commenced negotiations on
a bilateral agreement that would allow the U.K. Government to
request data directly from U.S. companies in criminal and
national security investigations not involving U.S. persons.
This type of agreement may serve as model for future
agreements, and thus relieve some of the international pressure
on U.S. tech companies, but we must closely examine important
details, such as the legal standard for which the U.K.
Government may make requests of U.S. tech companies, whether
such requests would require an independent review, and what
privacy protections should be implemented.
Such an agreement could also help alleviate any conflicts
of law relating to requests by the U.S. for data stored abroad
by U.S. companies. But any such agreements must preserve
American civil liberties and privacy protections embodied in
U.S. law.
Ultimately, in order for a bilateral agreement of this kind
to have effect, Congress would first need to enact legislation
enabling direct access to U.S. companies by foreign
governments, and prescribing the criteria that must be met by
the foreign government to receive such access.
Once again, the House Judiciary Committee finds itself at
the forefront of a pressing issue that impacts personal
privacy, national security, public safety, economic viability,
and the rule of law. Members of this Committee have been
dedicated to finding a legislative solution to address the
issues raised by the current conflict of laws, and we will
continue to examine all options presented to the Committee.
As always, we will not shy away from the heady task ahead
of us in finding a thoughtful, balanced solution to this
problem. I look forward to closely examining these issues today
and hearing from our distinguished witnesses, and with that, I
am pleased to recognize the Ranking Member of the Committee,
the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte. And thanks to
all of our witnesses on both panels for the time they are
taking to be with us today. The House Judiciary Committee is
the appropriate forum for a topic that never seems to leave the
news: how government agencies access the content of our
communications.
Over the past few years, we have explored this theme in
various forms: government surveillance, the FBI's effort to
build back doors into strong encryption, and our works to
reform the Electronic Communications Privacy Act. Today, we
discuss a different aspect of this theme: how law enforcement
agencies attempt to access data stored beyond their
jurisdictional reach.
Whatever your favorite policy solution may be, everyone in
this room agrees that there is a problem that must be solved.
Twenty years ago, a police officer in the United Kingdom
investigating a routine crime would have had little reason to
seek evidence stored in the United States, but today, on a
daily basis, law enforcement agencies around the world request
access to digital evidence stored in other countries. And the
legal framework in place for making those requests is wholly
inadequate to the task.
The mutual legal assistance treaty system was written for a
different era, and struggles to keep pace with the scope and
pace of modern communications. Our Members have also been
outspoken in the need to modernize the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, and I hope we will do it soon.
I am also a co-sponsor of H.R. 1174, the ``Law Enforcement
Access to Data Stored Abroad Act.'' Now I signed onto this bill
because it is an important vehicle for the discussion that we
will have today, and I thank the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Marino, the gentlelady from Washington, Ms. DelBene, and
Mr. Amodei, Nevada for their leadership on this issue. The
LEADS Act takes a holistic view of the system.
It reforms ECPA to require warrants for content in the
domestic content. It also provides one solution for Federal law
enforcement to reach data that is stored abroad. And, it begins
a much needed overhaul of the mutual legal assistance treaty
framework, and even if we may reach consensus on a solution
that differs from the LEADS Act, it will have been important
legislation for having recognized early that we need to use
every tool in our toolbox to update Federal law for the digital
age.
One other possibility for reform that I would like to
discuss today is the idea of bilateral agreements with our
closest allies. Those Nations we trust most on civil liberties
and due process issues. We should add this concept to the mix.
In addition to amending the Electronic Communications Privacy
Act, and updating our treaty system, these agreements could
counter the trend toward data localization, incentivize our
partners to set better standards for data protection, and help
our closest friends investigate serious crimes that often
impact the United States either directly or indirectly. I would
add only two notes on this topic for our distinguished guests
from the Department of Justice.
First, I hope to have your agreement today that no deal
with the United Kingdom is better than a deal that does not
honor privacy, due process, and free expression on both sides
of the Atlantic.
Secondly, I hope that this will be a collaborative process.
It is unfortunate that we learned about your discussions with
the British from the Washington Post before we heard about them
from you. I appreciate that the Department took the time to
brief Committee staff earlier this week. It was important, I
appreciate how candid the Department was about possible civil
liberties concerns going forward. I am sure that working
together, we can come up with a system of reforms that benefits
each of the stakeholders in this discussion.
And so I thank the Chairman and yield back any time that
might be remaining. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. And without
objection, all other Members' opening statements will be made a
part of the record.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jackson Lee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Goodlatte. We welcome our distinguished witness of
today's first panel. And if you would please rise, I will begin
by swearing you in. Do you swear that the testimony that you
are about to give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth so help you God? Thank you very much.
And I will now introduce our witness for today's first
panel. Mr. David Bitkower serves as the Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General of the U.S. Department of Justice.
Prior to joining the criminal division at the DOJ, Mr. Bitkower
was an Assistant United States Attorney in the eastern district
of New York.
He is a graduate of Yale University and Harvard Law School.
Your written testimony will be entered into the record in its
entirety, and we ask that you summarize your testimony in 5
minutes or less; and to help you stay within that time, there
is a timing light on your table. When the light switches from
green to yellow, you have 1 minute to conclude you testimony.
When it turns red, that is it. Your time is up. Welcome. Please
begin.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID BITKOWER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Bitkower. Thank you. And good morning Chairman
Goodlatte, Ranking Member Conyers, and Members of the
Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf
of the Department of Justice concerning international conflicts
of law, cross border data flow, and law enforcement requests.
The Department recognizes that issues concerning cross border
law enforcement access to data, while vitally important, can be
complex and require balancing several sometimes competing
goals.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Bitkower, you may want to pull that
microphone a little closer to you.
Mr. Bitkower. Certainly, thank you. Most importantly, we
must fulfill the responsibility that Congress and the American
people have entrusted to us by taking lawful steps to protect
Americans from threats to their safety and security. But we
must also do our best to meet legitimate public safety needs of
other countries that require access to evidence that happens to
be stored in the United States without compromising users'
privacy interests, and we must recognize that U.S. service
providers, seeking to compete in a global marketplace, may in
some instances face conflicting legal obligations from the
Nations where they choose to do business; and we should seek to
minimize those conflicts where possible.
Finding solutions that satisfy all of these goals will be
difficult, and we welcome this hearing as part of an important
discussion about how to do so. I will focus on two issues this
morning.
First, I will discuss the increasingly important role that
cross border access to data plays in the protection of the
public, both for the United States and for our foreign
partners. Second, I will discuss a potential new opportunity to
build a framework for cross border access to data that would
facilitate legitimate law enforcement requests for electronic
information, help to alleviate conflicts of law as faced by
service providers, and protect privacy and civil liberties.
Two related trends have significantly increased the need
for U.S. law enforcement to be able to access electronic data
that may be stored overseas.
First, the rapid growth of Internet use has meant that law
enforcement increasingly relies on electronic data, such as the
content of emails or text messages, in identifying perpetrators
and bringing them to justice.
Second, while much of this information is stored within the
United States, providers are increasingly storing information
outside the United States as well. United States law generally
does not require providers to store data here, and U.S.
providers increasingly face tax or other business incentives as
well as pressure by foreign governments to store data outside
the United States.
In fact, many of the largest American providers now operate
data centers abroad, and it is unusual for a major provider to
store all of its data within a single country. For these
reasons, although law enforcement access to data stored abroad
is already a key issue for the United States, its importance is
likely to grow over time. Under United States law, when a
provider is subject to the jurisdiction of U.S. courts, U.S.
law enforcement may use the Stored Communications Act, or SCA,
to obtain this data.
The SCA's efficient and privacy protecting process is
critical to successful investigations. When SCA process is
unavailable, U.S. law enforcement may attempt to obtain
information stored abroad through international cooperation
mechanisms, such as mutual legal assistance treaty, or MLAT
requests, but the MLAT system can be cumbersome and is
overburdened, and the United States does not even have MLAT
treaties with half the countries in the world.
As a result, criminals may remain free to commit serious
crimes against Americans. The United States is of course not
alone in confronting these challenges. Many of our foreign
partners, including close allies such as the United Kingdom,
find themselves in an even more difficult situation reliant on
evidence stored outside their borders, often within the United
States, to protect public safety and national security. The
difficulty arises in part because the SCA not only serves as
the mechanism for U.S. law enforcement to require a provider to
disclose information, but also precludes providers from
disclosing the contents of communications unless certain
exceptions are met; and the SCA contains no exception
permitting a provider to disclose the contents of
communications in response to a foreign production order.
Thus, when a foreign country makes a request under its own
law for an American provider to disclose data stored in the
United States, the provider may face conflicting legal demands,
compulsion to disclose under foreign law, and simultaneous
preclusion of that disclosure under American law. This is so
even if, for example, the order relates solely to a crime
committed by the country's national within its own territory.
The result may be to stymie legitimate investigations,
motivate foreign countries to require data to be stored within
their own borders, and expose American companies and their
employees to potential enforcement actions abroad. There is
widespread acknowledgement that this status quo is untenable.
To address these problems, the Administration is currently
considering a framework under which U.S. providers could
disclose data directly to the United Kingdom in response to a
lawful U.K. order. The agreement would not permit the targeting
of U.S. persons or persons within the United States, and would
not be used for bulk collection. The agreement would also
secure reciprocal access for the U.S. to data located in the
United Kingdom. We recognized that any such agreement would
require legislation, both to lift conflicts of laws in
carefully specified circumstances, and also to set forth base
line standards to project privacy and civil liberties.
We look forward to working with Congress as we continue to
explore this approach. Should the approach prove successful, we
would consider it for other like-minded governments as well. We
believe the framework I have described rather than legislation
that would unilaterally restrict U.S. law enforcement
authority, offers a path forward to efficient and privacy
protecting cross border law enforcement access to data. Thank
you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bitkower follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. We will now begin the
questioning, and I will recognize myself. Mr. Bitkower, what
will happen if Congress fails to implement legislation to
facilitate international agreements such as the one currently
being negotiated with the United Kingdom?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you for the question, Congressman. And
I think it goes to the heart of why such a framework is so
helpful. As we said, the status quo today is untenable, both
for our close allies and for our companies. If there is no
agreement or path forward, then our companies will increasingly
face conflicts of law situations when foreign countries,
including close allies such as the United Kingdom, have
legitimate requests for data related to legitimate
investigations under their own law, the only connection to the
United States of which is that the data happens to be stored
here, and the provider is precluded under United States law
from complying with that request.
I think we will see that situation continuing to grow as
crime becomes more international and as data can move around
more easily, and if we do not resolve those questions, then we
will face both continuing pressure from our allies as well as
continuing pressure on our own companies.
Mr. Goodlatte. Do you agree that the Stored Communications
Act is silent as to whether its procedures apply to data stored
outside the U.S. or to non-U.S. persons outside the U.S.?
Mr. Bitkower. Again, thank you for the question,
Congressman. So, the U.S. Stored Communications Act is a form
of compulsory process. And U.S. law at the time the SCA was
enacted and in fact, for many decades has provided the
compulsory process, if served on a company within the
jurisdiction of the United States, can require that company to
produce materials, even if those materials happen to be stored
abroad. This has been the law of the United States for many
decades and in fact many countries have similar laws. I think
we saw, in fact, even in the case involving Microsoft in
Ireland.
Mr. Goodlatte. Yeah, can you answer the question though? Is
it silent with regard to these parties?
Mr. Bitkower. So the text of the law does not particularly
mention where the data is stored and does not turn one way or
the other in where data is stored.
Mr. Goodlatte. So, what guidance do U.S. providers have as
to the application of the Stored Communications Act to data or
customers that are outside the U.S.?
Mr. Bitkower. So again, we think that since this SCA was
legislated against a backdrop of U.S. law, which applies across
a variety of contexts, not just in electronic communications
contexts.
Mr. Goodlatte. Is your answer that it does not give
guidance to this?
Mr. Bitkower. No, to the contrary, sir. My answer is that
it operates like other forms of compulsory process where the
law is clear that companies may be required to retrieve data
from abroad in response to a lawful request.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. Should a bilateral agreement such as
the one under consideration with the U.K. also ameliorate any
conflicts of law with regard to U.S. requests for data held by
U.S. companies in that other country that is a party of the
bilateral agreement?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, Congressman. One of the primary benefits
in an agreement of this nature would be to have reciprocal
benefits for the United States in lifting any conflicts of law
that might be present in the other country from where we
request data.
Mr. Goodlatte. And in your written testimony, you say that
a successful bilateral framework must establish adequate base
lines for protecting privacy and civil liberties, both through
the agreement and implementing legislation. And you also go on
to say that, for example, legislation should require the
foreign country's law to have in place appropriate substantive
and procedural protections for privacy and civil liberties.
What does that mean?
Mr. Bitkower. So thank you, Congressman. That is an area
where we had hoped to work very closely with Congress and in
particular with this Committee in establishing what those base
lines ought to be. Our goal is that when we choose a country to
conclude such an agreement with, we would want to ensure that
that country has adequate substantive and procedural base lines
to ensure that the orders that they are submitting and serving
on our providers are ones based on a rule of law framework,
they provide protections for civil liberties, they provide
protections for privacy. And so that way our companies can be
sure they are complying with legitimate requests.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much. I now recognize the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers for his questions.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to our
hearing, sir. In the case pending before the Second Circuit
right now, the Department of Justice and Microsoft differ on
the application of the law to data stored on servers outside
the United States.
I would like to focus on some areas that I think we may be
in agreement on. Do you believe that companies like Microsoft
face a difficult decision when U.S. laws like the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act dictates one outcome, and the law of
a different country dictates another? That is a pretty
difficult situation, is it not?
Mr. Bitkower. I absolutely agree, Congressman. Our
companies currently can be caught in difficult conflicting
legal obligations, in particular when foreign countries seek
access to data that is stored here in the United States.
Mr. Conyers. Do you believe that the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act should be reformed to address this
issue?
Mr. Bitkower. So, thank you, Congressman. I am aware this
Committee held a hearing in December on the subject of the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act. The Department was
privileged to submit testimony to that hearing, and obviously
we stand by that today. We recognize that certain aspects of
the Electronic Communications Privacy Act have not kept date
with the way technology is used, and the Department is open to
certain changes in that statute, provided contingencies are
made to protect important civil and criminal law enforcement
functions.
Mr. Conyers. Now, in February, the Washington Post reported
that the Department of Justice had entered into negotiations
with the British government on an agreement that would allow
British agencies to serve wiretap orders directly on United
States companies. Do you think it might have been appropriate
for us to learn about this activity from the Department of
Justice rather than the Washington Post?
Mr. Bitkower. Certainly, Congressman. We believe that close
collaboration with Congress is essential in this area as in
many others. I do not want to overstate any progress we have
made. The negotiations began just very recently. We only very
recently received, in fact, the authorization to begin those
negotiations, at approximately the time that that Washington
Post article was published. We obviously did look forward to
the opportunity to brief this Committee and other Committees of
jurisdiction and we hope to work with you in the future as
well.
Mr. Conyers. Well, is it your position that our government
should be able to obtain data stored abroad by applying the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act to any company based in
the United States?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you, Congressman. We think it is
essential that the United States be able to obtain data without
regard to its location, if the provider is subject to U.S.
jurisdiction. As I noted in my testimony, there are numerous
examples of cases where individuals who may be outside the
United States, who may not be United States citizens, whether
they are in the United States or not, commit very serious
crimes against Americans, and if we do not have access to data
and evidence, then those crimes could continue. So we do take
seriously potential conflicts of laws that our companies may
face.
We do everything in our power to minimize those and see if
there are work arounds we can engage in. But at the end of the
day, if the United States does not have the authority to gather
evidence simply based on the location of that evidence, then
not only will our citizens suffer, but in fact, an agreement of
the type we are talking about today, would have no reciprocal
benefit for the United States.
Mr. Conyers. All right. Is there some way we can speed up
the negotiations and the conferences and all this business so
that this does not take months and months, and jeopardize the
interest of a lot of individuals and companies? How would we
react if the Chinese government, for example required, a
Chinese company like Alibaba, which maintains the data center
in the United States, to produce account information that
belongs to a U.S. citizen or citizens?
Mr. Bitkower. So thank you, Congressman. Again, that is I
think one of the key conflicts of laws that our companies may
face. That is they receive requests from other companies in
other countries, for data that our companies may store in the
United States. Sometimes those are requests that they very much
want to respond to. Legitimate requests from close allies to
resolve crimes in their territory; and sometimes they come from
countries who do not have the same human rights record and
where the request is not as obviously legitimate.
We do not believe the solution to that problem is to enact
legislation that would unilaterally strip U.S. authority to
investigate serious crimes, but we do think a framework of the
type I am talking about today, under discussion between the
U.S. and the U.K., which allows us to pick and choose
likeminded countries and circumstances in which we would reduce
those conflicts is a path forward.
Mr. Conyers. Well, I hope we work more closely together in
this area, and I thank you for your response to my questions.
And I thank the Chair.
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Issa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bitkower. Is it
Bitkower?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Sometimes, here from the dais, the best way
to deal with a new problem is see if the problem is new or not.
So let me ask you a few questions just to see if the problem is
new. The country of Ireland decides that, in fact, you
committed a crime, and they want you back there. Should they be
able to simply unilaterally go to an Irish court, issue a
warrant, and come get you?
Mr. Bitkower. So if the country grounds had an extradition
request for me?
Mr. Issa. No, no. They just want to come haul your ass in.
Mr. Bitkower. I would oppose that, sir.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So, in the tangible world, that is an
example where we have absolutely no authority whatsoever to
take a person--by the way, U.S. or otherwise, from another
sovereign country. We have had a long tradition--and I just
left the Foreign Affairs Committee--I have got Secretary Kerry
there so I apologize I am going back and forth between the two
most important people I will see today--so, for all these years
we have set up a list of countries in which we do business on
extradition.
We want tangible evidence. Let's just say an M-16 used in a
crime, but it left the country. Or, an M-16 was found in
Ireland being used, but we believe it is from the U.S. When you
want that tangible property, you do not go to a U.S. court
order alone. You go to a U.S. court to plead your case, and
then you go to a foreign jurisdiction, and you negotiate with
the foreign jurisdiction whether or not, as to that person, as
to that equipment, as to that evidence, they are willing to,
through their court system, allow you access or, in fact,
removal from their country. Correct?
Mr. Bitkower. So the question is--Congressman, I do
appreciate the question, I think, across a wide variety of
contexts. We face a wide variety of situations where we--there
may or may not be a conflict of law.
Mr. Issa. Right, but let's just look at the intangible
world, the piece of paper reduced to a PDF. Because that is
really what we are talking about. We are talking about
something that could be tangible fairly quickly but happens to
be in electronic format, correct?
Mr. Bitkower. Certainly.
Mr. Issa. Okay, and you want us to assume that somehow, as
to U.S. corporations, Microsoft, Apple, whoever it happens to
be, that in my opinion the bully--is being bullied by the
Justice Department today in some ways. You want us to believe
that you should throw out all the history of extradition, all
the history of you do not get it, you get to ask another
country for it. And you want to have an absolute right to
demand it and get it if a U.S. court says it, and you have
jurisdiction over the entity who could control the bringing of
it back electronically to you. Is that correct?
Mr. Bitkower. That is not precisely correct.
Mr. Issa. It is pretty close though, is it not?
Mr. Bitkower. Well, respectfully, sir, the U.S. courts do
have a long tradition of balancing----
Mr. Issa. I am not asking what the U.S. court is. I am
asking what you are asking for. You are asking for the U.S.
courts to summarily order U.S. corporations or any entity that
you believe the court has jurisdiction over, to deliver to you
something from another country and circumvent that other
country's opportunity to tell you yes or no. And that is
essentially what you are asking for.
So let me ask it in another way, and I will be asking the
next panel. Should we not fashion legislation that treats
intangible evidence exactly the same as we treat tangible
evidence? That treats the summoning of something from somewhere
else to the United States substantially similar to how we would
do so if, in fact, it was tangible, like a person, M-16, or a
piece of paper? Is that not where--not your position. Your
position is rightfully so, self-serving, that you would like
the evidence as quickly and easily as possible. But from our
standpoint, our Founding Fathers saw 200 years evolve without
this sort of an idea that you can order an U.S. entity to bring
back something to the United States.
Can you give me a good reason as the time expires--I will
give you the rest of the time and as much as the Chairman gives
us--can you give me the good reason why I should treat this
intangible substantially different than we have treated
tangible for 240 years?
Mr. Bitkower. So thank you, Congressman. We do not believe
that our position either in the Microsoft case or with regard
to the SCA treats tangible and intangible objects differently.
As I said before, there is a long tradition where corporations
and banks, for example, subject to U.S. jurisdiction, may be
required by lawful process in the United States to retrieve
documents from abroad. If after that order is given, the
provider can show, or the company can show that there is
legitimate competitive laws we work every with companies in
that context, in our financial investigations, in trade secret
investigations, and so on.
Mr. Issa. So you go to the court, you get an order, and
then with the threat of the order and the financial loss to
them you negotiate. Is that right?
Mr. Bitkower. That is correct.
Mr. Issa. But only if they file an opposition and they are
tying it up in court. Then you negotiate because you want it
faster. Is that right?
Mr. Bitkower. That is not correct. They do not have to file
an opposition. They simply have to tell us there is a conflict
of laws and we will talk to them right away. I will point out
in the Microsoft litigation you are referring to, there has
been no claim or allegation by Microsoft of any conflict of
law.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Lofgren, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for scheduling this and a series of hearings on this important
topic before our country. You know, I will just join with the
other Members' concern with the negotiations with Britain with
the newspaper instead of from the Department. I just do not
think that is the way this should work. And looking at that, I
just got to express some concerns.
Yes, Britain is our ally, but they do not have a First
Amendment. I mean, they do not protect speech. And they do not
have judicial review. I mean, they do not have a magistrate
that oversees the issuance of warrants. And they do not have a
probable cause standard either. So to think that just because
they are our ally, they meet our standards I think is
completely mistaken, and I have very grave concerns about what
is going on.
Obviously this is not the focus of this hearing, but I will
just get that out there. I have very grave concerns. And
certainly Britain is moving in a direction away from what we
would consider basic liberties that are guaranteed by our
Constitution. So their direction in our negotiation I think is
cause for grave concern in this country. And I will--we are
going to have to get further into that later.
Since you are here, I would like to ask a couple of
questions about ECPA reform, because I think what we do with
ECPA reform will greatly impact the conflict of laws issues
that is the subject of this hearing. We have a bill that has, I
think, hundreds of co-sponsors. I am for that bill. But what
the bill does not have in it is protection for geolocation.
Now, our Supreme Court is moving in the direction of projection
geo location, so it may be that our Supreme Court is going to
solve that, even though the legislation does not include it,
but I am interested in the Department's policy.
Now, it is my understanding that the Department recently
enacted a policy requiring a warrant before deploying a cell
site simulator, sometimes called a StingRay, to locate a
suspect using their cell phone. Does that mean that the
Department of Justice is going to require a warrant for all
other means of obtaining real time geo location information of
a person or mobile device? And if not, what technologies and
techniques require a warrant and which do not?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you, Congresswoman for raising two
different but both very important issues. Initially, with
respect to the U.K., I do want to emphasize we are at an early
stage in the negotiations. We fully recognize and appreciate
that Congress will have to legislate in this area, and we hope
to work with this Committee and others in order to establish
the appropriate base line standards for the protection of
privacy and civil liberties.
And I will also note, as you note, that the U.K. has
introduced substantial reforms to its Investigative Powers Act.
Any determination with respect to any country, including the
U.K., will only be made after there is legislation in place at
that time. With respect to geo location, I will note also at
the beginning we follow the law, whether it is in the statute
or created by court decisions, including the Supreme Court. So
we will follow it, obviously no matter what the circumstance
is.
There is no single category of geo location data that law
enforcement can obtain from third parties. There are various
types of data and various types of technology. It depends
whether you're looking at prospective information or historical
information, information provided voluntarily by an individual,
or information collected without their consent. And they vary
in terms of precision. So our practices vary depending on the
type of information, and the type of technology, and we make
the showing that is required under law for any of those.
Ms. Lofgren. So, let me ask you this. If you are requiring
a warrant for--which I must say, apparently the U.S. Marshals
Service is not--to deploy StingRay for real time geo location
would you require a warrant generally to obtain historical geo
location?
Mr. Bitkower. So, again Congresswoman, it depends on what
you mean by geo location information.
Ms. Lofgren. Where you are.
Mr. Bitkower. Well, again, that can be determined with
different degrees of precision. That could be as precise as are
you in this room? It could be more generally, are you in the
city? Or are you in this country? When you get more precise,
generally speaking the law does require a higher showing, often
including a warrant based on probably cause. When you are less
precise, often the law requires a lower showing and we will
follow that law.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, in some cases there is a void in terms
of the law, in terms of where the court has so far acted. So it
sounds like, Mr. Chairman, that as we take this up, we may want
to include some geo location protection and precision to guide
the Department in the future, and I see my time has expired,
and I would yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentlewoman and
recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King, for 5 minutes.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for your
testimony, Mr. Bitkower. I would like to ask you about the
broader picture of this. I mean, we are bouncing this back and
forth between the United States and the U.K., and it is far
more complex than this as I understand it. And the several
hundred countries there are in the world, that would seem to me
that that is several hundred different bilateral relationships
that need to be negotiated. Could you paint this big picture on
what would be the optimum here? I mean, if we had the picture
of what's optimum, perhaps then, as we move the pieces around
on this jigsaw puzzle, we might be able to get that picture
eventually put together, or at least have a target?
Mr. Bitkower. Sure, and thank you, Congressman. And I will
do my best. I think we all start from the recognition that the
current situation is untenable, and the optimum would be to
move in the right direction, which means both to facilitate
legitimate requests from countries to solve crimes and protect
public safety, but also to take our companies out of the middle
when they are stuck between conflicting legal obligations, both
of which they respect.
We do not believe that we will wind up with 181 bilateral
agreements. I think that is not even close to being
contemplated. There are not that many countries, I think, that
share our values in that sense that would be willing to conduct
such an agreement with. If it proves successful with the U.K.,
however, we would be amenable to exploring it with other
countries with whom we have similar close relationships, and
who have similar values and have similar rule of law respecting
systems.
So I think the approach that we want to take is one that
solves the problem that we see, the problem being lack of
access because of conflicting laws and our country is caught in
the middle. The approach we want to avoid is one that would
unilaterally strip U.S. law enforcement of its authority to
protect Americans, even in cases where there are no conflicts.
Mr. King. I would add to that, that by some of the memos
here I have in front of me, there is an indication that perhaps
just valuable evidence in a criminal investigation might be
delayed as long as 10 months. It would seem to me that that
would be a big discouragement from the prosecutors in whichever
country was waiting for 10 months. How much is that a
consideration of your initiative here?
Mr. Bitkower. That is an everyday consideration, sir, for
the most serious crimes we face, ranging from terrorism to
child sexual exploitation to computer crime, and I will add the
10 months is an estimate of the time it takes us to respond to
requests from foreign countries.
When we are talking about situations where the Department
of Justice is required to request information--I am sorry, the
10 months is when we produce information. When we are talking
about situations where we are required to request information
from foreign countries, 10 months may be a best-case scenario.
In many cases we will never see that evidence at all, and in
many cases we do not even have a mutual legal assistance
treaty, as I said, with about half the countries in the world.
So, if we are required to pursue international cooperation
mechanisms to gather evidence, that is going to stop many
important investigations dead in their tracks.
Mr. King. So that would imply that there are many criminals
going free because of these delays.
Mr. Bitkower. There is no question that that is true, sir.
Mr. King. And also, what about intelligence purposes? Say
investigations of radical Islamic terrorists? How much of this
proposal is contemplated that would be gathering that kind of
intel?
Mr. Bitkower. So that is a core consideration. So, if, for
example, the United Kingdom was investigating a U.K. citizen
who had gone off to Syria to fight with ISIL, and was
communicating with his co-conspirators through a U.S. provider,
and that data was stored in the United States, right now the
U.K. would have to come to us for an MLAT, and we would have to
go through all those same procedures.
By the same token, when we investigate Syria's terrorism
offenses--and I have a couple in my written testimony--quite
often terrorists are non-U.S. persons who are located overseas,
and that might be exactly the type of data that our providers
store overseas. If we have to go through MLAT procedures to
obtain that evidence, and if any conflicts of law are
automatically resolved against the United States, those
investigations will automatically suffer.
Mr. King. Let me just suggest then that if we are
contemplating a degree of change in our foreign policy, that
Mr. Issa referenced foreign policy and foreign affairs--a
change in our foreign policy that we were committed to actually
defeating ISIS and doing so in a comprehensive way, not only
tactically in the Caliphate, but throughout our initiation of a
global war against terrorists, and using data as a component of
that as well as finances, would you say that this is a critical
element that we are addressing here today?
Mr. Bitkower. When it comes to the fight against terrorism
by both us and our allies, access to evidence stored abroad is
a key part of that. Absolutely.
Mr. King. And right now we are handcuffed to a degree?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes.
Mr. King. Thank you. I appreciate your testimony, Mr.
Bitkower, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Marino [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Johnson from Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sir, thank you for
your testimony today. In what ways, if any, would a bilateral
or series of bilateral agreements be preferable to a mutual
legal assistance treaty?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you, sir, for the question. So let me
say from the very beginning, the mutual legal assistance
process is a vital part of international cooperation. We rely
on it all of the time on a daily basis, and I do not by any
means mean to suggest that that is not a key element going
forward, but the mutual legal assistance process can be
burdensome, because it requires essentially a diplomatic
request from one country to another, the need for a country to
translate its documents not only in terms of language but also
in terms of legal process.
Mr. Johnson. Well, that is within the current framework
of--yeah.
Mr. Bitkower. Exactly, exactly. And the idea of a new
framework of the type I am talking about today between the U.S.
and the U.K. is that it would permit direct requests from the
U.K. under U.K. law to providers that are doing business in the
U.K. And that would circumvent the need to go through all the
procedures in the MLAT process that are not privacy protecting,
that do not enhance investigations, but simply add time and
delay.
Mr. Johnson. A new MLAT process or framework could
incorporate the features of the bilateral agreement that is
being negotiated with the U.K. Is that not correct?
Mr. Bitkower. So, in a sense the U.S.-U.K. framework is one
of mutual legal assistance, but it is not mutual legal
assistance in the type contemplated by our current treaties,
which require requests to go through those diplomatic channels.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I guess I am getting to the issue of
whether or not it is better to try to, for this country, to
address its cross-border access to data issues--and other
countries that have the same issue--whether or not it is better
to negotiate within a treaty format as opposed to a series of
bilateral agreements. Why would a bilateral agreement process
with at least 190 different Nations in this world--why would
that be a superior route as opposed to a treaty?
Mr. Bitkower. So, I absolutely agree with you. We should
continue to work and reform the MLAT system, and there are a
number of steps that we are taking in that regard. And we are
happy to work with this Committee and others to continue to do
so. That is an essential step as well.
Mr. Johnson. It seems like that is on the back burner
though.
Mr. Bitkower. Not at all, sir. That is actually on the
front burner for the Department of Justice, and it is an area
where we put a lot of resources and intend to continue to do
so. In fact, we think a framework of the type--a bilateral
framework with the U.K. of the type I have discussed would
actually contribute to reforming and improving the MLAT
process, because it would take certain high volume countries
like the U.K. out of that system to a degree and free up
resources for uses for all other countries, even those that are
not part of the framework. But the reason we would go through a
bilateral framework is for certain close allies with
particularly--with legal systems that have adequate substantive
and procedural protections for privacy and civil liberties, the
idea is that this would be an expedited method, that they would
not have to go through the normal MLAT procedures for crimes
that are of particular concern to them, and do not involve U.S.
persons, they have not targeted at U.S. persons or persons
located in the United States.
So we would get the best of both worlds in a sense of
expediting process that have privacy protecting features and
favor our close allies, but also lifting all boats by freeing
up resources for people who are not part of that process.
Mr. Johnson. So, I presume that you are working under the
assumption that British legal standards are acceptable with
respect to U.S. legal standards?
Mr. Bitkower. So, again, we are not working on any
assumptions. We recognize the need to and we look forward to
working with this Committee and others to establish exactly
what those standards ought to be and only then would be
evaluate the U.K. as an applicant for such a process.
Mr. Johnson. And, last question: would a bilateral
agreement with the U.K. waive U.S. Fourth Amendment protections
with respect to requests from British for electronic data
stored here in the U.S.?
Mr. Bitkower. So, any agreement obviously would require
MLAT legislation and that legislation would have to be
consistent with the Fourth Amendment. We certainly recognize
that. The Fourth Amendment, of course, takes particular views
with regards to investigations by foreign governments as
opposed to our own. Or data that does not belong to U.S.
persons or persons who are in the United States.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. And would a bilateral agreement be
subject to congressional approval?
Mr. Bitkower. So Congress would have to enact legislation
to make this entire process possible, sir.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Marino. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, a former judge, Congressman Poe.
Mr. Poe. I thank the Chair. I am over here on the far
right. Let me just go back to the basic, what the law is right
now. Under current law, information that is stored in the cloud
that is over 6 months old, the Department of Justice, on behalf
of some law enforcement agency, makes a request or a demand to
the provider for that information in the cloud such as an email
that belongs to Bubba down in Texas. Is that a fair statement
of what the law is right now?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir. For the content of email, we would
generally proceed with a warrant.
Mr. Poe. Okay. You would get a warrant from a judge.
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Poe. When is it you do not get a warrant, but you get a
subpoena or a request made by some person in the Department of
Justice?
Mr. Bitkower. So we would proceed by subpoena with--under
the SCA with respect to certain non-content information, such
as metadata, or subscriber information.
Mr. Poe. So that is not a law enforcement agency, though.
Is that correct?
Mr. Bitkower. That would be on behalf of law enforcement
agencies, sir, yes.
Mr. Poe. Oh, a law enforcement agency. So when do you
request the subpoena and when do you have to get the warrant?
Mr. Bitkower. So the Department's practice is to seek a
warrant when content of the communications are at issue, sir.
Mr. Poe. But to get the data, you issue a subpoena.
Mr. Bitkower. For certain types of non-content information,
that is correct, sir.
Mr. Poe. Okay. And, right now, Congress, for the last 4
years, has been discussing and trying to update ECPA to deal
with the issue of content and information that is stored in the
cloud that is over 6 months old. Is it the Department of
Justice's position that a warrant should be required to get
that information, whether it is data or whether it is content?
Mr. Bitkower. So the Department is open to a warrant
requirement for that type of data if exceptions for certain
limited contingencies involving civil investigators are made.
Mr. Poe. Okay. All right. And just so you are clear, I
think that the--you ought to have a warrant for all of that.
And the reason that the SEC wants to have an exception is
exactly the reason that the SEC should have a warrant
requirement as well. Its content I think is--or data I think is
protected under the Fourth Amendment. That is one of the bills
that we are debating here. And regardless of what we eventually
come up with, do you think it is important that Congress
actually make a decision on reforming ECPA?
Mr. Bitkower. So again, the Department is certainly open to
that change that you are describing, and I would agree with you
that any access to data has to comply with the Fourth
Amendment. There are ways other than warrants to comply with
the Fourth Amendment, and we think those ways might be
available to civil investigators.
Mr. Poe. And I think it ought to apply to the civil
agencies in the Federal Government as well. That is my personal
opinion. Do you think that Congress--I am asking your opinion
if you are open to it, are you open to it now, or do you think
we ought to wait to figure out some deal with the British on
what they are doing? Or should we go ahead and make that
decision as our responsibility in Congress?
Mr. Bitkower. So certainly, we do not see one process as
dependent on the other. Our concern is when, for example, DOJ
civil investigative agencies or civil components, such as the
Civil Rights Division, do need to seek information for an
important civil rights investigation, and they are not able to
get a warrant because it is not a criminal investigation. And
in that case there ought to be some mechanism for them to get
access to data from the provider, but with full privacy
protections, and we are open to a variety of solutions in that
regard.
Mr. Poe. I did not ask you that. I asked you about dealing
with the British. I did not ask you about civil rights. Do you
think that we ought to wait to deal--make a treaty with the
British on content that is stored in the cloud, and what they
think and what we think and come up with some agreement,
treaty, whatever it is called, or should we act on behalf of
the American public now?
Mr. Bitkower. We do not think there is any need to wait to
act on ECPA, but to resolve the situation with the U.K. either,
no.
Mr. Poe. All right. Well I agree with you on that. That is
Congress' responsibility, and it is long overdue that we deal
with storing information in the cloud, and I think the Fourth
Amendment ought to apply to the information stored in the
cloud, over 4 months or over 6 months old, whether it is civil
process or criminal process. And maybe we will get that
legislation that is now pending with over 300 sponsors of
Congress to the House floor soon. Thank you very much; I will
yield back the balance of the time.
Mr. Marino. Chair now recognizes the congresswoman from the
great State of Washington, Congresswoman DelBene, who is a
coauthor with me on the LEADS Act.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you thank you, Mr.
Bitkower, for being with us today. The DOJ argued in the
Microsoft Ireland case that congressional inaction with respect
to updating the Electronic Communications Privacy Act is
evidence of legislative intent, and that Congress generally
think the law is fine, but the courts should feel free to apply
it to all of the unique situations that arise given the way
technology works today, including international data storage.
Now as was mentioned by my colleague from Texas moments ago,
are you aware that this Committee has held hearings and
announced plans to mark up the Email Privacy Act, and there are
over 300 cosponsors on that very basic reform bill waiting for
this Committee to take it up, and over 100 on the LEADS Act
that addresses the international question?
Mr. Bitkower. I am aware of those facts, yes.
Ms. DelBene. So, you have indicated that DOJ's position is
that in all cases, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act as
written reaches data oversees. So where it is stored does not
matter.
Mr. Bitkower. With respect to the government's ability to
compel a provider to disclose information, it does not matter
where the provider chooses to store that information, that is
correct.
Ms. DelBene. Now, you know, Congress is looking at a number
of ways to update the Electronic Communications Privacy Act to
account for the global nature of cloud computing, and the needs
of law enforcement to access critical evidence, but some of the
threshold questions that we have discussed include the
citizenship of the account holder, the location of the data, or
the headquarters of the company holding the data. Would you say
that the DOJ's position is that ECPA as written already
addresses questions about how to handle data stored abroad, and
that all these questions are essentially superfluous to--and we
should not be asking them?
Mr. Bitkower. So I think ECPA today currently does not make
distinctions that restrict the government's ability to
investigate based on the nationality of the account holder, and
does not make distinctions about the DOJ's ability to
investigate based on where the data is stored. We think that is
a wise course to continue with, because there are many
investigations where we need to take action where the
individual may be abroad and the individual may not be an
American. So obviously we are concerned with legislation that
would unilaterally strip our authority to investigate in those
cases.
Ms. DelBene. So if we follow the model that says it is
based on a company, then--and I think this was mentioned
earlier as well--China could make subsidiaries of Chinese
companies in the U.S., turn over whatever information it wants,
is that a desirable outcome?
Mr. Bitkower. That is certainly not a desirable outcome,
and that is in fact why we are looking for a creative way
forward that would address conflicts of laws in targeted ways
that lower those conflicts in case we have legitimate requests
from companies that respect--countries that respect rights. But
we can pick and choose which country to make a deal with.
Ms. DelBene. So, many of us would agree though that the
MLAT system is in need of modernization to function officially
in a digital age. Could you share with the Committee how many
times an MLAT has been used to obtain data stored overseas
versus a warrant stored under the Stored Communications Act?
Mr. Bitkower. So it is difficult to answer that question,
because for the most part, if you are talking about the context
of the SCA, the government is not aware where the data is
stored. So if a company complies with an SCA warrant, we will
not know one way or the other where the company got that data
from, Seattle, San Francisco, or Ireland. So I cannot give you
an answer to that question. I can only give you answers based
on the information we have received from companies when we
serve that process on them.
Ms. DelBene. But can you give us your best estimation of
that answer then? Or is that a different----
Mr. Bitkower. So this may not be a scientific answer, but
to our knowledge, in the history of serving SCA warrants on
U.S. providers, we have never been told that they cannot comply
because of the conflict of law.
Ms. DelBene. It is my understanding that before the
Microsoft Ireland case, standard practice in these
circumstances was to use the MLAT process. So if the MLAT
process is broken, it is--you know, I would urge the DOJ to
start working with Congress on reforms, rather than coming up
with new legal theories that apparently you have relied on in
the past to get there, and I really would love to get more
information on the difference of these numbers, if you can
provide those to us.
Mr. Bitkower. So we would be happy to work with you on
that. I guess the one area where I think that it is important
to clarify, is that there was no change in DOJ policy for--or
in the law. For upwards of three decades, it has been the clear
law of the United States that lawful process served under an
American company cannot require that company to bring data back
from abroad.
We have never heard from an SCA provider to my knowledge
that they cannot comply with one of those warrants because of a
conflict of law. If we were ever told so in a given situation,
we would take that very seriously. We would work with a
provider and endeavor to see what that conflict of law is. If
there is a true conflict, we would try to see if there are ways
around that. That situation has not actually occurred yet,
including in the Microsoft Ireland case, whereas I said before,
Microsoft has not alleged any conflict of law. In fact,
Microsoft submitted a declaration on behalf of itself, and
Ireland submitted a declaration on behalf of itself, and
neither one have alleged a conflict of law in that situation.
So we take very seriously conflict of laws, we do it across
a variety of investigative contexts. Nearly every one of our
financial investigations involving banks and the like involve
claims with conflicts of laws. We work through those processes.
If we do proceed to a compulsion action in court, the court is
then empowered to balance important considerations, including
comity, including the value to the investigation, including the
burden that might be facing the company, and we take all of
those very seriously.
Our concern is with legislation that in every single case,
if there was a conflict, resolve that conflict against law
enforcement and in favor of the foreign country.
Ms. DelBene. My time has expired. I think we need laws that
work the way the world works today, and that is going to be
critical for us all to follow up on. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. I now my recognize myself for my
questioning, and thank you for being here, sir. Assume that I
am back down near in my position where the Marino thing is, and
the gentleman to my left, Trey Gowdy, former Assistant U.S.
Attorney. The gentleman to my right, the former judge from
Texas, Judge Poe and myself. And I am going to include you in
this because you would not be where you are at if you were not.
There is no one in this room that is more law enforcement than
the four of us in our careers, and I thank you for your service
to this country in law enforcement and prosecution. I read your
statement, thoroughly, and I agree with you.
Your first issue, cross border access. We all know how
incredibly important that is. Your second issue, current rules
governing access to data in other countries. Again, another
complicated issue that we must deal with, and your third issue
of the possible legislation. While it is not possible
legislation from my perspective, it is going to be legislation
from my perspective. We are talking about dealing with 2016
issues based on a 1986 law, ECPA, which we are talking about
data collection when we did not even--when that law was
implemented, we barely had these. We did not have this, we had
such a model that my mother still likes to use, just the flip
one with the big buttons.
So let me ask you this, if you would please? You talked
about treaties, and of course the SCA. Would legislation not
make life simpler if we got a consensus on the legislation,
instead of having 194 different agreements with countries or
referring to a law that is, what, 30 years old?
Mr. Bitkower. So certainly, sir, we would not contemplate
194 different agreements. We think this agreement would be
available to a very small set of countries, at least at the
beginning.
Mr. Marino. Okay. At least in the beginning. But okay, you
start out with two countries, and then you go to six, and then
you go to 16, and then you go to 60. These countries are not
going anywhere, and the electronic age is going to continue to
explode. So why not have definitive legislation? Do you think
that justice should be legislating or interpreting a 1986 law,
instead of a 2016 Congress legislating what is important to law
enforcement, without tying the hands of law enforcement, but
also with having a law--a rule of law that we can agree on with
other countries once we get established here in the
legislature.
Mr. Bitkower. So I fully agree with you that there is an
important role for legislative change here and legislative
change would absolutely be necessary to enable us to take down
these conflicts of laws in carefully targeted ways. The way we
anticipate it working is that Congress would act by
establishing the parameters for an agreement, and then we would
be able to fit particular countries in that agreement if they
qualify.
Mr. Marino. I do not get that from reading DOJ information.
I am getting that DOJ does not like the LEADS act.
Mr. Bitkower. Well so, to be clear sir, even under the
context of a bilateral agreement of the type we are discussing
in the United Kingdom, that sort of agreement presupposes both
the United States and for the United Kingdom the ability to
compel the production of data that might be stored abroad.
Mr. Marino. My point exactly then. Would legislation not
simplify that matter? And when you have a direct source of law
that we could point to when we need to. Let me pose a scenario
to you. Assume there is a company with a presence in Brazil.
One of our companies, a presence in Brazil. And the Brazilian
Government wants some of that information, they issue a
warrant, but that warrant would violate U.S. law. What do we
do?
Mr. Bitkower. That is a serious situation of course. That
is one we face in real life. That is not a hypothetical
situation.
Mr. Marino. Okay. But would legislation not then address
that issue? Good concise legislation working closely with
justice and the private sector from a law enforcement
perspective. Would that not be the approach to take?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes. I do not want to speak to any particular
country obviously, because there is a wide variety of----
Mr. Marino. Neither do I. That is why I keep going back to
legislation. And it is Congress' role to legislate. And looking
back at a 30-year law based on where we are today, I do not
think is logical. So at no time I do not think, at least I do
not know that Justice even called my office, called Ms.
DelBene's office, called the Chairman to discuss LEADS. We
would like to do that; we want input from Justice on these
issues.
So again, I thank you for your service, but the point I
want to get across is Congress legislates, and I yield back my
time. The Chair now recognizes Congressman Jeffries from New
York.
Mr. Jeffries. I thank the Chair for yielding, and for your
leadership in putting forth the LEADS Act and on this very
important issue. And I thank you for your testimony here today.
The law is currently silent as to whether the DOJ can compel a
U.S. company to produce the email content of a non-U.S. citizen
when the server is in another country. Is that correct?
Mr. Bitkower. So, we would not agree with that, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. But the Stored Communication Act is
silent on this issue, correct?
Mr. Bitkower. So, we would agree that the Stored
Communication Act does not address that through tax, that is
correct.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. And in light of this silence, the
Department of Justice has chosen to take the broadest possible
interpretation as to what its authority can be. Is that right?
Mr. Bitkower. Well respectfully sir, there are court
decisions on the matter, and we are following those decisions.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now do you agree that Congress, in
light of the silence that you have acknowledged at least as it
relates to the Stored Communications Act, should step into the
void to clarify the situation for all parties involved?
Mr. Bitkower. So again sir, we think Congress did act, and
Congress legislated against a backdrop of which the government
could compel the production of documents from abroad. So we
think that already occurred. Obviously we will see how the
courts come out on these issues, and it may be the case that
for the legislation might be helpful.
Mr. Jeffries. So at the end of the day, in the absence of
congressional action, at least as it relates to the specific
circumstance that I laid out, is it fair to say that we could
put a United States company in the position of providing email
content located internationally as it relates to a non-U.S.
citizen in violation of another country's laws. Is that a
possibility, sir?
Mr. Bitkower. That is a possibility.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now in the 21st century we live in a
global economy. Is that right?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. And compelling United States companies
to violate, potentially as you have acknowledged, United States
law by disclosing email content of non-U.S. citizens could
possibly place United States businesses at a competitive
disadvantage. Is that correct?
Mr. Bitkower. Sir, the way I would answer that question is
to say, again, for many decades ,we have engaged in the
enforcement of our laws, and that often results in us trying to
compel records from companies which store those records abroad.
This is not a new issue, it is not unique to the SCA. It is not
unique to the United States. In fact most countries, or many
countries at least, have similar provisions in their law that
authorize them to seek evidence that may be stored abroad.
Mr. Jeffries. There is at least a possibility that by
compelling a United States company to violate international
law, as you have acknowledged, is potentially the case here,
that that could place a United States company as a competitive
disadvantage. Yes or no?
Mr. Bitkower. So to be clear, I did not say to violate
international law, I said it is possibly the conflict with the
law of another country.
Mr. Jeffries. The law of another country.
Mr. Bitkower. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries. Correct.
Mr. Bitkower. So that is correct. It could absolutely put
companies in a situation conflict to legal obligations.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now, and that could in my view I think
in the view of many reasonable people place them at a
competitive disadvantage, which I think could undermine the
United States' national interest economically. And in fact I
would just point out that Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 of the
United States Constitution states that Congress shall have the
power to regulate commerce with foreign Nations. Are you
familiar with that clause?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. Now I think that the Founding Fathers in
their great brilliance understood that Congress should be the
entity to decide how to properly balance United States'
interests across the legal, economic, constitutional spectrum.
True?
Mr. Bitkower. Congress certainly has that authority, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. So is it not correct that Congress should act
in this specific circumstance where you have acknowledged at
least that there is silence? Some ambiguity in order to clarify
this very complex situation.
Mr. Bitkower. So, again sir, I do not think there is
ambiguity in terms of how the statute works today. Certainly we
do welcome the opportunity to work with Congress in addressing
the very conflicts of laws you were talking about. Our concern
is simply if we address them in a way that unilaterally strips
U.S. law enforcement authority and does not address the
situation of foreign law enforcement authority, that is not the
approach we are seeking, but we do think there is definitely
options that Congress can work on here.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Lastly I would point out, and I think
my colleague Darrell Issa began this line of inquiry, I think
it was very important, the U.S. has a history of respecting the
sovereignty of other Nations when conducting criminal
investigations in the context of extradition treaties. Correct?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. And we have got extradition treaties with
about 120 Nations. True?
Mr. Bitkower. I do not know the exact number.
Mr. Jeffries. Including Mexico, correct?
Mr. Bitkower. That is certainly true.
Mr. Jeffries. Are you familiar with El Chapo?
Mr. Bitkower. I am, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. He is an international drug dealer. Correct?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. Seven United States jurisdictions have
currently criminal charges pending against him, including
murder. True?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jeffries. Would you conceive of a circumstance where
the United States, in violation of its treaty with Mexico,
would go across the border, snatch El Chapo, and bring him back
to justice, notwithstanding the serious United States interest?
Would you conceive of that circumstance?
Mr. Bitkower. No, sir, I could not.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. And if we would not do it in such a
serious situation, for the life of me, respectfully, I cannot
figure out why Congress should not step into this vacuum that
exists as it relates to email content and respecting the
principles of comity and the competitive disadvantage that will
replace the United States companies and which would undermine
our national economic interests. I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
congressman from Georgia, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think at this point
I am just going to have a few questions. But I do not agree
with the Chairman. I mean, from my background, I think this has
become the new discussion over the years, as, you know, yes,
there are many Members who are prosecutors on those, judges on
this. I take it from a little different perspective.
I am the son of a State Trooper from Georgia. As I have
jokingly said, I have fought the law on many occasions, and I
lost most of the time, but the issue here is not an issue of
law enforcement. This is an issue of where are we at in 21st
century privacy, where are we at in a 21st century and digital
environment, and why do we continue many times to continue to
hold to issues that really need to be updated? I would agree
with my friend from Texas, the judge, and I would agree with my
friend from New York and also Washington. The LEADS Act,
although it seems to be in some of the questions and some here
tends to denigrate this LEADS Act, I think that something needs
to be done and something that we need to put our companies and
the world on notice on how we are going to do this.
ECPA also was another issue which is again baffling to me.
And I know it has been said that well 300 Members could be
wrong. Well yeah, I agree, this is Congress, but I think 300
Members also have a pretty good idea that something is not
right too. And to continue to hold this out is a frustration,
but especially from DOJ's position.
And in the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, I think it is
the Microsoft case, as we work on this, the DOJ lawyer argued
in the case that it does not--that ECPA does not apply to
disclosure of information abroad. Even if the information to be
disclosed is private email correspondence of a U.S. citizen.
In other words, the Department argued that U.S. citizens'
emails have no privacy protection under ECPA outside the U.S.
They were pressed on this issue by the court, and the court--
the DOJ attorney said the result should be of some concern to
U.S. technology users, but suggests this is the norm, was his
words. Or their words. I am concerned about the Department's
position. I reject this notion that this is the new norm, and
in fact, I think Congress is speaking in to say Congress the
silence on this is not accurate in this environment. But I just
want a clarification.
Do you agree that ECPA does not provide or protect email
communications even if sent and received within the U.S. from
disclosures abroad?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you, Congressman. So I think it is
important to distinguish between two different provisions of
ECPA. The provisions at issue in the Microsoft case generally
are the provisions in 2703, which relate to the United States
government's authority to compel a provider that is already
subject to our jurisdiction to compel records that are in its
custody or control. The provisions I think you are talking
about now are the ones contained in 2702, which prevent a
provider from disclosing content except in certain limited
circumstances.
Mr. Collins. Well, let's go there, because there is a
concern there, because what it seems to be, and again, you--it
is your time to clarify. It seems that what the Department of
Justice is not seeing is that they are trading private emails
of technology users as a business record of a service provider.
That is a leap.
Mr. Bitkower. So, certainly, sir, that is not the standard
that we are applying. The standard we are applying when it
relates to our ability to compel----
Mr. Collins. But you have taken that position in
litigation.
Mr. Bitkower. No, that is not precisely correct, sir.
Mr. Collins. Okay. Elaborate.
Mr. Bitkower. I would be happy to clarify, sir. So, the
precedent we have taken is that a long line of cases stretching
back over 30 years allows us to compel companies that are
subject to our jurisdiction to produce responsive materials
pursuant to lawful process, even if they may be stored abroad.
Now if that production produces a conflict of laws, there is
further work to be done. There is further work to be done both
by us in discussing it with the company and by the courts if
applicable.
The question I think that you are raising now about whether
a company is free to disclose information is a slightly
separate question. And that is if a company, American or
otherwise, stores data abroad, then the protections of 2702 may
not apply. That is, that company, irrespective of what DOJ does
one way or the other, may be free to disclose that information
to a foreign government or to any other person. The provisions
of ECPA have simply been interpreted not to apply as it regards
to 2702, which protects the information.
Mr. Collins. I think at this point in time, in the effort
to defend the what if, I think DOJ has had some contorted
positions in this. And I think understandably you have a job to
do, you feel this is the best way to do your job. I think this
panel, if you have heard today, has some very different
opinions on how that actually is playing out in the real world,
dealing not only with businesses and the cross country data
flows and other issues, but also just the issues of privacy and
the issues of when this is. And again, when you get that to a
point of, you know, whether the company can disclose or not,
and it being a business record of a company which has nothing,
there is some concern there.
So we are going to continue this hearing, I appreciate your
service, but the LEADS Act and ECPA need to move forward, and
this needs to be--have a debate. It is not up to an executive
agency to determine law or intent. It is up to this Congress to
do so. We are doing that, and I think that is where it needs to
go. And with that Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Marino. Chair recognizes Congresswoman Jackson Lee from
Texas.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I was very pleased to
listen to a sizeable part of the exchange, and Mr. Bitkower, I
thank you for your service representing this Nation and the
Department of Justice. But as I listen to the series of back
and forth, I think one of the things that I want to restate for
the record is the large gap of response by Congress, in
particular the passage of the Electronic Communication Privacy
Act in 1986.
I guess I am in awe, and I might use the term appalled,
that there is that large, enormous gap that has lasted on a
number of issues. Then a state for the record that the SCA was
not designed for international application, and ECPA does not
permit providers to disclose information directly to a foreign
law enforcement agency, even when the agency is investigating
one of its own citizens. I think we had as an example what a
police officer would do, 20 years ago in the United Kingdom,
what they might need to do now, which is to ask for the
information.
I also want to put into the record the dilemma that
Microsoft faced. Their case is now pending. They answered part
of it, Microsoft produced a non-content information. But they
made the argument I think legitimately when the other material
was stored in Dublin, Ireland. And so we find ourselves in a
dilemma that must be answered. And what I would like to see is
that we answer it with DOJ, even as we move legislation
forward.
And so I am going to ask process questions, and what you
are seeing in the day-to-day operations of the Department of
Justice. So I will just ask the question. One, is it obvious
that you are seeing a massive increase of requests for data
internationally?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you, Congresswoman. We are seeing a
massive increase of requests for----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well if massive takes you back, you are
seeing an increase in requests coming in.
Mr. Bitkower. I would say massive, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. I had the right----
Mr. Bitkower. We have seen a massive increase in this,
particularly for digital evidence.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And as I see, part of the process in
particular, some of the processes under the DOJ requires a
request to come into the international office, and then it gets
spread out to U.S. attorneys across the Nation. Already I am
overwhelmed by just the process of it having to leave you,
headquarters, and reach to places beyond and find offices of
varying sizes that have to respond.
So let me just get a more detailed response from you. Do
foreign law enforcement officers ever attempt to obtain data
through faster, informal channels? Do they call their
colleagues in the FBI or the NSA for a faster result?
Mr. Bitkower. So there are a range of methods of
international cooperation. Each one of them must obviously
follow the law, but certainly there are occasions where we can
share information on a more informal basis. If consistent with
the law, of course.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The question implied that maybe there was
the normal collegiate responses, and so you cannot attest here
today that that does not happen. I hear what you are saying, in
compliance with the law, but----
Mr. Bitkower. That is correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Because the law is so--I
would say it does not answer the questions, it could be
possible that relationships and people's interpretation of the
law, information could just be given or access could be given.
Mr. Bitkower. Well again, certainly Congresswoman,
information relating to law enforcement threats is shared every
day by police forces around the world. When it comes to
compelling data from a provider, then there needs to be a legal
process, and that legal process has to be obtained either under
the law of the United States pursuant to if it is content a
probable cause standard, or if under the law of a foreign
jurisdiction. What we are trying to do here is eliminate some
of the obstacles and burdens that are created when one country
has to go through the processes of another country in order to
get that information.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And particularly when it involves the
providers. Let me ask, one of the chief concerns underlying
this discussion is the move toward data localization laws in
other countries. And so, would you explain why the current
environment has motivated some countries to try to balkanize
the internet in this way, with respect to the data
localization?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes, thank you very much. So one of the
concerns we have seen with regard to the new world of cloud
computing and international data storage is that countries make
requests that may be legitimate under their own laws for data
that happens to be stored in another country, perhaps in the
United States. If they cannot get those requests fulfilled in
an efficient manner under their own law, then there is an
incentive for them to mandate that that data be stored in their
own country, so they do not have to go through these cumbersome
processes, whether it is with U.S. or another country.
So one of the goals of the framework we are discussing
today is to try to eliminate those incentives, but in a very
carefully targeted way that protects privacy and civil
liberties, and only for countries with an established rule of
law system.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would you say that legitimate major
companies, many of them creating genius through intellectual
property, created here in the United States, become the tennis
ball, the batting ball, and they become batted from one place
to another? I hesitate to say that they are victims, but in
essence, are they batted from one place to the next under the
present structure that we now have?
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentlewoman has expired, but
the witness will be permitted to answer the question.
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you. So yes, in particular, the
requests by foreign countries for data stored within the United
States, that is correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And so we need a fix.
Mr. Goodlatte. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Buck, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Bitkower, I assume
that as a United States citizen, you would agree with me that I
am afforded certain protections by our Constitution and laws.
Mr. Bitkower. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Buck. And that an individual in Ireland would be also
afforded certain protections by their laws?
Mr. Bitkower. Yes sir.
Mr. Buck. And we have a treaty between the United States
and the United Kingdom that recognizes those protections, and
both countries agreed to.
Mr. Bitkower. Both the United Kingdom and with Ireland, yes
sir. Separate treaties.
Mr. Buck. Excuse me. And when the Department of Justice
goes around that treaty, you have made a decision that--and I
assume it is fair to say that you went around the treaty by
getting information in the Microsoft case outside of the
processes created by that treaty.
Mr. Bitkower. So I would actually disagree with that, sir.
The treaty between the United States and Ireland, first of
all--let me back up. At the time the request was made in the
Microsoft case, the Department of Justice had no knowledge that
the data was stored in Ireland. Typically we would not be aware
of that information unless we were told by the provider after
it happens.
Mr. Buck. Did you withdraw your request when you learned
that the information was stored in Ireland?
Mr. Bitkower. So that brings me to the second point, sir,
which is that many mutual legal systems treaties do not require
that they are the exclusive mechanism for getting data from one
country to another. They are one option.
Mr. Buck. Well, is there a just kidding clause in that
treaty? Is there something in the treaty that says, ``Well you
do not really have to follow the treaty? You can do anything
you want, this is just one way of getting information.''
Mr. Bitkower. Well, so in essence, sir, the treaty does
state as one way of getting information necessary. It is not
the only way of getting information.
Mr. Buck. And so, does the Department of Justice recognize
the situation you have put American corporations in across the
world when you go around treaties and use a completely separate
process? Why would any country want to do business with an
American corporation if America has access to that information
all across the world?
Mr. Bitkower. So again sir, I have to emphasize that we do
not go around treaties if those treaties do not require that
they have the present mechanism.
Mr. Buck. You said you used a different process to get
information.
Mr. Bitkower. That is correct. That is correct.
Mr. Buck. Now that is not going around the treaty?
Mr. Bitkower. It is not, sir. The treaty does not require
that it be the exclusive mechanism for the transfer of data.
Mr. Buck. So answer my question. Do you recognize the
situation you have put American corporations in across the
world?
Mr. Bitkower. So if our actions did create a true conflict
of laws, we would recognize that as a serious problem, yes sir.
Mr. Buck. I did not ask about conflict of law. We are
trying to do business with other countries. And if the
Department of Justice has a way of going around a treaty and
getting information from an American corporation for an Irish
citizen on an Irish server, why would any country want to do
business or any citizens of any country want to do business
with American corporations?
Mr. Bitkower. So again sir, I need to specify. The
discussion in terms of the Microsoft case did not necessarily
involve an Irish citizen or a person in Ireland. It is data
that happens to be stored in Ireland. It could belong to--as
far as the record is clear, a citizen of any country, including
an American citizen. That is said, the only fact we know about
it from the record of that case is that the company has chosen
to store that information in Ireland.
If, for example, it belongs to an American citizen, or a
citizen committing a crime who is located in America, I think
we would all agree that the United States has legitimate
interest in obtaining that information as expeditiously as
possible so long as it follows----
Mr. Buck. Are you going to answer my question? Why would an
American company--why would anybody want to do business with an
American company overseas if the United States has access to
any information it so chooses by going around a treaty?
Mr. Bitkower. So again, sir, if there is a conflict of
laws, we would take that seriously. And if that is brought to
our attention, we absolutely will do everything we can to avoid
a----
Mr. Buck. I am not talking about the laws, though. I am
talking about the competitive disadvantage you are placing
American companies in.
Mr. Bitkower. So my understanding is of what we have heard
from companies is certainly the competitive disadvantage, if
any, comes from the fact that they are placed in conflicting
legal obligations. That is one country tells them to do one
thing, another tells them to do another. If that comes to our
attention, we take it seriously, and American law already also
takes that seriously.
The situation we are talking about now is, however, where
data may be stored in a country with no connection to that
country other than the fact that it is chosen to be stored
there. It could be the information of vital importance to the
United States, and information with very little connection to
Ireland. And in that case, we just need to have a mechanism to
make sure we can get that data to the United States to protect
American citizens.
If it turns out there is a conflict of law at any point, if
that is brought to our attention by the company or by the
country itself, then obviously we would have further work to do
and further discussions to be had. I want to clarify, that has
not happened in the Microsoft case.
Mr. Buck. If Microsoft is put in a position where--or any
American company--and frankly what is most bothersome to me is
Microsoft has the resources to battle with the Department of
Justice. A startup company, a company with 10, 12 employees in
a similar situation would just cave. The coercive effect of the
government would be placed on a company like that, and they
could not--they do not have the resources to fight the
Department of Justice. But in this situation, a foreign citizen
would not want to do business with a U.S. company if that U.S.
company is forced by the U.S. Government to turn over
information that is located in that foreign country. And I am
concerned about that.
Mr. Bitkower. So again sir, that is the very purpose of the
U.S.-U.K. framework that we are trying to explore now, is to
find the ways of eliminating those conflicts of laws, prevent
any competitive disadvantage to our companies, but do it in a
careful way that allows the different investigations to take
place, both on our behalf and on behalf of foreign governments
in a way that it respects privacy.
Mr. Buck. I yield back, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Bitkower, the process to exchange data under
the MLAT process has been criticized as being slow and
cumbersome, with requests taking average 10 months to fulfill.
You argue that the MLAT is also unreliable, given that our
country does not have MLATs with about half of the countries in
the world. And some countries exclude certain categories, or do
not cooperate at all. Is this occurring because they believe
the MLAT process is too slow, or do they not believe in this
process at all?
Mr. Bitkower. So again, the MLAT process faces a variety of
challenges. You have identified some of them. That is, even if
we have a fully functioning MLAT relationship with another
country, it will take many months at best to get that
information. And as you point out, we may never get it at all,
and that is even when we have a treaty, and as you point out
again, for about half the world, we do not even have such a
treaty, so in those cases, the requirement to rely exclusively
on MLAT channels would end investigations.
Ms. Chu. Well, you have referred to the proposed deal
between the U.S. and the U.K., and providers under this deal
could disclose data directly to the U.K. for serious criminal
and national security investigations when the U.K. obtains
authorization to access the data under its own legal system.
While the courts may have provisions to protect individuals'
privacy rights, other countries may not. If we use the U.K.
agreement as a model, what steps will the Department of Justice
take to ensure that there are sufficient protections for
privacy and civil liberties moving forward?
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you Congresswoman. So that is an area
where we would hope to work very closely with Congress in
setting up exactly what those adequate baselines are for
protecting privacy and for protecting civil liberties, and we
want to make sure that any country we choose to negotiate an
agreement with fits into that category based on its own legal
framework. It does not require that it exactly mirror the
American framework certainly, and if it did require it, then no
country would quality, but it does require that the country
have those adequate protections.
Ms. Chu. And what kind of enforcement mechanisms could you
put in place to ensure that that they would comply with, with
privacy terms as well as other terms of the bilateral
agreement?
Mr. Bitkower. So again, we are obviously at the early
stages of discussing what these agreements would look like and
what the legislation would look like. We would certainly
anticipate that there would have to be a mechanism to provide
oversight of the agreement to make sure that it is being
applied correctly.
Ms. Chu. And if the bilateral agreement approach is taken
by the U.S., how do we determine whether or not a country is an
appropriate partner? For example, how many of the witnesses
have discussed about a country's policy on human rights. How do
we evaluate that consideration and whether the country meets
that requirement?
Mr. Bitkower. So that would be a topic for close and
ongoing conversation, I think, between us and Congress
certainly. There are a number of factors we would look at. We
would look at the system as a whole certainly, but with
particular regard to its surveillance laws. We would want to
make sure that there is a rule of law framework in place and
appropriate procedural and substantive protections for privacy
and civil liberties.
And these are areas of course, it is easier in cases like
the U.K. where it is a longtime ally with a long democratic
tradition with whom we have actually had a very long MLAT
relationship as well. So we have a certain knowledge and
visibility about how their system works, and I think that would
be helpful in the process.
Ms. Chu. And with a country that is not as clear as the
U.K., what would you do?
Mr. Bitkower. So a country that is not as clear as the U.K.
might not qualify at the end of the day, and that is just a
fact. So we would have to make sure that the country, whatever
its laws are, that we get good visibility into what those laws
are. Not just what the laws are on the books, but how they are
applied in practice, and to make sure there are those
appropriate protections in place before we would consider such
an agreement.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Rhode Island, Mr. Cicilline, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Bitkower. I want to just pick up on something you just said.
You said in your testimony that the MLAT is not the only way of
getting information. It is not the exclusive way. I just want
to challenge you on that for a moment. It is in fact the
agreement by which we set out a procedure for the sharing of
information. That is the purpose of the treaty.
Mr. Bitkower. So all MLATs are different, and some of them
have different provisions, but MLATs are generally one method
of exchanging information. They are not typically the exclusive
mechanism.
Mr. Cicilline. But I mean, is not the purpose of the treaty
so that both parties to a treaty have an understanding about a
process that will be followed for a particular activity? And
that is the whole purpose of it, otherwise what would be the
purpose of having an MLAT if it were not in fact the
expectation of both parties that this process be followed in
the sharing of information?
Mr. Bitkower. Well, so again, sir, every treaty is
different. Typically the treaties make sure that a process is
available to be followed in the case of a need in the
requesting country.
Mr. Cicilline. And with respect to the negotiations with
the United Kingdom, what is the exact status of that
negotiation, and what action will be required by Congress
according to you, if any, if that agreement is successfully
concluded?
Mr. Bitkower. So, thank you, sir. The negotiations began, I
think as you know, fairly recently, where we received formal
authority to begin those negotiations within the last month or
so. We have been hard at work in seeing what an agreement would
look like, but we absolutely recognize that action by Congress
would be necessary to make this project feasible in the first
instance, both to lower in a targeted fashion the legislative
bars that are present in our own law, and also to set up the
framework to determine which countries would be eligible to
join such an agreement.
Mr. Cicilline. And so, to use this example again of British
law. As you know, British law is not always compatible with
U.S. law, particularly in the areas of due process and probable
cause determinations. And if you think about the requirements
we have in this country in terms of judicial review, a concept
which is not omnipresent in the British system, how do you
square some of those standards and practices? And that is a
country that I think most people would agree might have more
compatibility than many other countries. How do you make those
determinations so that we can be certain those very deeply held
values are reflected in this process?
Mr. Bitkower. So I think that is the key question, and it
is one that we will be grappling as we go forward. I think it
is important on the one hand that we do not require that the
other countries' legal processes exactly mirror our own, or
else no country would ever qualify of course. We have some of
the highest privacy protections in the world, and we are proud
of those, and justifiably so, and we want to make sure that
other countries have substantial protections and legitimate
protections, but we cannot demand that they have the exact same
legal standards for every sort of process along the way. Some
of them have lower standards in one area and higher standards
in another, and they have their own checks and balances within
their own system.
So the U.K. is a country with which we have a great
familiarity. As I said before, a very long democratic
tradition, a tradition of rule of law. We are comfortable with
understanding how their system works. As I mentioned earlier,
they have also introduced a new investigative powers bill which
would introduce further reforms. So we will have to keep
looking at that as it goes forward. We will make any evaluation
at the time when the legislation is prepared.
Mr. Cicilline. But Mr. Bitkower, I think it is very clear
that most of us on the Committee recognize that there is an
important role for Congress to play in this. And if you have
already answered this, I apologize, but it seems particularly
disturbing that in light of the complicated nature of this and
the important role of Congress should be playing that many of
us learned about this from reading it in a news account. And I
am just wondering, what was the reason that you would not have
engaged Congress more as you developed or thought about the
development of framework, so that we might have some alignment
of what ultimately Congress might intend to do in this area?
Mr. Bitkower. So again sir, I want to make clear that we
only very recently began negotiations with the U.K., and only
very recently, in fact, we received permission to do so through
the intergovernmental process. So we tried to notify this
Committee as soon as we possible could once those negotiations
started. It was approximately the same exact week, I believe,
that the Washington Post article came out.
We have tried to make ourselves available to brief this
Committee and others. We expect to continue to do so, and there
is no question that we fully respect the essential role that
Congress has to play in these agreements.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you,
sir, for your patience and for hanging in there. I think you
have answered the questions very clearly. As I understand it,
you are following the law as was passed in 1986 and interpreted
by the courts. I am not sure what else we would ask you to do.
You have been admonished or exhorted by a number of Members of
Congress, that Congress should act.
I am not sure what you are supposed to do about that
either. These are all Members of Congress, maybe they are
responsible for amending the laws if we see a need to do so,
but I appreciate how you have illuminated the issues. But it
was a little bit Alice in Wonderland-y to hear them lecturing
you about why Congress should take some action, because they
are Congress Members.
But I would say your testimony spells out pretty long
detail of some concerns about the LEADS Act. I apologize, I do
not have the testimony that you refer--cross reference about
the ECPA amendments that are proposed, but maybe you could just
take a few minutes to sort of outline what your main issues
are. And then I would like to know kind of how you think it
would be most constructive given the discussion we have had
about the negotiations with Britain, that this Committee might
engage you in talking through some of those issues so that we
could actually update the law to reflect not both privacy
concerns--both privacy concerns as they are 30 years on, but
also security concerns.
Mr. Bitkower. So thank you, Congressman. I will begin with
the ECPA related proposals, and I am concerning to make sure
you get a copy of the testimony we submitted in connection with
that hearing. But as we have said in that testimony and
elsewhere, the Department absolutely recognizes that some of
the provisions of ECPA have not kept pace with the way
technology is used today, and the way people think of their
emails.
And we are certainly open to a change that would require a
warrant when criminal law enforcement authorities seek to
compel the content of emails, whether they are older than 180
degrees, newer than 180 degrees, whether they have been opened,
whether they have not been opened. We are certainly open to
that change. We do have a concern that any change in law create
an accommodation for certain very limited civil investigative
functions where a warrant is simply not available, because they
are not criminal investigators.
Mr. Peters. That would be something of the SEC for
instance.
Mr. Bitkower. The SEC, I am talking about important civil
rights investigations, anti-trust investigations. Things that
affect important rights for Americans every day. We have a
number of other concerns with the Email Privacy Act, which we
are happy to provide further information on, but we do have
some concerns.
For example, in the area where it permits us to obtain
records from a corporation, where a corporation provides email
to its employees, there needs to be a mechanism and a
functional mechanism where you can get those emails.
Traditionally we do those investigations by subpoena, because
traditionally the employees do not have privacy rights in those
emails, and we want to make sure that provision works well. And
there were a couple of other areas where the bill gives us some
concerns. But we are happy to work with this Committee and
others in making those understood.
Mr. Peters. Have you been in conversation with Committee
staff about these issues?
Mr. Bitkower. We certainly have, sir.
Mr. Peters. Okay. Well I appreciate that. And I thank you
again for your time. I am looking forward to the second panel.
And I yield back.
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Bitkower, we very
much appreciate your testimony here this morning, and we can
excuse you at this time, and we will go to our second panel.
Mr. Bitkower. Thank you very much.
Mr. Goodlatte. We now welcome our second panel of
distinguished witnesses today, and if you would all please rise
up, I will begin by swearing you in. Please raise your right
hand. Do you and each of you swear that the testimony that you
are about to give shall be the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, so help you God? Thank you very much.
Let us let the record reflect that all of the witnesses
have responded in the affirmative. And we will begin our
introductions by recognizing the gentlewoman from Washington
for the purpose of introducing Mr. Smith.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you Mr. Chair. It is my pleasure to
welcome Brad Smith as a witness today. Brad serves as the
president and chief legal officer at Microsoft, and had joined
Microsoft in 1993 and became general counsel in 2002 and then
was made president and chief legal officer just last summer. He
is responsible for the company's corporate external and legal
affairs, and he is a graduate of Princeton University and the
Columbia University School of Law. And it is great to have
someone here from Washington State and we just want to welcome
you and thank you for being here. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. Welcome. Our next witness is the Honorable
Michael Chertoff. He is the executive chairman and co-founder
of the Chertoff Group. From 2005 to 2009, Mr. Chertoff served
as Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. Federal
judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit and
Assistant Attorney General of the Department of Justice,
Criminal Division. Mr. Chertoff is a graduate of Harvard
College and Harvard Law School.
Our next witness, the Honorable David Kris, began his
career with the U.S. Department of Justice serving as an
attorney in the criminal division and then as Associate Deputy
Attorney General. He went on to be deputy general counsel and
chief ethics and compliance officer at Time Warner,
Incorporated, as well as an adjunct professor of law at
Georgetown University and a non-resident senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution. Mr. Kris currently teaches national
security law at the University of Washington Law School, and he
is a graduate of Haverford College and Harvard Law School.
Harvard Law School is well represented here.
Our final witness is Ms. Jennifer Daskal. Ms. Daskal is an
associate professor of law at American University, Washington
College of Law where she teaches and writes in the fields of
criminal law, national security law and constitutional law.
From 2009 to 2011, Ms. Daskal was counsel to the Assistant
Attorney General for National Security at the Department of
Justice and among other things, served as the Secretary of
Defense and Attorney General-led Detention Policy Task Force.
Prior to joining the Department of Justice, she was the senior
counter-terrorism counsel at Human Rights Watch and worked as a
staff attorney for the Public Defender's Service for the
District of Columbia. She earned a bachelor's degree from Brown
University, a master's degree from Cambridge University and not
surprisingly, a J.D. from Harvard Law School.
We welcome all of you. Your written statements will be
entered into the record in their entirety and I ask that each
of you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help
you stay within that time, there is a timing light at the
table. When the light switches from green to yellow, you have 1
minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red,
that is it. You are done.
Mr. Smith, welcome. We are pleased to have you here, and
you may begin the testimony.

TESTIMONY OF BRAD SMITH, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER,
MICROSOFT CORPORATION

Mr. Smith. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Conyers,
Members of the Committee, it is my pleasure to represent
Microsoft this morning. Today's hearing provides an important
opportunity to address a critical issue--the growing conflict
between countries and among laws that are affecting not only
technology, but people's safety and privacy. I think the
ramifications of this issue are really illustrated by two real-
world examples.
The first is a case involving Microsoft a year ago in
Paris. The day after the horrific terrorist attack on Charlie
Hebdo, the French police using international legal process
worked with the FBI and served on Microsoft lawful requests
seeking the emails of the two terrorists that were at large in
the streets of France. Because the French used international
legal process, we at Microsoft were able to examine the orders,
determine they were valid, pull the email and provide them to
the FBI and the French all in exactly 45 minutes. That was a
day when the system worked. But unfortunately, that has become
the exception, not the norm. The norm is illustrated by the
second example. A case involving Microsoft in Brazil; there,
the Brazilian police have in pursuit of a local suspect served
a local order requiring Microsoft to turn over content that is
not in Brazil, but is in the United States. And because U.S.
law prohibits us from turning over some of this content,
Microsoft has had to refuse. The Brazilians have not turned to
international process. They have not obtained the information
they need, but they have fined Microsoft, and they are pursuing
a criminal prosecution of one of our executives in Brazil for
the sole reason that we are comply with United States law.
And unfortunately, that kind of case is spreading. It is
spreading because other governments, including the United
States government is using unilateral legal process rather than
international legal process to obtain data around the world.
Now, we appreciate that law enforcement needs information,
sometimes located in other countries to do its job, but this
approach to using unilateral process is causing concern around
the world. It is causing concern in other countries about
people's privacy rights. It is causing concern about whether
other countries can even trust and use American products and
technology. It is causing concern that is leading other
countries to enact new laws to block the very steps that our
government typically takes through unilateral search warrants.
Now, the good news is there are solutions at hand. There is
a solution in the form of Federal legislation modeled on
something like the LEADS Act. There is a solution in the form
of modernization of the mutual legal assistance treaties. There
is a solution in the form of new international agreements that
are designed and built for the 21st century. Like the one that
is now being considered between the U.S. and the U.K. All of
this will require action across the executive branch, but it
requires action by Congress as well because all of these
problems have a root cause. Our law is old and has become
outdated.
When Congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy
Act, when the House passed that bill by voice vote on June the
23rd, 1986, Ronald Reagan was president, Tip O'Neill was
speaker, and Mark Zuckerberg was 2 years old. In the 30 years
that have followed, 125 million new Americans have been born.
Technology has moved ahead by leaps and bounds, but at least in
this field, the law has mostly stood still. I have here on one
hand, and IBM computer that was first sold in 1986, and I have
here on the other hand, a Microsoft Surface that is for sale
today. The computer that is for sale today not only connects to
all of the world's information on the internet, it has 355,000
times as much storage capacity as the floppy diskette that one
had to use in this computer that was sold when ECPA was passed.
These two computers make the story clear. Technology has moved
forward. Now, the law needs to catch up. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. Chertoff, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL CHERTOFF, CO-FOUNDER AND
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, THE CHERTOFF GROUP

Mr. Chertoff. Mr. Chairman, it is good to be back. I am
looking at that IBM computer. It looks like what I have at home
still. I obviously would like to indicate that I am speaking
here in a personal capacity, although my firm does do work with
Microsoft and other tech companies in this area, and as I also
previously disclosed, I am of counsel with Covington and
Burling, which is actually involved in representing Microsoft
in this litigation. But whatever I am saying here really
reflects my own views and no one else should be held
accountable for them.
I think it is really important that this Committee have
this hearing, and that Congress get involved in legislating in
this area. The issues that surround the intersection between
modern technology and the law are frankly quite complicated.
They are quite technical, and even having been a Federal judge,
I have to say I am not sure the Federal courts in the first
instance are the right place to resolve all of the competing
issues in technical dimensions of these kinds of questions.
Now, here, we are dealing with one aspect of this, which is as
Brad Smith pointed out kind of dramatically--the amount of data
now which is--moves around the world and is held in this so
called cloud dwarfs what was being confronted when ECPA was
passed. And contrary to what maybe some people think, obviously
when the data is in the cloud, it is not really in the cloud.
It is living somewhere in the world in a server, and the
ability to house it anywhere in the world and to move it around
rapidly as possible really changes the dimensions of the
question about where something is and who ought to have the
jurisdiction to compel it to be turned over.
I think we are seeing the issue of conflict of laws in
three areas. First substantive areas where different countries
in parts of the world have different views about what gets
protected as private and what does not. Second, the question of
process--different standards of process about what is required
when a government seeks data, and finally, the problem of
global companies that are often caught between different legal
regimes and are damned if they do and damned if they do not.
And so, I think we do need to take the opportunity to look
at rationalizing the law and particularly to the extent we can,
globalizing the law. Coming up with agreements and processes
that allow us to synchronize the law so that companies that are
in the business of housing data are not caught between the so-
called rock and a hard place. And I would suggest as I do in my
statement, just a couple of points about this.
First, I think to the extent we can have agreements or
frameworks in a statute that lead to agreements, we ought to be
focusing on the citizenship of the accountholder and not where
the data happens to be located. Data location should be driven
by engineering considerations, and not by desires to create
legal safe havens or to find places that are legally more or
less hospitable.
The second thing I would say is if we are going to have
agreements, we do need to make sure that the companies we are
dealing with have process in place that is comparable to what
we require with respect to our own citizens when other
countries want to have data that is held over here. We do not
want to create a situation where we are jeopardizing the
constitutional rights of our Americans by simply in the pursuit
of an agreement.
And finally, we have to recognize there will be certain
types of requests from other countries that will run afoul
substantive issues and so, we are going to have to create a
regime--a legal regime in place through any agreement and
through any statute that respects that. Finally, there has been
a lot of discussion about the MLAT process and I think, you
know, Brad Smith was very clear in indicating this process can
work if we want it to work. Often, frankly, I can speak from my
own experience, honoring MLAT requests goes to the bottom of
the pile of overworked assistant U.S. attorneys, but with
modern technology and if the government views these as high
priority cases, we can move to the kind of process that gives
you the results that occurred in the Paris case. And which I
think would encourage both our country and other countries to
use the international treaty process rather than unilateral
action as a way to get information that is stored in other
parts of the world.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to
answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chertoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chertoiff. Mr. Kris, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE DAVID S. KRIS, FORMER ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Kris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and
Members of the Committee for inviting me to testify. I, too, am
speaking only in my personal capacity. There is obviously a
range of opinion represented on the Committee today, but I
think there is also an unusual degree of consensus, which I
have heard during the course of this morning's proceedings on
at least three important points. First, there is a problem.
We have a situation where there are international conflicts
of laws in which one government's laws can compel the
production of data, while simultaneously, another government's
laws will prohibit it. This is very vexing for the holders of
data, like Microsoft, who understandably wish to comply with
all of the laws and rules to which they are subject. Second,
this problem is not unprecedented, but it is getting worse over
time. I think that is true for three technical reasons and
three political reasons which I will outline quickly.
Technically, the size and scope of international data
networks, the degree of international data storage in the cloud
and the use of encryption are all on the rise in previous--in
recent years. Politically, the Snowden disclosures, I think,
have caused the U.S. Government to decrease the scope and
increase the transparency of its surveillance. That is
particularly true in the foreign intelligence realm, but there
is a good deal of overlap with law enforcement.
On the other hand, in Europe, the rise of ISIL and some of
the technical factors that I have mentioned, I think have
caused European governments to go the other way to expand their
surveillance authorities and to put a lot of pressure on
providers. And third, the providers for their part are a little
bit caught in the middle of that. And they have reacted,
understandably, again, I think in two ways. By reducing the
degree of cooperation, one, with respect to voluntary
production of data rather than compelled production of data,
and then, also at the margins in resisting certain compulsions.
I want to be clear this is not in any way some kind of
wholesale civil disobedience and it is again perfectly
understandable given their fiduciary duties. Even if, in any
given instance, one might argue that it either does not go far
enough or goes too far. Given that problem and the nature of
the problem, I think there has been consensus third that some
kind of international solution is in order to address it. You
have heard today about the MLAT process, and one of the
solutions that has been discussed is some kind of fairly
drastic increase in the resources available for processing
MLATs. If the current time to process is 10 months and the
equation scales linearly and I am not sure it does--if you
wanted to reduce the time down to 1 day, you would be scaling
up by a factor of 300. Again, I am not sure, it scales in a
linear fashion. There are some structural limits in MLAT.
And the other means of addressing the problem we have
talked about today involve direct access by foreign
governments. In some carefully delineated class or sub-class of
cases, I understand the executive branch is currently working
with the U.K. on a bilateral agreement. Perhaps it would be
limited to non-U.S. persons located abroad by analogy to the
FISA Amendments Act. Perhaps to certain kinds of crimes;
perhaps to certain kinds of directives on certain predicate
showings made by certain officials in the U.K. You can imagine
lots of limits here. And then, of course, Congress will need to
evaluate whether those limits are appropriate and only then
make the necessary amendments to the Stored Communications Act
to allow that agreement to be effectuated.
So, there is definitely a profound role for Congress in
this area regardless of these executive agreement. Finally, I
want to mention, but I do not know as we can discuss fully in
this setting, a couple of foreign intelligence surveillance
concerns that I outlined in my testimony. I urge you to have a
conversation with the executive branch about the two gaps in
FISA that I have set forth. I would love to be wrong about
those, but I think it is something that is worth your exploring
in an appropriate setting with the executive branch. Thank you
very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kris follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Kris. Ms. Daskal, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF MS. JENNIFER DASKAL, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, AMERICAN
UNIVERSITY WASHINGTON COLLEGE OF LAW

Ms. Daskal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
and Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me here
today. I want to spend my time talking about three things. The
problem, why Congress is needed, and specifically, what
Congress should do. So, as has already been discussed pretty
extensively, the Stored Communications Act operates as a
blocking statute. It prohibits U.S. space providers from
disclosing certain data, including emails to anyone other than
the U.S. Government pursuant to a warrant.
Now, let us consider U.S. investigation of a London murder.
Imagine that the U.K. officials seek the emails of the alleged
perpetrator to help establish motive. If the alleged
perpetrator uses a U.K.-based provider, the officials could
likely get access to the date within days, if not sooner. If
instead, the data is held by an American-based provider, the
Brits will be told that they need to go through the mutual
legal assistance process and initiate a diplomatic request.
This is, as we have already heard, a notoriously inefficient
process taking an average of 10 months, and foreign governments
are frustrated, understandably, by the state of affairs, and
they are responding in a number of concerning ways, including
the mandating of data localization which undercuts the growth
potential of the internet, increases the cost to American
businesses and facilitates domestic surveillance; unilateral
assertions of extra territorial jurisdiction which put American
companies in the crosshairs of two competing legal obligations
with a foreign government demanding the compulsion of data and
U.S. law prohibiting it; and the use of malware and other less
accountable forms of accessing the sort after data, which
undercut the privacy and security of all.
Now, in response to this, as we have heard, the U.S. and
U.K. have been negotiating an agreement that would allow the
Brits, in certain circumstances, to make direct requests to
U.S. companies for stored communications. Such an agreement is
needed. If done right, it is an important step forward, which
then brings me to my second point, the need for Congress. As we
have already heard, none of this can be implemented without
congressional authorization.
So, what should Congress do? Congress should amend the
Stored Communications Act. It should authorize the executive to
enter into bilateral and multilateral agreements that would
allow, in specified cases, foreign governments to directly
request stored content from U.S. providers. In doing so,
Congress should also set the key parameters of such agreements,
ensuring, among other things, that the partner country meets
basic human rights standards; that the particular requests
satisfy a baseline set of procedural requirements; and, that
the system is subject to meaningful transparency and
accountability mechanisms. These parameters are essential and
they are justified for at least two reasons.
First, even as I think as envisioned by these agreements,
the target of the request is a foreign national, it is likely,
in fact, almost certain that at some point, some time, such
requests will lead to the incidental collection of U.S. citizen
data. And second, whereas, the United States is often in the
position of exhorting other countries to improve their human
rights standards and protect free expression, this is one of
those rare opportunities to couple such exhortations with a
carrot, that of expedited access to U.S. data. And in so doing,
help set the system of a global system of cross border access
to data.
Now, in making these recommendations for Congress to
engage, I am not alone. For the past 6 months, I have been
working with a cross-section of civil liberties groups,
companies and academics all focused on the need to reform the
system governing law enforcement access to data across borders.
My recommendations draw heavily on the conversations with this
group. Although, I speak solely in my personal capacity and not
on behalf of anybody else.
To sum up, the system for responding to law enforcement
requests for data is broken. The time to fix it is now.
Congress has an opportunity, and in my view, a responsibility
to help build a system for the future. One that simultaneously
safeguards privacy, protects American businesses and promotes
the growth of an open and secure internet. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Daskal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much, Ms. Daskal. We will now
begin a round of questioning and I will recognize myself. Mr.
Smith, let me follow-up on what Ms. Daskal just said, because
that seems to get right to the crux of what has held up here in
this process. So Microsoft supports international agreements
that will address and overcome conflicts of law, but these
agreements are likely going to allow foreign countries to
acquire data held by U.S. companies on a standard less than
probable cause. Do you support this, and if so, why?
Mr. Smith. Well, first of all, I would like to agree with
the testimony that you just heard. I think we do need
legislation. We do need international agreements, but I also
believe that any international agreements that are negotiated
should absolutely ensure that the rights of Americans are
protected by U.S. law and the Constitution, including the
probable cause requirement.
Mr. Goodlatte. How does allowing foreign countries to
obtain data from U.S. companies on a less than probable cause
standard square with the call for a uniform probable cause
standard for requests by the U.S. Government?
Mr. Smith. Well, if the question is to me, I think the
answer is two-fold. First, there will be benefit over time if
the world can move toward a more uniform standard. But I think
between now and then, the most important thing is that people
have the protection of their own rights by their own law. I
think that is fundamentally what most people in most countries
want, and I think that is what Americans want for their own
rights as well.
Mr. Goodlatte. Ms. Daskal, do you want to respond to that?
Ms. Daskal. I fully agree.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay, well, so I am not quite sure I
understand. If they are protected under their own laws, but
their own laws do not have the same high standard of
protection, and they are coming to the U.S., how are we going
to have the carrot that you just referred to in your testimony
to incentivize countries to provide greater protections?
Ms. Daskal. Sure, so that the suggestion that I was making
is that when Congress authorizes these agreements, that it
specify certain requirements that the country must meet, both
at the country level and at making specific requests for that--
--
Mr. Goodlatte. Would those be the standards contained in
U.S. law?
Ms. Daskal. So, my suggestion would be for Congress to
write in the amendment to the Stored Communications Act an
exception to the blocking provision that basically says, ``The
executive has permission to enter into bilateral and
multilateral agreements with foreign countries when the
following conditions are met.'' And some of those conditions
should specify minimal standards that the requests have to
meet.
Mr. Goodlatte. But not necessarily U.S. standards?
Ms. Daskal. Not necessarily U.S. standards----
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay, I got it. All right, good. Then you
are in agreement. Should a bilateral agreement--I will direct
this back to you, Mr. Smith--should a bilateral agreement, such
as the one under consideration with the U.K. also ameliorate
any conflicts of law with regards to U.S. requests for data
held by U.S. companies in that country? Would this not resolve
the issue currently being litigated in the Second Circuit?
Mr. Smith. It would resolve the issue that is being
litigated in the Second Circuit if the bilateral agreement were
between the United States and Ireland. And I think what your
question points to in part, is that if a model that works can
be created between two countries, then there is an opportunity
to replicate it elsewhere, but it will need to be replicated.
Mr. Goodlatte. And do you see any conflict between your
position as it relates to foreign government access to data
stored in the U.S., and your position as it relates to U.S.
Government access to data stored abroad?
Mr. Smith. I believe that if you put an international
agreement in place, that resolves any potential conflict. It
creates the means by which two governments together, and
respect the rule of law.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, I get that, but it seems to me that if
we agree to their standard, they agree to our standard, you
still have two different standards that are in place.
Mr. Smith. But I think it really speaks to an important
point. I think the American people want to have their rights
protected by U.S. law. I was in London last week. I think the
British people want to have their rights protected by British
law. We need governments that have--I will just say a like-
minded approach. It does not mean that they have to agree on
every particularity though.
Mr. Goodlatte. Ms. Daskal, the rules established under ECPA
govern what a U.S. provider can and cannot do with both
communications content and non-content records. The result is
that the ECPA procedures, including the warrant requirement
apply to any customer of a U.S. provider regardless of that
customer's nationality or location and regardless of where the
data is stored. Why is this insufficient to protect the privacy
interests of all U.S. provider customers including foreign
customers?
Ms. Daskal. So, I absolutely think that the answer to the
question of the warrant's requirement for content is necessary
and it is an important privacy protection for when the United
States is accessing data, but that is not really the issue
here.* The concern is not about insufficient privacy
protections; the real concern is about this really significant
conflict of laws which over time is going to lead to an
increasing number of things, like increased data localization,
increased unilateral assertions of extraterritorial
jurisdiction, other means of getting around these restrictions.
And so that is where the privacy concerns come in, not because
of the warrant requirement, which is a great requirement, but
about what other countries are doing in response and what
happens as a result of these conflicting obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note: The witness amends her response as follows:

So, I absolutely think that a warrant requirement for
content is necessary and is an important privacy protection
when the United States is accessing data, but that is not
the issue here.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, for his questions.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Smith, it is
important for technology to protect both privacy and security.
Can policy proposals being considered today do both, or do they
pit one against the other?
Mr. Smith. I think there are times when these two
fundamental values, privacy and security, might be intentioned,
but I think there are many times when creative and new laws
that are designed for 21st century technology can move privacy
and security forward together, and that is what we need to
strive to do.
Mr. Conyers. Secretary Chertoff, do you have any additional
comments on that same question?
Mr. Chertoff. No, I agree. I think that actually, although
occasionally, there is tension between the two, in many
instances, you cannot really have privacy without security, and
the value of security without privacy is much diminished.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you. One last comment from Mr. Smith
from me--with respect to the Microsoft case pending in the
Second Circuit, why has there been challenged the government's
demand for data stored in Ireland? What is your goal, or what
is the corporation's point in that case?
Mr. Smith. I think fundamentally, we believe that people
need to be able to trust the technology they use. And part of
their ability to trust the technology they use turns on
confidence that their rights, people's rights are going to be
protected by their law. We store emails in data centers that
are close to our customers. So, for example, when we have
customers in the European Union, we store their data, their
emails in our data center in Dublin or in Amsterdam. Our
concern is that the U.S. Government first is using power that
Congress never gave it. Namely, the power to go around the
world to vacuum up emails pursuant to a U.S. search warrant.
And second, our concern is because the U.S. is exercising
this type of extraterritorial power on a unilateral basis, it
is in effect saying, in this case, to the people of Ireland
that their law does not matter; the DOJ does not even need to
read it; it does not need to consult with the Irish Government;
it does not need to pay any attention to the mutual legal
assistance treaty in place between the U.S. and Ireland. All it
has to do is turn to an American technology company and apply a
power under U.S. law. That is not a recipe for the success of
the U.S. technology sector, and it is not a recipe for ensuring
people have trust in technology.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you. For Mr. David Kris--and I might ask
Ms. Daskal to both consider this: I think a bilateral agreement
framework could be a useful tool in resolving some of the
conflict of laws issues that have been discussed here today.
But there remain concerns, for example, about how we will
reconcile British law with our own legal customs. How will we
make sure that privacy, due process and human rights are
respected by our partners in these agreements?
Mr. Kris. That is an excellent question and issue to raise.
I am confident that Congress will have a role because even if
the United States and Ireland or any other country reach an
executive level agreement, for that agreement really to take
effect, Congress will need to amend the blocking provisions, as
Professor Daskal has referred to them, in the Stored
Communications Act.
And it will be, I think, up to you and incumbent on you as
a Congress to decide which categories of cases involving what
kind of, say, defendant, non-U.S. persons located abroad have
been discussed, such that U.S. persons, or persons in the
United States would not be subject to the exemption. Different
kinds of crimes exempting political crimes from this provision,
for example, various other limits are all possible. And
Congress will have an opportunity to consider those, if and
when it decides to amend the Stored Communications Act to
permit this kind of direct access by way of executive agreement
in some specified subset of cases that meet with your policy
approval.
Mr. Conyers. Ms. Daskal, would you add anything?
Mr. Issa [presiding]. Go ahead, Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you.
Ms. Daskal. So, yes, I agree with all that and I would
just--I think it is worth emphasizing that the agreement, as it
was explained to us this morning, and I think as Congress
should sort of adopt as parameters as well, would solely permit
a foreign government to get access to non-U.S. person data and
data of people who are not in the United States.** So, we are
talking about the Brits being able to get data on their own
citizens in connection with the investigation of a local crime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Note: The witness amends her response as follows:

So, yes, I agree with all that and I would just--I think it
is worth emphasizing that the agreement, as it was
explained to us this morning, and I think as Congress
should require as part of the adopted parameters, would
solely permit a foreign government to get access to non-
U.S. person data and data of people who are not in the
United States. So, we are talking about the Brits being
able to get data on their own citizens in connection with
the investigation of a local crime.
And Congress, I think, because we are talking about U.S.
providers, has a role to play in setting some minimal
standards, some minimal important procedural and substantive
standards as to what the Brits must do in order to get access
to that data from U.S.-based providers. But we are not talking
about the British requesting data about American citizens,
American permanent residents, or Americans in the United
States.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you all for your responses, and I thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you, Mr. Conyers. We now go to the
distinguished gentleman from Texas, Mr. Poe.
Mr. Poe. I want to thank the Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I, being a lawyer, I did not go to Harvard, but I
went to the University of Houston, which we call Harvard on the
bayou fondly in Texas. But, Mr. Chertoff, it is great to see
you again. Thanks for your service to the country that you have
done in the past.
Mr. Smith, I am impressed by your statement. Passionate and
you did not read it, so it is obvious that this is important to
you. It is important to the country. This, by way of kind of
review, ECPA, 30 years old. It would seem to me that we have
known for a long time that ECPA law needed to be reformed. And
30 years is long enough for Congress to finally pick a horse
and ride it and make some choices and changes in the law to
solve the problems that all of you have discussed; whether it
is nationally; whether it deals with business; whether it deals
with foreign countries; the information; do you think it is
about time that we make a decision on reforming ECPA?
Mr. Smith. I think that the time has come and it is perhaps
even overdue. I think what you are really hearing from all of
us today and you hear it from the tech sector every day, is
that we really do need a new law, and we need Congress to write
it.
Mr. Poe. And it should be Congress' responsibility to set
the standard of law rather than letting the courts make the
determination as to what the expectation of privacy is for
citizens, or corporations, or letting the Justice Department
take the law as they see it and interpret it the way they see
it. Congress needs to weigh in and make these decisions and
make it the law of the land. I mean, that is our
responsibility.
Mr. Smith. Absolutely, and I think, frankly, one of the
points that we have heard this morning that should give all of
us the most concern is the acknowledge by the Justice
Department that the Stored Communications Act passed in 1986 is
silent on whether the DOJ has the authority to apply these
search warrants worldwide. And the DOJ says, that because
Congress was silent, the executive branch has power. Well, that
basically amounts to an argument that Congress needs to write
really long laws, because every time Congress neglects to
address something, it is giving Congress--it is giving the
executive branch some power. That is not the way the
Constitution was written. That is not the way common sense
works.
Mr. Poe. There you go. I agree with that. And the Justice
Department, they are doing what they think they can do under
the law, and I think they are wrong, but ECPA was written to
protect privacy of individuals. That is the purpose of the law,
why it was written. So, Congress needs to weigh in on it, pass
legislation that has been pending for a long time. I think we
set the standard for the expectation of privacy. It should be
up to us, not some judge or group of judges, and we need to
move on with that. Set aside those comments, and tell me the
economic impact of not making a decision, and how that is
affecting industry.
Mr. Smith. I think there are two ways to think about this.
One is narrow, one is broad. They are both important. First,
because we are seeing this emerging conflict of laws, we are
seeing the risk of increasing fines on U.S. companies when we
get into these conflicts. Already to date, Microsoft has been
fined $28 million by the Brazilian authorities because of
this----
Mr. Poe. And that is a criminal fine. That is not a civil
fine. That is a criminal crime.
Mr. Smith. Right, yes. This is all connected to a criminal
proceeding, and we are being fined simply for obeying U.S. law,
and think about a start-up and what $28 million means. But the
implications are really broader because I find, in countries
like Germany and the United Kingdom, where I was last week, I
increasingly meet people in government and elsewhere who say
that unless this issue is resolved--they basically say,
``Unless you win your case in New York, we are not going to be
able to trust American technology and we are not going to be
able to move our content to the cloud when the cloud is
operated by a U.S. company with a data center.'' So, a lot is
at stake for the American economy and American jobs.
Mr. Poe. Well, I appreciate all of you being here. I do not
have time to ask the rest of you questions. But I think you are
exactly correct. For the problems that you have all mentioned,
it is time for Congress, like I said, to pick a horse and ride
it and let us pass some legislation to fix this problem. And I
yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the
gentlelady from San Jose, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. Before my questions, I would ask
unanimous consent that we put into the record the Yale Law
Journal article by our witness, Ms. Daskal.
Mr. Issa. Without objection, the document will be placed in
the record.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. This has been a very interesting
hearing and, comes at interesting time for our country, because
the issues we face are of law, but also of technology. And I do
not think we can talk about the legal issues without getting
into the technology issues. And I was looking at the Trans-
Pacific Partnership Agreement. Now, some of us have issues
about human rights in Vietnam, you know, health issues and the
like, but in terms of encryption, it is pretty clear.
It basically says that you cannot require a backdoor, an
encryption, if you are a party to this agreement. It prohibits
governments from requiring companies to either disclose their
keys or to use specific cryptographic algorithms. And the
Department of Justice's application and courts' subsequent
decision to compel Apple to provide special software
circumventing security protections would actually violate this
international norm, that is specified in the TPP, against
government mandates for backdoors. But also, we had several
votes here in the House of Representatives where we had over
two-thirds of the House vote in opposition to backdoors.
So, I am wondering, Mr. Smith, if I could ask you, what is
Microsoft's view of this? Do you support the position that
Apple has taken, that the court is setting a dangerous
precedent by forcing Apple to break its own security
protections? Does Microsoft plan to be involved in the
litigation that apparently is going to go on for a while? I
know Mr. Gates said something, but he has been gone from the
company since--for a long time. I am just wondering what the--
Microsoft's position is, if that is fair to ask?
Mr. Smith. Yeah, we at Microsoft support Apple, and we will
be filing an amicus brief to support Apple's position in the
court case next week. And I believe that Apple is making an
important point that, in fact, connects directly with the kinds
of issues that are being considered by this hearing today.
In the Apple case, the Justice Department has asked the
magistrate to apply language in the All Writs Act that was
passed by Congress, and written in 1911. The leading computing
device of that era is right here in front of me. It is an
adding machine that went on sale in 1912. Quite simply, we do
not believe that courts should seek to resolve issues of 21st
century technology with law that was written in the era of the
adding machine. We need 21st century laws that address 21st
century technology issues, and we need these laws to be written
by Congress. We, therefore, agree wholeheartedly with Apple
that the right place to bring this discussion is here, to the
House of Representatives and the Senate, so the people who are
elected by the people can make these decisions.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, and do you have any
other props?
Mr. Smith. No, not props.
Ms. Lofgren. I was surprised to see that, but----
Mr. Smith. But believe me, it is amazing what you can buy
on the internet.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I have heard that----
Mr. Issa. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Lofgren. If I can get----
Mr. Issa. What is the operating system on that?
Ms. Lofgren. What is the operating system?
Mr. Poe. It is called a hand crank.
Ms. Lofgren. I would like to follow up because I actually
very much believe that the encryption issue should be before
Congress. The Judiciary Committee has started that process, but
the Justice Department alleges that this is just one phone, and
I was surprised to hear that when we heard the district
attorney in New York saying he had 175 phones and then we found
out there were a number of others where we are seeking to
utilize the new operating system that the court has ordered
Apple to devise. Do you think that this issue goes beyond that
one phone?
Mr. Smith. Well, every case is obviously about one case,
but every case obviously has implications for lots of other
cases. The real concern here is actually the law and the
implications for the future. And the only way to get the law
right for the future is for Congress to act.
Ms. Lofgren. If I can just close, Mr. Chairman, I started
with the TPP, the international standard, and that is important
because encryption keeps us safe. It keeps people from breaking
into our data systems and causing problems for us. The either
hackers or terrorists or enemies of our country and I--the idea
that my data would have to be opened to hackers in China
because of specific cases is really what I think this is about,
and I thank you very much, Mr. Smith, for answering.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. We now go to the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman. Secretary Chertoff, you
mentioned a term, legal regime, in your opening. Would you
expand on that? And do you mean legal regime, meaning
legislation, or an expansion of MLAT, or something else, or a
combination?
Mr. Chertoff. I really principally meant legislation,
because as I think we also started a discussion about
encryption, in order to make decisions about how to structure a
legal architecture, when you are dealing with global data,
different forms of citizenship and evolving technology, I can
tell you having been a judge, the courts are not equipped to
weigh all of those things, and the unintended consequences of a
decision are often not clear in an individual case. So, to me,
this cries out--I know Chairman McCaul suggested a commission
to look at the issue of encryption, but to me, this cries out
for taking a comprehensive look at the way the technology
actually exists in the real world, and how one can then
reconcile the need to preserve privacy and the need to promote
security with that technological background.
To give you one example, you know, 100 years ago, when they
first invented telephones and photography, initially the courts
tried to deal with the issue of the Fourth Amendment by forcing
the facts into those old rules about not searching someone's
houses. So, we had the trespass cases. And finally, in some of
the more recent cases, the court said, ``Wait a second. This is
about expectation of privacy.'' It is not just about whether I
physically invaded a room or wire. And I think we need to have
that kind of technologically-informed discussion now.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Mr. Smith, what do you do in a
situation when you have conflicts like you have explained, as
far as advising your employees on how to approach these
matters?
Mr. Smith. Well, it is really a terrible situation that we
are being put into. I thought Chairman Goodlatte put it well at
the outset when he referred to it as a Hobbesian choice.
Imagine the kind of meeting that I have had to have with a
Brazilian employee who is being prosecuted. And imagine trying
to talk about the fact that we cannot, in fact, take the steps
that would bring the prosecution to an end in Brazil, because
it would require that we commit a felony in the United States.
This is a classic example, I think, of the fact that we need
governments to act, and we need our own government and we need
this Congress to act, perhaps most of all.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Ms. Daskal, referring back to the
secretary's atement on legislation, do you agree with that, or
do you see a combination of varieties of treaties and
legislation, or just the legislation?
Ms. Daskal. So, again, it depends on the specific issue,
but with respect to the problem of conflicting laws, there
absolutely needs to be legislation.
Mr. Marino. Good.
Ms. Daskal. Because the executive does not have the
authority to enter into the kinds of agreements that are needed
without Congress authorizing it and ideally setting parameters
as what those agreements look like.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, and Mr. Kris, would you expand a
little bit on the two points you raised in the FISA gap?
Mr. Kris. Sure. Again, I would love to be wrong on this. I
mean, I do think you should have a conversation with the
executive branch, but the jurisdiction and the reach of the
FISA statute depend fundamentally on the definitions of
electronic surveillance and physical search in the statute
itself, and those are very, very complex. But I am concerned
that given the way those definitions are written, the statute
cannot currently be used to compel the production of data
stored abroad; for example, the kind of situation we have in
the Second Circuit case involving Microsoft.
If the target of the surveillance is either a U.S. person
located anywhere, or a person of any nationality located here,
in either of those situations, I am concerned that the statute
cannot be used to issue a compulsion order to a provider to
turn over the data, and the government has to rely on a
voluntary repatriation of the data back into this country to
bring it within the jurisdiction of the statute.
Mr. Marion. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Gentleman yields back. With that, we go to the
gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I noticed in the
course of materials that I have here that--oh, first of all,
let me thank all the witnesses for their testimony. And I take
note of the fact--and I want to ask Mr. Smith and Mr. Chertoff
on this; that the issue at the European Union had been an
outstanding issue for a period of time in terms of data and
data protection, privacy. And just recently the U.S. data
transfer pack was agreed to.
Can both of you comment on what impact as we are discussing
legislation, the LEAD Act, and where are in the having not
acted, what that agreement does for you, even if it is sort of
around the ring of what we are discussing? Mr. Smith first.
Mr. Smith. Yeah, well thank you for asking that question,
congresswoman, because it actually raises a very important
point that we have not talked about yet today. You know, the
recent Safe Harbor negotiation I think, you know, put a Band-
Aid on a legal system that has been in existence since the year
2000 and, therefore, it appears the data will continue to be
able to move across the Atlantic. But time and time again, to
this morning you heard Mr. Bitkower talk about whether there is
or is not a conflict of laws across the Atlantic. The key thing
we need to think about here is that the new European Union
General Data Protection Regulation will take effect in 2 years.
And that regulation has an article, Article 43A, that will make
it unlawful for a company to move data out of Europe to comply
with a search warrant unless it is done pursuant to an
international legal agreement or process.
So in 2 years, a legal curtain is going to descend across
the Atlantic. There is going to be a conflict in every one of
these cases the Justice Department wants to pursue on a
continent that has 508 million people living on it, unless
action is taken to put new international agreements in place.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And so that would be aside from a statute
here in the United States. It would be additional international
agreements.
Mr. Smith. Basically what it means, I believe, is that we
have 2 years to try to figure out how to craft an agreement, as
we are trying to do with the United Kingdom, get legislation in
Congress, and then determine how and whether to replicate that
with the other countries in the European Union; so we do not
have a day to waste.
Ms.  Jackson Lee. Sense of urgency; Mr. Chertoff, thank you
for your service as Homeland Security secretary. So, I am going
to add a subset to the question is to reflect on the
international agreements, but also reflect upon the crucial
question of privacy and security in the backdrop of what we are
facing now. And Microsoft case represents--even the case was a
criminal case we have, as an ongoing looming issue, is at least
a dialogue or the issue of Apple. But can you, from your
perspective, speak to how we have a number of factors that are
impacting on our decision for the legislation and our exchange
on data?
Mr. Chertoff. Yeah, well thank you. And again, it is a
pleasure to appear before you again. I agree with what Mr.
Smith said about the need to particularly work out an agreement
with the Europeans, because they have typically been, at least
some of the countries there, the most reluctant to cooperate in
these areas. And yet the urgency of doing that cooperation now
is more evident than ever when you look at what happened in
Paris.
So we ought to move forward with that. I think in general
also, though, there are a series of issues which require us to
think in a little bit more of a technologically savvy way about
how we deal with data. And to go back to Congresswoman
Lofgren's point on encryption--I am a real believer that it
would be a mistake to legislate a requirement to create
backdoors or duplicate keys or other limitations on the ability
to have ubiquitous encryption. Because I know that encryption
is one of the key tools that we use to protect innocent people
against criminals or, for example, the North Koreans getting
into your data. And to sacrifice the security of the many in
this instance seems to me to be not worth it, particularly
because I am quite confident that the bad guys can find tools
overseas that are going to wind up allowing them to encrypt
anyway.
But, again, this is an area where I think--I know there is
a litigation going on now. For a court to be asked to make or
resolve this decision strikes me as the wrong way to go about
it. This is something that requires looking end to end at what
the problem is in trying to reconcile what--I do not think they
are inevitably contradictory impulses. But what I think are
impulses that need to be coordinated and synchronized so we do
not go too far in the direction of handicapping security, and
too far in the direction of handicapping privacy.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, can I sneak in one question for Mr.----
Mr. Goodlatte. Quickly, because we have just enough time
for each Member to have 5 minutes before our hard stop at 1:30.
Ms. Jackson Lee. In answer to Mr. Chertoff, the LEADS
legislation does lay out a process. What is your comment on the
statutory fix for this issue? Did you hear me?
Ms. Daskal. Yeah, yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yeah, thank you.
Ms. Daskal. So I think the fact that the Congress is
engaging with LEADS is a terrific step forward. I do have some
concerns about LEADS as currently written in the way that it
makes jurisdiction turn on the location of data, which I think
has all kinds of practical and normative problems, because of
the way data moves around so quickly, because of its
divisibility, because of the fact that oftentimes when we store
things in the cloud we do not even know where it is located at
any given time. So making jurisdiction turn over where our data
is does not seem to make a lot sense. That said----
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I am afraid we are going to have to
cut you off but----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I think you and I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the witnesses.
Mr. Issa. Young lady from California, Ms. Walters.
Ms. Walters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Smith, your
testimony describes Microsoft's dilemma with the Brazilian
Government seeking disclosures that would blatantly violate
U.S. law. And I am sure that legal predicaments like this will
only increase as governments enact laws that create additional
conflicts. These legal quandaries undoubtedly have negative
impact on Microsoft as well as other tech companies, and
ultimately impair a vital sector of the American economy. And I
know Mr. Poe had asked this question, and you had discussed the
fines levied against Microsoft. But I wanted to give you
additional time to discuss how this situation has impacted your
global customer's willingness to trust Microsoft products, and
what it has done to your business.
Mr. Smith. Well I think more than anything else,
congresswoman, your question, which is very important, just
underscores, first of all, the importance that people would be
able to trust technology. We are all putting so much of our
most sensitive information on devices and in the cloud that
people, by definition, only want to use technology they can
trust.
So the fundamental question that people around the world
are asking is whether they can trust American technology. You
know, we face this as one American company but I think this is
a question that every American company is having to face. And
there are a variety of steps we are trying to take to address
it, we are being more transparent ourselves; I think that is a
good thing. We are taking steps to advance privacy, to address
and advance encryption; I think that is a good thing. But at
the end of the day, the concern that I hear around the world is
that regardless of what we do, the U.S. Government may use its
long arm to reach unilaterally across borders and without
regard for other countries' laws.
So we need to fix that part as well. We obviously need to
do it in a way that ensures that law enforcement can do its
job; that is why these kinds of new agreements are needed.
Ms. Walters. Yeah, thank you. And then I have a question
for the entire panel. What does the internet look like if we do
not act and data localization becomes the norm?
Mr. Chertoff. I do not want to be overdramatic but you do
not have an internet. You have a series of internets or
intranets in individual countries. And so much of the value of
the internet, which is the ability to operate on a global
basis, is hampered. It also means that from an engineering
standpoint some of the considerations that you have when you
put a server in a particular place gets subordinated to issues
about how to manage the legality or kind of legal arbitrage
from one jurisdiction to another.
Ms. Daskal. I would just add as well I completely agree.
But I think the other piece of this that is important is when
that happens, the United States no longer has a role to say in
terms of what protections do or do not apply when a country is
getting access to data. And so that is why this opportunity to
enter into agreements and to set at least some parameters is a
really important opportunity for the United States to engage,
to set the parameters, and to do so in a way where the world is
still talking to each other.***
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
***Note: The witness amends her response as follows:

And so that is why this opportunity to enter into
agreements and to set at least some parameters is a really
important opportunity for the United States to engage, to
set the parameters, and do so in a way that protects our
privacy, security, and economic interests.
Mr. Smith. And the last thing I would mention is the
consequence of that kind of data localization trend and set of
requirements is that computing gets more expensive, because it
forces companies to build more data centers than, frankly, the
world needs just so you can have a data center in every
country. That costs money; that is going to lead to higher
prices.
Ms. Walters. Okay, thank you, I yield back. Do you have
anything to add, Mr. Kris? No. I yield back, thank you.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. We now go to the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Since we have veered down the road
of encryption, and it being a fact that encryption keeps us
safe from hackers and garden-variety criminals, we also have
this issue of a ungoverned space that is created by encryption;
a ungoverned space wherein terrorists can conspire with
impunity.
So, you know, on one hand, we have encryption that helps
keep us safe from hackers, but then we also have encryption
that helps keep terrorist conspirators safe from discovery. And
then we have the issue of international competition companies,
multi-national corporations, multi-national companies competing
in an international market for customers with privacy, or
encryption, being a selling point. And this is quite
interesting.
It can cause a lot of fear in the minds of people concerned
about law enforcement, concerned about intelligence,
international intelligence. And so we see where we have gotten
to the point where technology has exceeded the capacity of law
enforcement, both internationally and domestically, to be on
top of the situation which leads us into an area of anarchy,
lawlessness. Encryption, Mr. Chertoff--you have talked about
the fact that it protects us from hackers. What is your view
about terrorists who are able to conspire with impunity in that
environment?
Mr. Chertoff. Well, Congressman, this is a--look, this is a
serious issue, and I take the concerns of the FBI and the law
enforcement community very seriously; I understand why this
worries them. I guess my response is this: First of all, I know
that even if Congress says that companies or items--companies
that manufacture items here have to create backdoors or
duplicate keys, people who want to do bad things will find
devices that do not have backdoors or duplicate keys.
I point out to people that the so-called dark web, where a
lot of criminal activity goes on undetected because it is all
anonymized, is powered by the Onion Router Tor, which was
actually funded by the United States Government as a way of
providing anonymity for people who were dissidents. The second
thing I would say is that it has always been the case, and I go
back in my years of doing law enforcement, that bad people were
able to communicate with each other without being detected.
In the old days when we were doing mob cases, they would
either turn the radio way up so the listening device could not
record it, or they would take a walk around the block. And we
nevertheless succeeded in putting a lot of those folks in jail.
And the third thing I would say is that actually, if you
look at the technology that exists nowadays, and the amount of
metadata that is generated that is not encrypted, I would
venture to say that from the intelligence and law enforcement
standpoint, the ability to detect terrorism now is
fantastically better than it was even 15 years ago when, in the
wake of 9/11, we were trying to hunt down terrorists in this
country.
So, as with all technologies, there are elements of it that
are problematic for law enforcement, but there are elements
that help law enforcement, and I still think the balance favors
our security.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I do not have anyone on the panel
to ask if they would disagree with that, I assume. So with that
I will yield back.
Mr. Issa. And with that I would recognize the gentlelady
from Texas for unanimous consent.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you and the Ranking
Member. I would like to submit two articles into the record,
``New European U.S. Data Transfer Pack Agreed,'' dated February
2, 2016.
Mr. Issa. Without objection so ordered.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Reuters, and Washington Post, ``The
British want to come to America with Wiretap Orders and Search
Warrants,'' dated February 4th.
Mr. Issa. Without objection so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. We now go to Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chertoff, or
Secretary Chertoff, I thank you as well for your service while
you were over at the Department of Homeland Security, I was a
U.S. attorney and a former terrorism prosecutor. So I wanted to
ask you about your testimony; you seem to suggest that we
revert to a global standard of data control based on where the
target of the investigation is a resident, is that right?
Mr. Chertoff. Actually, I would be probably inclined to say
it should be based on where the citizenship of the
accountholder as opposed to the target. But I could see an
argument that might look at the target as well. But I think
probably the accountholder makes the most sense.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay, well let's walk through a scenario
that we have probably both been through before. What if the
information on say a suspected terrorist is located, and to use
an example others have used here, is actually stored in Ireland
but we know--let's say we know that that individual is a Saudi
national. How would you reconcile that?
Mr. Chertoff. Well, so first of all, I mean I think the
default position would be to go based on a treaty request, like
an MLAT, but hopefully in a world in which these requests are
not 10 months, but are more like 10 hours. And we have seen
from what Mr. Smith said that it is possible, in fact, to do
that.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So under the standard that you--tell
me the impact that you would think that would have with respect
to national security investigations generally.
Mr. Chertoff. Well, and again, I am predicating this on a
more efficient regime of answering these requests. But I think
in many ways we have dealt with these cases in the past. I
think that provided people put an adequate priority on this--
and my experience is generally they do in a terrorism case--I
think it would not impede investigations unduly, and I think
what it would do is avoid the kind of conflict that actually
winds up slowing up investigations, because that person who is
holding the data, or the entity that is holding the data, is
caught on maybe unnecessarily between two conflicting legal
systems when an agreement to go by way of a treaty would
eliminate that sense of conflict.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Do we get into a situation there where we
would be increasing our reliance on intelligence authorities
rather than law enforcement authorities?
Mr. Chertoff. Well, I will acknowledge to you that when you
are dealing with terrorism, particularly prevention, a lot of
what we do is intelligence based. And that is a different set
of issues than access by legal process. And so I am not
suggesting we do not do that, but I am saying if we are using
legal process, I think a system that eliminates conflict is
something that both enables us to actually speed up
cooperation, and avoids putting companies in a difficult
position.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. And speaking of processes, you
mentioned before the MLAT process. And you may have already
given your thoughts with respect to reforms, but that was
something that I tried to utilize during my time at the
Department of Justice and admittedly not very effectively
utilized it. And so I want to give you an opportunity to
expound on the MLAT process and the best way to reform that
from a congressional perspective.
Mr. Chertoff. Well, your experience and mine are very
similar. And I think there are two elements to this. One is I
think the technology, at least when I was a prosecutor, you
know, it was a paper-based system. And it tended to be, from a
technological as well as, frankly, a priority standpoint, you
know, pretty slow. I think we could build a technology platform
that would make this much, much quicker. We see this in a lot
of areas in the commercial domain.
I think the second issue would be the policy standpoint.
And there, I think, whether it is additional resources, or a
decision at a high level of the law enforcement community to
treat at least a certain category of these very high priority
would be--enable us to move these more quickly. And I think,
again, the lesson of what happened after the Paris attacks,
where it took 45 minutes to respond to a request is
illustrative.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Right. Well, out of respect for the other
Members that have questions, I will yield back the balance of
my time. I do want to thank everyone for being here. We all
understand what an important issue we are discussing today. I
yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the
gentlelady from Washington, Ms. DelBene.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thanks to all of you
for being with us today. Mr. Smith, when ECPA was written many
years ago, as you were highlighting, in 1986, it was also the
very early days of email. When I first started working on email
in 1989, even then it was still really only used in companies
that had it for internal communications. And if you did get an
email, folks always downloaded it from a server because
capacity in servers was very low. And they would regularly
delete those servers to have room for new information.
So it seems clear that some of the fundamental technical
assumptions that were made when ECPA was written have
definitely changed vastly since then. And I wonder if you could
comment on the mechanics of cloud computing today and what
legal questions that creates, especially with respect to ECPA.
And why cannot the courts just shoehorn kind of all of these--
today's legal issues and to, like, the international storage
issue, into that old law.
Mr. Smith. Well I think your question raises an excellent
point. A company like Microsoft built its first data center
outside the United States only in 2010. So cloud computing and
the explosion of cloud computing is really a phenomenon of this
decade. That is what has created all of these issues that we
are talking about today. And it has created the need at times
for law enforcement, quite rightly, to want to get access to
information, to content, to email in other countries.
I think the fundamental question in a sense from a U.S.
legal perspective is that when technology moves forward and the
law needs to catch up, as it does here, what is the best way
for that to happen? And we would say the best way is for the
executive branch, if it wants new power, to come back to
Congress and ask Congress to enact it.
Ms. DelBene. And when you say when the law was written it
was written actually with respect to the way technology was
working then, as opposed to providing intent going forward.
Mr. Smith. Well absolutely, and the most interesting and
telling aspect of ECPA in this regard is the fact that it
applied a lower standard to protect email that was over 6
months old. And that was all based on some thinking in the
1980's that, I think, barely anybody can remember, that most
businesses moved their paper records offsite after 6 months.
Maybe that was true. But who the heck has an email account that
has only email that is less than 6 months old? The answer is
only email accounts that have been opened less than 6 months
ago. All the rest of us have email that is older than that, and
that just shows how much the world has changed.
Ms. DelBene. And with the shift to cloud computing now,
more and more of that information is stored on servers.
Mr. Smith. Well, the amazing thing about the cloud, as you
point out quite rightly, is now we are not only talking about
email, we are talking about all the photographs of our lives.
We are talking about all of the other digital records that we
have. We are talking about the PDFs that--in our lives. It is
everything that sort of documents what we do every day.
Ms. DelBene. And do you think that people should have a
different expectation of how digital information is treated
versus physical information? Is there a legal significance to
the fact that you might information that is in digital form
versus paper form?
Mr. Smith. I think that technology needs to advance, but
certain timeless values need to endure. And among these
timeless values are the rights to privacy. And every time the
American public has been asked, they have said the same thing.
They want the data they store in the cloud to get the same
privacy protection as the information they store on paper. And
I think that is exactly the right point of view.
Ms. DelBene. Does anyone else think there is a difference
between digital or paper in terms of the legal significance and
that differentiation?
Mr. Chertoff. I agree with Mr. Smith. I think one of the
challenges here, frankly, is people--sometimes because of the
fact that the data moves electronically and seamlessly,
conflate what is a business record and a provider with what is
something that a provider holds as a custodian so to speak. And
to use an example from the banking world, it is one thing to
subpoena a bank for bank records which are the bank's own
documents or the bank's own information.
It is another thing if you want to get into a safety
deposit box. The bank does not have a limitless right to enter
the box and, therefore, you need a warrant for the box that is
separate and distinct from a subpoena for the business records.
And because electronic data does not neatly fall into that
obvious category, categorization, there is a tendency to
conflate the two. But I think as Brad says, that the principles
ought to be the same.
Ms. DelBene. Mr. Kris?
Mr. Kris. I would just say the two factors that strike me
as the most significant here are first, the incredible amount
of digital data that is now created and available. Digital dust
or digital footprints of your daily life are everywhere
created. And they are also, second point, stored with third
parties in a way that they did not use to be. And so I find
myself in strong agreement with Mr. Smith when he had his 1912
adding machine in front of him.
It is, I think, important and appropriate for Congress to
look at the All Writs Act again. I would go further, and
suggest you also consider the technical assistance provisions
in both the Wiretap Act and FISA to clarify exactly what kind
of assistance is going to be required from third parties in
making digital data in the clear available to the government.
You know, at one extreme is legislation now pending in the U.K.
which, if I read it correctly, would essentially allow them to
compel providers to push down widgets, malware in bulk, across
a network and all the users on that network.
And at the other extreme would be, you know, essentially no
compelled assistance. There is going to be a middle ground
there, and I think Congress is the appropriate institution of
our government to come to grips with that.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. And with that we go to
the gentleman----
Ms. DelBene. Sorry, my time expired.
Mr. Issa. Yes, I am afraid so. And we now go to the
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize for
having to leave. I had a meeting on the Senate side. But I am
happy to report that they are up at this early hour working on
the Senate side. And I see that almost all the good lawyers
have gone, so it is my turn. Mr. Smith, from a law enforcement
perspective, you receive a warrant for information that you
maintain in a foreign country. And I know some of this has
already come up, but just humor me because I find this stuff
interesting and I would rather you say it twice than not say it
once. You get a search warrant for material that is in a
foreign country from a U.S. law enforcement official, and it
violates the law of that foreign country for you to access that
information. How do you resolve that?
Mr. Smith. Well I think the real problem is we are just
being put in an impossible position. You know, certainly what
we have done to date is looked at U.S. law and if the
information is in the United States and it would violate the
Stored Communications Act for us to turn it over, we simply do
not turn it over. That is why, as I was saying earlier, we have
now been fined $28 million by the Brazilian Government, and we
have an executive there who is being prosecuted. I think the
big quandary we are all going to face in 2 years is what
happens once the new European Union regulation takes effect,
and their blocking statute that would prohibit us from turning
information over to the DOJ outside of an international
agreement kicks in. I do not see how we can turn information
over to the Justice Department if it is in Europe, and European
law prohibits us from doing so, which is why I think the
fundamental argument that the Justice Department, that it needs
this, both has some merit but, ultimately, frankly, sort of
misses the point. The day of unilateral search warrants is fast
coming to an end; it needs to be replaced by something new and
something better and we had better act quickly.
Mr. Gowdy. Are there any facts from the Brazilian fact
pattern where you have an executive that is facing--did you say
criminal prosecution?
Mr. Smith. Yes, criminal prosecution.
Mr. Gowdy. For being out of compliance with a discovery
order, or what is the procedure for where he finds himself, or
herself?
Mr. Smith. You can think of it as akin to what in the
United States would be a contempt order from a court. You know,
a local court has issued a local order requiring us to turn
over certain information but in this case the information is
not in Brazil, it is in the United States, and U.S. law
prohibits us from turning it over. As we talk about pressure
for data localization, this is the ultimate pressure for data
localization. Because obviously, what it is intended to do is
encourage U.S. companies to build data centers in Brazil so we
no longer have to follow U.S. law.
So, again, the specter of concerns that people have in some
ways are coming true before our very eyes if we cannot find a
better way to solve them.
Mr. Gowdy. For those of us in the past who have experienced
the joy of facing potential contempt from a judge, what is your
executive supposed to do? How is he or she supposed to get out
of this quandary?
Mr. Smith. Let me just say I do not want to get into the
privileged conversations that I have had with our employee. It
is a darn complicated situation. Yeah, these are situations
where people's life and liberty ultimately is at stake. And,
you know, we at Microsoft are not alone in having faced these
kinds of issues around the world. And there are a number of
companies facing similar issues in Brazil itself. And, you
know, it, among other things, calls into question how one
continues to do business in certain countries, whether people
can continue to live there. You know, these are not easy
decisions to make.
Mr. Gowdy. Have you proposed either a legislative or
regulatory remedy to the Department on how to resolve fact
patterns like the Brazilian one?
Mr. Smith. Yes, and I have talked with the Brazilian
Government as well as you might imagine. Ultimately, I believe
that if the U.S. and the U.K. can fashion an agreement that
works, the people in the United States can feel comfortable
with, that law enforcement can feel meets its needs, it creates
a model that we can consider then advancing in other countries.
And I, frankly, hope there will a day when there is an
agreement between the United States and Brazil as well. I think
that that kind of solution is needed for the people of Brazil,
and the Brazilian Government, who have legitimate needs I
appreciate, but we just need a new solution, not an old one.
Mr. Gowdy. I am almost out of time, so this will be my last
question. Going back to when we were in law school and this
expectation of privacy, and the fact that it has to be an
expectation that the public considers to be reasonable, but the
public can change its mind. So the bank records case from 30
years ago, or however old that was, if that is really the most
recent precedent or the precedent that people cite for this,
where do you see the public's reasonable expectation in terms
of what they think they have a privacy interest in?
Mr. Smith. I think technology has moved forward, public
expectations of privacy have caught up, people actually do
expect the data they store in the cloud and put on their
devices to be private. And the Supreme Court, I think,
recognized this unanimously 2 years ago in the Riley case. And
I thought the fact that it was a unanimous Supreme Court
decision acknowledging this public expectation to privacy was
of fundamental importance for the country.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We now go to the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Jeffries.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all the
witnesses for their presence here today. Let me start with Mr.
Smith. Microsoft is a U.S.-based company in Washington that
employs around tens of thousands of individuals in the country,
is that fair to say?
Mr. Smith. That is correct. We employ more than 50,000
people in the United States.
Mr. Jeffries. And other companies like Google and Apple and
Facebook also employ tens of thousands of people here in the
country?
Mr. Smith. Collectively our industry employs hundreds of
thousands, indeed probably millions, of people in the United
States.
Mr. Jeffries. And it is projected, I think, over the next 5
years that at least a million, if not more, jobs will be
created here in America as a result of the activity of
technology innovation companies.
Mr. Smith. Assuming our country can give people the skills
and education they need, absolutely we will create the jobs and
fill them here.
Mr. Jeffries. Now, collectively, companies like Microsoft
and Apple and some of the others that I mentioned are sort of
world leaders in the technology and innovation economy. Is that
also a fair assessment?
Mr. Smith. That is what we aspire to be every day, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And I would be interested in your thoughts as
to this notion that the trust factor, which has been eroding
all across the world as it relates to the view that many other
countries have toward our leading technology companies, could
adversely impact our position as a world leader in technology
and innovation.
Mr. Smith. It is, I just think, an imperative for the U.S.
technology sector to restore trust in American technology. We
really, over the last 3 years, since the Snowden disclosures,
there has been a global conversation taking place about whether
people can trust technology. And as a tech sector, we have been
out taking new steps, including investments in end-to-end
encryption to advance that kind of trust. And I just think it
is fundamental to our ability to succeed globally in the
future.
Mr. Jeffries. Secretary Chertoff, could you comment in this
trust dynamic and the notion of eroding American
competitiveness?
Mr. Chertoff. Yeah, I would be delighted to, Congressman. I
will give you an example of what happens when you do not have
trust. It is not a surprise that some of the major Chinese
companies that are involved in producing telecommunications and
IT equipment have a bit of a trust problem around the world.
And I think in the last couple of years they wanted to be--one
of them wanted to be the backbone of the IT system in
Australia, and the Australian government said no, they would
not allow it because, again, there was a trust issue.
I think we underestimate sometime the strategic value of
the United States of the ability to have an IT system, and to
produce products and services that people do trust, and are
willing to rely upon and implement. And I think, you know,
since the Snowden disclosures, the effort to rebuild trust by
making sure that first of all we have clear processes about,
you know, what the law is, what is private, under what
circumstances it has to be turned over--I think that is
critical to maintaining our competitive position and that has
an effect not only on our, frankly, our jobs, but on our
national security as well.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you. Mr. Smith, the Department of
Justice seems to have taken a position that there are no
existing conflicts of law. Is that your understanding of their
position, or your understanding of what the actual landscape is
at this moment in time?
Mr. Smith. It is clearly what Mr. Bitkower said this
morning. I do not believe it is an accurate characterization of
the issues in our lawsuit at the Second Circuit. We pointed out
that there are serious issues and concerns involving the
potential conflict between U.S. and Irish law. There is no
Irish court decision that is yet on point, but I think that the
issues are serious.
As I have mentioned, in Europe the law will be clear. There
will be a concrete conflict across Europe in 2 years. And
fundamentally, the case is not about whether there is a
conflict of laws. It is about whether the executive branch is
exercising power that the Congress gave it in ECPA.
Mr. Jeffries. Now are countries in other continents likely
to follow the lead of the European Union and move in the
direction that becomes more restrictive, countries on the
Continent of South America, Africa, Asia?
Mr. Smith. We are following these regulatory and legal
trends around the world. And what we are basically seeing is a
number of governments considering or enacting new laws or
regulations that, in some cases, are requiring data
localization, and in other cases are considering or moving
toward these kinds of so-called blocking statutes like the one
I have referred to in the European Union; yes.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you. And lastly, Secretary Chertoff,
the 19th century was the century of the telegraph, the 20th
century the century of the typewriter, and then the personal
computer, 21st century, century of the smart phone, internet of
things, who knows what other innovation will take place. There
seems to be an emerging consensus from many colleagues on both
sides of the aisle that Congress needs to step in, in this
vacuum.
My question is with the explosive growth of innovation and
technology, which is a great thing, you know, how--it is
difficult for Congress to keep up with the changes in
technology. But what framework should we take in looking to
enact legislation that recognizes the fact that we want to
create some certainty, but also flexibility in interpretation
in order to capture the dramatic and rapid change of
technology?
Mr. Chertoff. I think that is a very important question, it
is one that I am not going to be able to fully answer in the
remaining time allotted. I would say this--I do think it is
time for Congress, whether they do it by way of a commission or
some other body, to really take a comprehensive look at the
question of how the change in technology has affected a lot of
our expectations. I would not legislate on a micromanagement
level but I do think some general principles could be fleshed
out. And just to give you one example, Mr. Smith talked about
the Riley case. Much of our rule about privacy is based on the
idea that we are thinking about when you search an object or a
case, you are searching what is in the case. But in many ways
when you now pick up a smart phone and you start to search the
phone, what you are doing is you are taking a key to your
house. And it is as if you are taking the key and walking over
to someone's house and searching the whole house.
So as we think about the issue of, how do we deal with data
that is remotely held I think there is a general set of
principles that we could come up with that would not
micromanage every situation, but would help give a framework
for applying?
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. Now all you have left are
the non-attorney, four attorneys behind me, that will
undoubtedly question a lot of my questions, but rightfully so.
You know, Secretary Chertoff, I am going to use you as part of
it; I am going to use probably Mr. Smith as part of it. First
question was, since you brought all of your props and they are
all tangible old props do you view--as I asked the first
panel--do you view that, in fact, what we need to do is write
specifics, but write them based on the same principles that we
had in the tangible world? That is a fair analysis, is it?
Secretary, same thing. Because I mean I think that is the first
thing. We are going to have to write legislation. Do we write
it based on principles of the past that our Founders saw in the
tangible world, and then find a way to make them versatile in a
instantaneous transfer world?
Mr. Chertoff. I would say the answer to that is yes, in the
sense that the enduring principles are what we want to make
sure are preserved. But without minimizing the fact that it is
not simply a matter of translating, you know, what is physical
to what is virtual. There are going to be some differences, but
the values remain the same.
Mr. Issa. Well let me go over some of these values. And if
I see a headshake no, I will call on you. Otherwise, we will
assume that I have got some yeses on these, which I like to get
to yes. You might have noticed that in the past. Principles
that we need to do if we pass updated legislation; first of
all, we need to deal with the predictability, not just in the
United States, but around the world.
We need to have a reciprocity concept at the time that we
produce this legislation, because the rest of the world is
looking to us for whether we will live by our rules when the
shoe is on the other foot. The American people need to have a
notice of what their rights are, and likely, in most cases, a
notice of the taking of their information. We know there are
certain times that it will not happen. We need to deal with
what nexus is in a virtual world; not just is it a U.S. person,
but did it originate in the United States? Did it transfer
through the United States? And so on.
We are likely, I believe, as a principle to have to break
into two parts; one is the criminal part, including national
security, the other is civil. Because, again, I suspect that we
are going to have a custody battle between two people, and yet
records are going to be demanded from around the world.
It seems like, back to the same point, there has to be an
informed consent. In other words, today most of us have no idea
whether or not the storage of some item might give us
additional rights or might not. And I presume we are going to
have to look at that from a standpoint of both law and treaty.
One that I, because I am also on foreign affairs, I am become
very familiar with is the principle that does not seem to exist
here but clearly exists in Europe, the right to be forgotten is
going to have to be addressed if we are going to have
reciprocal agreements with other countries who truly believe
that if you host something in another country, it will not
eliminate the likelihood that you have to honor, let's just say
a European Union citizen, the right to disappear, which they
are clearly working on. I have not got a no yet.
Lastly, the expectation of privacy. It appears as though
one of the most important things we are going to have to do is
define what the American people can expect from data which is
stored anywhere outside of their pocket in an inanimate object
with no battery and a cloister of multiple different shrouds,
so that it cannot possibly be energized remotely, and thus
activated and taken.
And, Mr. Chertoff, you were laughing because we all know
exactly how that happens. So did I go through points you all
agreed to? And it looks like I did. What did I leave out? What
additional considerations should this Committee have in the
record today as we look to what is obviously our primary
jurisdiction and a long overdue look at the world as it exists
electronically? And I will just go right down the list.
Mr. Smith. Well first I would say that you have shown once
again what Abraham Lincoln first proved, you do not have to go
to law school to have a great legal mind. I think you have
captured the legal issues that the world needs to address and
certainly this Congress needs to address. I do not think there
is anything that you have left out or--let me put it another
way--if Congress could answer the questions that you have
posed, the whole world of technology and the world for people
would be much better off.
Mr. Chertoff. I really agree with that. I would say one
thing, just not to be naive. You know, I think in our minds
when we talk about the ability to reach a global accommodation,
we are thinking of the Europeans, we are thinking of countries
that are more or less kind of western style democracies.
Mr. Issa. But I serve on Foreign Affairs so I know that we
are--we may all be created equally but we do not all think the
same.
Mr. Chertoff. Exactly. And I think when we deal, for
example, with Russia, we are going to need to be realistic
about that. But, you know, if we can reach a reasonable set of
agreements with a good deal of the globe, that would be a
major, major step forward.
Mr. Issa. And so that is where the reciprocity may not be
universal but at least the standards among those who have
reciprocity would be universal. Mr. Kris.
Mr. Kris. Yeah, I agree. I thought that was an excellent
summary of all of the issues that need to be addressed.
Mr. Issa. That is why I went last.
Mr. Kris. Instantiating them, you know, in all of the
various digital and other settings is going to be, as you know,
enormously challenging. The only additional point I would make
is you have, I will call it an opportunity, before the end of
2017 to consider renewal of the FISA Amendments Act. And so
that is, as an adjunct to this, another area in which you are
going to want to, I think, harmonize your efforts. Thank you.
Ms. Daskal. So I echo the agreement with the incredible
list. I would just add that when one is thinking about the
relevant nexus, which you raised just now and you also raised
in your earlier questions to Mr. Bitkower, and the analogies to
tangible property, I think the analogies are right in the sense
that it does not make sense for the United States to assert
unilateral jurisdiction over everything everywhere in the
world; that there is a concern about that. At the same time, I
think it is worth thinking about other jurisdictional hooks
other than location of data, given the differences between data
and other forms of tangible property.
Mr. Issa. I think your point is good. And just as one
Member of this Committee, I believe that is one of the
challenges we face from a business standpoint. And I will put
my recovering, hopefully, never fully recovered businessman's
hat on for a moment.
And that is that we want the world to have an expectation
that rule of law will exist for them, no matter where the data
is. The data transfer or, let's just take J.P. Morgan Chase; if
they only have one server farm, or two server farms, and they
are both in the United States that will not happen. But if it
did, we do not want the world to believe they are
disenfranchised and begin ordering balkanization. And I
certainly think although that is not part of the principles of
our Constitution here, it is good common sense that we have to
find a solution that does not adversely affect business models,
cause countries essentially to order, even if it is Russia, to
order that you localize for some reason.
Let me beg your indulgence; I have 4 minutes left on the
Chairman's mandate that we finish at 1:30. There is an elephant
not in the room, which is the Apple case, but since I am
bringing it into the room, I want to ask just a basic question,
and I will start with Mr. Smith. Microsoft, you mentioned in
your testimony, and in some of your answers, you are looking at
end-to-end encryption for a multitude of products. Your
products, if they do not now, will shortly un-encrypt, use
data, re-encrypt as a matter of course because we now have the
processing power that allows you to do that. Is that a fair
statement?
Mr. Smith. Well we are certainly focused on implementing
encryption. It was two and a half years ago we said we would
implement encryption at rest, encryption in transit, encryption
in more scenarios. So I think fundamentally encryption is an
important part of safeguarding people's information for the
future.
Mr. Issa. So is it fair to say that what Apple is dealing
with--you mentioned you are going to submit an amicus brief--
what Apple is dealing with, every software company, and
probably every communication company, and perhaps most, if you
will, social networking and even ecommerce companies, all are
going to face similar questions to the one that Apple is facing
today.
Mr. Smith. I think in one form or another, many, many
technology companies in many, many countries are going to need
to address these encryption issues. And certainly Apple's case
is an important example of one form of that.
Mr. Issa. And Secretary Chertoff, I am going to take
advantage of the fact you have worn so many hats, and your
knowing what FISA judges go through, knowing how the NSA
provides information, knowing what the Central Intelligence--
what their sources and methods historically have been. Let me
just ask you a question in the open. Is not one of the most
important tools that we have in going after terrorists and
criminal networks, the lack of their predictability and
knowledge of what we can or cannot break, what we do or do not
know, and what we can or cannot find out?
Mr. Chertoff. I think that is absolutely correct. And that
is one of the things that was very damaging about Snowden is to
some extent he at least put them on alert about certain things.
Mr. Issa. So when Apple and others say that ordering a
predictable key encryption, a backdoor, guarantees that at
least as to those who have complied with it, that the bad guys
will know not to use that product. And if I think of sort of
the entrepreneurial nature of criminals and terrorists, by
definition will we not be begging them to take their millions
or billions of dollars and use it to develop items that do not
have a backdoor and, thus, reduce the chances that we are going
to have commercial off the shelf software that we might be able
to produce our own independent backdoors from time to time
without their knowing it?
Mr. Chertoff. I think you are absolutely right. One of the
unfortunate things about this being a public dispute is that it
pretty much guarantees that terrorists will now be looking to
other tools. And, in fact, there was something in the paper
recently about a manual they found or some kind of a document
of ISIS folks going through what are the best encrypted
technologies. Now sometimes they are wrong, and that works for
us, but only if we keep it quiet.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I want to thank all of our guests. You
were great witnesses. It is exactly 1:30, and we stand
adjourned.
Ms. Daskal. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:30 p.m., the Committee adjourned subject
to the call of the Chair.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Questions for the Record submitted to David Bitkower, Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General United States Department of Justice*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note: The Committee did not receive a response from this witness
before this hearing transcript was finalized in October 2016.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from Brad Smith,
President and Chief Legal Officer, Microsoft Corporation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Questions for the Record submitted to the Honorable Michael Chertoff,
Co-Founder and Executive Chairman, The Chertoff Group*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note: The Committee did not receive a response from this witness
before this hearing transcript was finalized in October 2016.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from the Honorable David S. Kris,
former Assistant Attorney General for National Security, United States
Department of Justice

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Questions for the Record from Jennifer Daskal, Assistant
Professor, American University Washington College of Law

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
