- UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES: COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS AND PUBLIC POLICY IMPLICATIONS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS AND
PUBLIC POLICY IMPLICATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,
AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 10, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-42

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman

DOUG COLLINS, Georgia, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JERROLD NADLER, New York
Wisconsin                            JUDY CHU, California
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                TED DEUTCH, Florida
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   KAREN BASS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
TED POE, Texas                       DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 SCOTT PETERS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             ZOE LOFGREN, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
MIMI WALTERS, California               Georgia

Joe Keeley, Chief Counsel

Jason Everett, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

SEPTEMBER 10, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, and the Internet........................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet................     3
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     5

WITNESSES

Brian Wynne, President and CEO, Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Chris Calabrese, Vice President for Policy, Center for Democracy
& Technology
Oral Testimony.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Chris Polychron, 2015 President, National Association of
Realtors
Oral Testimony.................................................    27
Prepared Statement.............................................    29
Tom Karol, General Counsel--Federal, National Association of
Mutual Insurance Companies
Oral Testimony.................................................    38
Prepared Statement.............................................    40

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     5

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Prepared Statement of the Motion Picture Association of America..    71

UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES: COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS AND PUBLIC POLICY
IMPLICATIONS

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2015

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,
and the Internet

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:02 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Darrell
E. Issa (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Goodlatte, Collins, Chabot,
Forbes, Poe, Chaffetz, Marino, Nadler, Chu, Richmond, DelBene,
Cicilline, Peters, Lofgren, and Johnson.
Staff Present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Senior Counsel; Eric
Bagwell, Clerk; and (Minority) David Greengrass, Counsel.
Mr. Issa. The Committee will come to order. Members will be
joining us throughout the next few minutes, but we will get
started because we have a vote likely at 4:30 p.m. And as a
result, as I previously announced, our goal is to get all the
statements in and questions in so that we not hold you over
into the dinner hour.
I want to welcome everyone here today. Today's hearing is
on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Commercial Applications and Public
Policy Implications. And unspoken very clearly in that title is
the rights and responsibilities of individuals and the people
who are underneath those aerial vehicles.
Today, we will discuss commercial applications for unmanned
aerial vehicles, otherwise known as UAVs or drones, and the
potential public policy implications. It is my hope that this
and future hearings on new technologies will educate Members so
they have a more informed understanding of the policy decisions
before us.
There is significant potential for UAV markets. Some of
that potential has already been realized on the battlefields of
Iraq and Afghanistan and in providing safe observation of
hurricanes and other activities around the world. But today,
drones--drones as small and simple as this few hundred dollar
one up to drones costing $18,000 and more are commercially
available. These drones are often used in novel ways never
possible before.
This includes and is not limited to one of our testimony
today, which will talk about the significance of unmanned
aerial vehicles for real estate. The ability to know and see
the property you may buy while you are, in fact, thousands of
miles away has been a dream for a long time. And until
inexpensive unmanned aerial vehicles became available with
high-performance cameras, it was impossible to demonstrate from
the air how you would get there, what it looked like, the
condition of it, or even what the backyard properly looked like
in a way in which the potential buyer could appreciate it well
before coming to see the property.
Companies like Google, Facebook, and Amazon are investing
in developing new drone technologies that have the potential to
change how we receive Internet service, various goods, and even
how we monitor and access remote places around the world or
disaster areas. Responsible drone use across industries,
including Internet services, movie and news industries, sports
coverage, and more are part of daily operations.
As drone technology has become rapidly more prevalent over
the past few years, both the Government and private sector have
been faced with challenging questions over privacy, airspace
access, and more. Such a debate broadly echoes the theme that
this Committee sees in new technology. How do we allow new,
innovative technologies to come to market and advance economic
interests without stifling private industries through outdated
or inflexible regulations?
UAV technology has the potential to deliver genuine
services to society, and at the same time, the public and
private sectors must work together to protect consumers' safety
and privacy. Such a cooperation should focus on flexibility,
and I am interested to hear from our witnesses suggestions on
how we can balance the needs of consumers and technology
developers.
Before I conclude and yield to the Ranking Member, I want
to say on a very personal basis that I have seen these vehicles
operate. I have had the opportunity to operate some of the
small vehicles. I have seen them operate as long ago as the
beginning of the Gulf War in 2001.
These and their consumer smaller versions represent a great
opportunity, one that more than a decade--or not more than a
decade, 6 years ago, Ray LaHood, then the brand-new Secretary
of Transportation, said one of his priorities to accomplish
during his tenure. He pledge to work on the FAA to develop
standards for safety and deployability not just for these
smaller ones like the one I held up earlier, but, in fact, for
the Global Hawk, the Predator, and other large-scale UAVs.
He is a dear friend of mine, but the FAA let us down. And
today, as a private pilot, I find it reprehensible that we are,
in fact, constantly talking about the danger of very small ones
while the FAA has essentially punted on their responsibility to
set standards.
The FAA is not within this Committee's jurisdiction, and we
appreciate that. But at the same time, we understand that the
possibilities for these vehicles flying typically below 400
feet cannot be stifled by just the inaction of the FAA.
And so, with that, I look forward to my Ranking Member's
statement and our witnesses, and I yield to the gentleman from
New York.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we examine another emerging technology, unmanned
aerial vehicles, UAVS or, as they are commonly referred to,
drones. Like the Internet of Things, which was the subject of a
recent hearing in our Subcommittee, drone technology holds
great promise but also raises significant questions of privacy
and security.
Today's hearing is not about our military's use of drones
overseas, nor are we considering drone use by domestic law
enforcement. Those are important topics that raise many
questions to be discussed at another time. Our focus today is
on the commercial application of drones in the United States,
which raises its own set of important issues.
Once upon a time, if you talked about a remote controlled
aircraft, you conjured up images of a child playing with his or
her toy airplane in the backyard or in the park. The plane was
fairly small, had a limited range, and wouldn't cause much
damage except to itself if it fell to the ground or crashed
onto your roof. This was hardly something that would concern
Congress.
But we are now entering a very different world, where
today's remote controlled aircraft may be as heavy as a few
hundred pounds, can travel many miles, and might be equipped
with sophisticated cameras and sensors, sending images and data
to your computer in real time. In some cases, the aircraft
might not even be remotely controlled. It might be following a
preprogrammed flight path.
And the operator isn't a child in the backyard. It may be a
major company delivering packages, monitoring farm land, or
reporting on traffic jams. How we address the privacy and
safety implications of this new kind of unmanned aircraft is
very much the province of Congress, and I hope this hearing
will help us answer some of the important questions raised by
the commercial use of drones.
Drone technology has the potential to unleash a wave of
innovation across numerous industries. For example, real estate
agents can provide aerial views of prospective properties.
Insurance adjusters can quickly survey flood damage over a wide
area.
Companies like Amazon hope to deliver packages by air
within 30 minutes, and photographers and film directors can
take footage of their subjects from unique angles. An Israeli
company recently developed a drone that can quickly deliver a
defibrillator to the site of a heart attack victim in the
street, along with a camera and a microphone so that the
operator can instruct a bystander on how to use the drone to
save the person's life while the ambulance and the medical
technicians are still on their way.
Meanwhile, entrepreneurs are launching companies that offer
drone services for hire or act as brokers between drone
operators and businesses that need their services. The
possibilities for innovation are almost endless, but so are the
questions that these services can raise.
Most critically, how can we assure individuals that their
privacy will be protected as these unmanned aircraft fly
overhead? Drones have the ability to collect massive amounts of
data regarding the people and places below. What sort of notice
should be given to the individuals whose data is collected,
whose backyard may be surveilled?
What rights should they have to control how this data is
stored, shared, and used? And what sorts of security protocols
are in place to protect against this data being compromised by
hackers?
Drones also raise significant safety concerns. We are all
familiar with the drone that accidentally crashed into the
White House lawn in January. Just last week, a drone crashed
into the U.S. Open tennis tournament. And last month, a college
student mounted a handgun on a drone and posted a video on
YouTube of the handgun firing live ammunition from the flying
drone.
Although each of these incidents involved privately
operated drones, they highlight the danger that can be posed by
misuse of this technology. Not only must we protect against
drones being used for malicious purposes, we must also ensure
that drones are operated safely and do not interfere with other
objects in the sky.
In addition, we must seek to minimize the noise or other
nuisance that drones may present to individuals on the ground
as they pass by. Recognizing the growing potential of drone
technology, in 2012, Congress called on the FAA to develop a
plan to safely integrate civil use of unmanned aerial vehicles
into the National Airspace System.
The FAA has yet to complete this rulemaking, but its
proposed rule naturally focuses on issues of safety in the
skies as that is the agency's domain rather than on privacy
concerns. Therefore, in February, President Obama directed the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration to
convene a multi-stakeholder process to develop and communicate
best practices regarding privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties.
But these best practices would be merely voluntary in
nature. Given the vast array of issues raised by the commercial
application of drones, it would seem that a mandatory
regulatory structure is warranted.
We should also consider where such regulatory power should
lie. For example, the FAA regulates the safety of objects in
flight, while the Federal Communications Commission regulates
the airwaves through which drones are controlled. The Federal
Trade Commission plays a strong role in protecting consumer
privacy, while the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security
take the lead in protecting our security.
These agencies are one problem, and they are in addition to
the many laws that have been passed on the State level
concerning drones. I hope our witnesses today will help us sort
through what a proper regulatory scheme might look like for
drones and commercial use and who should administer these laws
and regulations.
Despite the many potential benefits of drone technology,
there are too many questions that must be answered before we
can fully embrace it for commercial use.
I appreciate the Chairman calling this hearing so that we
can begin a thoughtful consideration of these important issues.
I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
I would now like to recognize the Chairman of the full
Committee, Chairman Bob Goodlatte of Virginia, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
your holding this hearing.
And today, we are here to learn more about the commercial
applications and policy implications of unmanned aerial
vehicles. This new area of technology is of particular interest
to the Judiciary Committee, considering our longstanding
jurisdiction when it comes to issues pertaining to intellectual
property and security.
UAVs have the opportunity to transform a wide range of
industries from farmers monitoring their crops to realtors
trying to sell a home, to utility companies monitoring power
lines, to delivering emergency supplies, to changing the way we
view sports or film movies. As this Committee continues to
study this new technology, it is important for us to keep in
mind the issues surrounding UAVs and be cognizant of their
effects on public policy today and in the future.
In particular, we need to examine the privacy and security
implications of this technology and look into the security and
privacy measures that industry is building now and the measures
they intend to implement as open standards are developed. I am
hopeful that this new technology will help fuel the engine of
American innovation, prosperity, and creativity, and I think we
have a great panel with us here today, and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
All Members, including the Ranking Member, will have their
entire opening statements placed in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee
on the Judiciary
The commercial use of unmanned aerial vehicles--or drones--presents
substantial public policy considerations but also promises potential
benefits.
As we hear from today's witnesses, I would like for us to consider
the following points.
To begin with, unmanned aerial vehicles present potentially serious
privacy, safety, and security issues.
I am already concerned about law enforcement's use of drones for
surveillance purposes.
But widely-available drones sold commercially present different but
just as important privacy implications.
These drones have the capability to violate the expected privacy of
individuals by peeking into windows and take photographs.
Drones can collect data through identification technologies, such
as automated license plate scanners and facial-recognition software,
that could be used for surveillance purposes.
Not only do drones raise privacy concerns, they also can create
safety and security issues.
Just last week, for example, a drone crashed into the stands where
thousands were viewing the U.S. Open Tennis Championships. Fortunately,
no one was injured.
Earlier this year, drones on two separate occasions crashed onto or
were flown over the White House grounds presenting serious national
security concerns.
There have also been reports of drones being weaponized, and the
resulting shooting down of drones by individuals protecting their
privacy or finding the drones a nuisance.
And, there have been numerous reports of drones violating the
restricted airspace of commercial and military airplanes.
So, as a starting point, we must protect against the threats to
privacy and public safety presented by the use and proliferation of
commercial drones and, to that end, have a thorough discussion on how
the government can best achieve those goals.
For example, Congress could consider Representatives Poe and
Lofgren's H.R. 1835, the Preserving American Privacy Act, and
Representative Welch's H.R. 1229, the Drone Aircraft Privacy and
Transparency Act. These bills attempt to address privacy concerns.
At the same time, I believe Congress should consider ways to foster
the development of the commercial use of unmanned aerial vehicles as
this industry could play a major role in helping to grow our Nation's
economy and create new jobs.
The technologies inherent with drones provide expansive
opportunities for innovators and investors.
It is estimated, for instance, that within three years after drones
are integrated into the national airspace, the unmanned aircraft
industry could generate more than $16 billion in value to our Nation's
economy.
This, in turn, could create thousands of new jobs.
Finally, I am also particularly interested in hearing how consumers
could benefit from unmanned aerial vehicles.
For example, realtors are utilizing unmanned aerial vehicles to
survey land and photograph properties to provide more informative
perspectives for potential homeowners and investors.
The news media are using drones to record events that are too
dangerous for humans to cover, such as the wildfires that have been
ravishing the Western U.S.
And, it is hoped that one day high altitude drones that can stay
aloft for significant time periods will provide Internet access to
consumers living in remote areas who otherwise would lack such access.
We need to strike a balance that protects the privacy, safety, and
security of individuals while encouraging the legitimate and commercial
use of unmanned aerial vehicles.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses.
__________

Mr. Issa. We now go to our distinguished panel of
witnesses. For all the witnesses, your written statements have
been entered into the record in their entirety, and I ask you
to please summarize within 5 minutes or less your opening
statements.
To help us stay within the time limit, you will see the
light on the table. My former Chairman of another Committee,
Mr. Ed Towns of New York, often said there is nothing easier
for us to understand than the red, green, and yellow light.
Green means keep talking if you want to, yellow means go
faster, and red means stop. So having quoted my predecessor on
another Committee, I would ask you to please abide by the Ed
Towns rule.
Pursuant to the Committee's rules, would you please all
rise to take the oath and raise your right hand?
Thank you.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing,
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record indicate that all the witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
Our witnesses today include Mr. Bryan Wynne, President and
CEO of Association of Unmanned Vehicle Systems International;
Mr. Chris Calabrese, Vice President of Policy at the Center for
Democracy & Technology; Mr. Chris Polychron, the 2015 President
of the National Association of Realtors; and Mr. Tom Karol,
General Counsel at the National Association of Mutual Insurance
Companies.
And with that, I would now recognize for 5 minutes Mr.
Wynne.

TESTIMONY OF BRIAN WYNNE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ASSOCIATION FOR
UNMANNED VEHICLE SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Wynne. Chairman Issa, I thank you very much. Ranking
Member Nadler and Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate
very much the opportunity to participate in today's hearing
regarding unmanned aircraft systems.
I'm speaking on behalf of the Association for Unmanned
Vehicle Systems International, the world's largest nonprofit
organization devoted exclusively to advancing the unmanned
systems and robotics community.
The UAS industry is poised to be one of the fastest growing
in American history. During the first decade following UAS
integration into the National Airspace System, the industry
will create more than 100,000 new jobs and provide more than
$82 billion in economic impact. From inspecting infrastructure
to filming movies, the applications of UAS are virtually
limitless, enabling researchers, public agencies, and
businesses to do things more safely and cost effectively.
As with any emerging technology, there are public policy
issues that can help or hinder its growth. Let me explain.
We are less than 3 weeks away from the congressionally
mandated deadline of September 30th for the integration of UAS
international airspace. The FAA has had more than 3 years to
put a small UAS rule in place. There is tremendous pent-up
demand for commercial UAS operations, yet the FAA isn't
expected to meet this deadline.
Until the small UAS rule is finalized, the primary way
commercial operators may fly is through an exemption. That
process started in May of 2014. The FAA has received more than
2,700 requests and granted more than 1,400 exemptions.
According to AUVSI's report on the first 1,000 exemptions,
businesses in more than 25 industries representing more than
600,000 jobs and $500 billion in economic impact are now using
UAS technology. And we've outlined the top 10 States with
exemptions on the screen before you so you can see how they're
distributed. Just the top 10.
For example, San Diego Gas and Electric provides energy
services to 3.4 million people in southern California. It plans
to use UAS to help inspect 26,000 miles of power lines,
improving safety and efficiency.
The Associated General Contractors of America represents
26,000 member companies in the construction industry. Some are
using UAS to improve project planning and execution. These are
only a couple of examples, and you'll hear from more industries
on the panel.
It's easy to see the far-reaching benefits UAS will add. At
the same time, the absence of Federal regulations means many
businesses remain grounded. The current system of case-by-case
approvals isn't a long-term solution.
The lack of regulations--regulations isn't just limiting
economic potential of this industry, it's also causing States
and municipalities to fill the void with laws they may not have
the authority to enforce. The most recent example is
California's Senate Bill 142, which would have restricted UAS
from flying below 350 feet over private property if it were not
for Governor Brown's veto last night.
While my industry supports the safe, nonintrusive use of
UAS technology, SB 142 would have created inconsistencies with
Federal law. Only the FAA can regulate airspace. States and
municipalities cannot. According to the U.S. Code, and I quote,
``The United States Government has exclusive sovereignty of
airspace of the United States.''
It's critical for the Federal Government to assert its
preemptive authority over the national airspace. In the absence
of FAA action, we may soon be facing a legal quagmire.
Challenges to questionable State laws will tie up the courts
and at significant expense to taxpayers.
If the FAA feels it needs clarification of its authority, I
would urge Congress to provide such clarity and legislatively
settle this issue. Putting the small UAS rules in place will
also help increase the safety of the airspace. It'll provide
the necessary tools and training to create a culture of safety
around the use of UAS.
As more commercial UAS operators are certified, they'll
join the longstanding aviation community, which I've been part
of for more than 20 years as an aircraft owner and instrument-
rated general aviation pilot. They will foster the aviation
community's principles of airmanship and self-policing to
promote safety and discourage careless and reckless operations.
Because safety is essential for all users, AUVSI, in
partnership with the Academy of Model Aeronautics and the FAA,
last year developed the Know Before You Fly campaign to educate
newcomers to the UAS, and I'd be pleased to answer more
questions about this and other matters of interest to the
Subcommittee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wynne follows:]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Calabrese? Calabrese, I'm sorry.

TESTIMONY OF CHRIS CALABRESE, VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY, CENTER
FOR DEMOCRACY & TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Calabrese. Thank you, Chairman Issa. Oh.
Mr. Issa. Push the button.
Mr. Calabrese. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Nadler, and Members of the Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on
unmanned aircraft systems, or drones.
I'm Chris Calabrese. I'm the vice president for policy at
the Center for Democracy and Technology.
CDT is a nonpartisan, nonprofit technology policy advocacy
organization dedicated to protecting civil liberties, such as
privacy and free speech while enabling Government agencies to
provide security in the private sector to innovate.
There are three key realities that should drive
congressional action around drones. The first is that unmanned
aircraft systems are a promising technology but have the
potential to erode civil liberties through pervasive
surveillance.
The second is that current laws do not provide strong
privacy protections from Government or private unmanned
aircraft invasions. This lack of privacy protections undermines
public trust in drone technology, which holds back the
industry.
Third, to earn public acceptance of drones, both Government
and the UAS industry should fully address civil liberties
issues through a combination of legislation and an industry
code of conduct.
CDT hopes and believes that UAS can become a valuable tool
for commerce, journalism, disaster relief, scientific research,
and more. However, privacy rules are a necessary predicate to
all of this.
Without baseline standards, we will continue to see State
restricts on drone use as well as public distrust. It is
telling that in a recent Pew poll, almost two-thirds of the
public thought personal and commercial drone development would
be a negative in spite of being generally positive about
technology overall.
Drones represent a new privacy threat because they are
inexpensive, can stay in the air longer, and surveil previously
private locations. In other words, UAS have the potential to be
persistent, pervasive, and cheap.
Our fear is that law enforcement might establish a ``drone
dragnet'' that constantly tracks individuals in popular--
populated outdoor areas, chilling the public's right to
assemble and free association. At the same time, a network of
commercial unmanned aircraft could constantly record video
footage of anyone who steps out of their home, even if the
individual remains on private property.
UAS can also be equipped with a variety of sensors, such as
cell phone trackers, enabling even greater tracking. While this
scenario is clearly not going to happen tomorrow, there are no
existing laws that would prevent it from happening, and the
Government does not--or the public does not yet trust the
Government or the UAS industry to do anything--or excuse me, to
do enough to prevent that reality.
When it comes to Government UAS, CDT believes that
prolonged physical surveillance of individuals in public places
violates Fourth Amendment principles. However, the Supreme
Court has repeatedly said that Americans have no expectation of
privacy from aerial surveillance.
The court even held that the Fourth Amendment is not
violated when a police helicopter looks into the interior of a
private building through a hole in the ceiling without a
warrant. Bottom line, there is very little privacy protection
from Government UAS even outdoors.
Law enforcement use is the most acute public concern with
UAS. To address this public concern, Congress should pass
legislation that, among other things, establishes due process
protections for UAS. And while I know that's not this
Committee's jurisdiction, it's certainly something Judiciary
Committee Members are concerned with. Note--and the most
important thing is that that legislation be accompanied by a
warrant.
When it comes to private sector UAS use, common law privacy
torts provide Americans with some protection outside of the
home, but only if the conduct is highly offensive to a
reasonable person. However, any Government regulation of
private UAS must not violate the First Amendment and Americans'
right to take photographs in public.
An industry code of conduct would help provide privacy
protections from UAS where direct regulation cannot. But it
would only be effective if the industry agrees to adopt a
strong and enforceable code.
This code should establish reasonable limits on UAS
collection and retention of personally identifiable
information. It should create a publicly accessible registry
that includes data collection practices and--and we should
establish cybersecurity standards to prevent hijacking or
unauthorized damage to UAS systems.
Thank you for holding this hearing. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Calabrese follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Polychron?

TESTIMONY OF CHRIS POLYCHRON, 2015 PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS

Mr. Polychron. Chairman Issa and Members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Chris Polychron, and I'm the 2015
President of the National Association of Realtors.
I've been a realtor for 28 years. I'm an executive broker
with First Choice Realty in Hot Springs, Arkansas. I specialize
in both residential and commercial brokerage.
NAR is America's largest trade association. Realtors are
involved in all aspects of residential and commercial
brokerage. NAR is America's largest trade association. Realtors
are involved, again, in all aspects of commercial real estate.
Realtors are excited about the prospect of using unmanned
aircrafts, or UAS, in their businesses, including using UASs
for aerial photos, videos, and property inspections. Realtors
are early adopters of new technology.
In fact, a realtor from Arizona was the first to
successfully apply for and receive a Section 333 waiver. A 2015
AUVSI study determined that of the first 500 waivers, real
estate was the leading industry, making up over a quarter of
all waivers.
Commercial use of UASs has the potential to create new jobs
and businesses specializing in their uses. NAR is excited about
the possibilities, but also understands the need to balance
them with protecting the privacy and safety of citizens and the
national airspace.
As end-users of this technology, realtors want clear
regulations that permit the commercial use of UASs in a way
that is affordable and safe on the ground and in the national
airspace. The potential applications for UASs in real estate
are plentiful and will grow.
Currently, UASs can provide the opportunity for real estate
practitioners to offer photographs and videos of properties
that would otherwise be difficult to obtain. Using UAS
technology to do the same thing is typically less expensive,
less time-consuming, and less dangerous for everyone involved.
As UAS technology progresses, the type of applications will
grow as well. Real estate practitioners are excited about the
potential to use the technology to conduct property
inspections, appraisals, insurance valuations, and land
surveys. And most importantly, to allow consumers to make
better-informed decisions.
Citizens' safety and privacy are a primary concern of
realtors, and we truly appreciate the steps that the FAA and
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration
have taken to protect these values. This requires clear
regulations and strong education efforts for operators and
their clients. Realtors are committed to being safe and
responsible UAS end-users.
NAR will continue educating its members about the
importance of safe UAS operations. NAR's participation in the
Know Before You Fly safety campaign is merely one part of NAR's
efforts to talk about UAS safety with being a key priority.
Through seminars material and Web site content, NAR has already
informed its members about the safety precautions necessary
when using UASs.
NAR is pleased that the FAA is moving forward with its
rulemaking. NAR believes the proposed rules' risk and safety-
based approach is common sense and a reasonable one, and NAR
supports the FAA's attempt to address different levels of risk
posed by different sizes and uses of UAS technology. A ``one
size fits all'' approach will not effectively integrate
technology as diverse as UAS into a complex airspace, which is
why we are pleased that FAA has proposed a micro UAS category.
UAS will continue to evolve and will require flexible
regulations in order for it to meet their full potential. NAR
is committed to working with the FAA to create a culture of
safety surrounding the use of UAS while still enabling users to
easily use UASs.
NAR will continue to educate members on safety and privacy
issues surrounding UAS operations, and we look forward to
working together with lawmakers on this as well.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I, too, look
forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Polychron follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Karol?

TESTIMONY OF TOM KAROL, GENERAL COUNSEL--FEDERAL, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANIES

Mr. Karol. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Nadler,
and Members of the Subcommittee.
On behalf of the National Association----
Mr. Issa. If you could----
Mr. Karol. Sorry.
Mr. Issa. Yeah, add a little mike and pull it, pull it a
little closer, too. Perfect.
Mr. Karol. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Nadler,
and Members of the Subcommittee, on behalf of the National
Association of Mutual Insurance Companies, for the opportunity
to testify today.
NAMIC is the largest and most diverse property casualty
trade association in the Nation with more than 1,300 property
casualty insurance companies. NAMIC members serve more than 135
million auto, home, and business policyholders with more than
$208 billion in premiums, accounting for 48 percent of the
automobile/homeowners market and 33 percent of the business
insurance market.
The development of commercial UAS is accelerating. More and
more sectors are contemplating the use of UAS, but regulations
and laws in the United States have not kept up. NAMIC believes
a reasonable, effective, and efficient regulation of the
commercial use of UAS is not only possible, but should be a
primary goal of policymakers in all levels of government.
NAMIC members themselves are exploring the use of UAS to
help appraise property, evaluate risk, and assess damage more
quickly and accurately for policyholders. UAS can significantly
reduce, if not eliminate, the dangers inherent in important
tasks that our insurance personnels now put themselves in
precarious positions, including roof inspections, damage
assessments, and disaster response.
A number of companies have already obtained Section 333
exemptions for insurance services from the Federal Aviation
Administration. Additionally, NAMIC has had very productive
meetings with the FAA in exploring the use of UAS in disaster
situations, where the speed of processing and payment is
paramount to victims of the disaster.
At present, however, Federal and State UAS restrictions can
limit, if not preclude, practical UAS by insurance companies.
Our consumers have also asked NAMIC members about providing
insurance coverage for their personal and commercial use of
UAS. Insurance coverage for both the UAS itself and liability
for any damage or loss are key parts of responsible commercial
use.
While many insurance companies are willing, few now offer
such coverage. This is primarily due to the lack of legal and
regulatory clarity at all government levels. Insurance
contracts need to comport with Federal, State, and local law
and regulations, which are presently in a state of flux.
Insurance contracts that address liability and compensation
depend on civil law and judicial determinations, which may or
may not apply to commercial UAS usage.
Until standards of UAS liability are better defined, it
will be extremely difficult for insurance companies to
understand and provide such risks. Furthermore, these standards
must be integrated into an existing system of privacy and
property rights at the appropriate Federal and State and local
level.
The question of liability may seem fairly close if a UAS
crashes into a house or a person, but basic questions about
property, privacy, and negligence need to be resolved for NAMIC
members to understand the risks, underwrite the coverage, and
price policies for those coverages.
For example, if a UAS flies on your lawn, at what level do
you consider that UAS to be trespassing upon your property? If
a UAS is flying in your backyard and you or your family feel
threatened, can you hit it with a baseball bat or a 9-iron?
In making decisions concerning underwriting risks and
paying claims related to UAS, it will be critical to understand
the application of specific torts as well as the State and
Federal laws that can permit UAS use and/or generate lawsuits
or fines against a UAS.
For example, concerning trespass and personal injury
liability, an FAA designation of UAS navigable airspace will
greatly inhibit, if not preclude, allegations that a UAS in
that airspace trespassed on private property or violated
privacy. The FAA has opined that UAS navigable airspace extends
from the ground up, which could practically eliminate private
property rights. It could also eliminate State jurisdiction
over UAS.
California legislature, on the other hand, has recently
passed a law that defines a UAS flight of less than 350 feet
over private property as trespassing.
While certain legal questions remain surrounding UAS damage
and injury, there is potential liability for harm from even the
smallest UAS. Among the host of other issues, it will be
important to address the question regarding the duties of a UAS
operator to limit the foreseeable risk to others.
In conclusion, there will always be risks associated with
the commercial use of UAS. The FAA's issuance of final rules on
small UAS will eliminate some of the more significant barriers
for UAS insurance at the Federal level. However, NAMIC
members--for NAMIC members to provide comprehensive liability
coverage for this emerging area, it will require the further
development of Federal, State, and local regulations, as well
as standards of liability, negligence, and property rights.
NAMIC is committed to working with Federal, State, and
local regulators in an effort to promote responsible UAS
regulatory developments that protects aircraft, people,
business, and property. As UAS regulations and civil liability
standards evolve, NAMIC will work to ensure the development of
regulations provide for the necessary clarity and breadth that
its members need to serve and protect the policyholders.
Again, on behalf of the more than 1,300 members of NAMIC, I
thank you for the opportunity to testify today and look forward
to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Karol follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
And before I recognize the Ranking Member, do you want to
clarify the status of that law in California?
Mr. Karol. I believe it was vetoed by Governor----
Mr. Issa. That is correct. It was vetoed. So it was
rejected by Governor Brown last night.
I now take have the pleasure of----
Voice. Are you sure?
Mr. Issa. Yeah. They do those things at night in
California. We work all the time.
Now I recognize the gentleman from New York, and it was
definitely night in New York when he did it, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Wynne, you make a strong argument that the FAA's
proposed rule regarding drones should be enacted without delay.
But the FAA's proposal focuses on safety in the skies rather
than on the privacy implications of the vehicles they would
regulate. Do you think there is also a role for Government
regulation of the data that may be collected by the drones?
Mr. Wynne. Absolutely, sir. I think that those regulations
also need to apply to body cameras and to license plate readers
and all kinds of other technologies. There's nothing specific
about drones, which are just platforms for data collection
that--that----
Mr. Nadler. Do you think they should be the same
regulations?
Mr. Wynne. I beg your pardon?
Mr. Nadler. They should be the same regulations, regardless
of the platform?
Mr. Wynne. I think we have this problem. We're all in favor
of privacy, and it's in our code of conduct. So the question is
how do we do that in a way that's technology neutral and that
it actually doesn't inhibit this technology?
Mr. Nadler. But if--if I am wearing a body camera, I can't
enter your backyard. A drone can surveil--can engage in
surveillance of your backyard. So you don't think that it might
be necessary to have somewhat different regulations?
Mr. Wynne. Well, forgive me, sir. I was trying to address
your question about data retention and such.
Mr. Nadler. Oh, okay.
Mr. Wynne. I think--I think the question--you know, I
have--actually, the partner in my airplane is chief of police
in Arlington County, and this is the question that we talk
about a good deal. The retention of the data, the protection of
that data, how that data is utilized, transparency, et cetera.
These are things the industry is for and has to be for.
We will not be a sustainable industry if we don't take care
of our customers' data.
Mr. Nadler. Now any--thank you.
Anyone who lives near an airport, and certainly my
constituents in New York who suffer from tourist helicopters
buzzing in the sky, can tell you that noise pollution is a real
problem. If commercial drone use increases substantially, as
you envision, what sort of regulation should we put in place to
protect against noise pollution and other nuisances caused by
drones, particularly in residential neighborhoods?
Mr. Wynne. Well, I think there's a good--a very robust
conversation going on right now about where drones, the
commercial drones would fly, what kind of flyways would be
created, et cetera. One thing I'm absolutely certain of is they
will make less noise than helicopters.
Mr. Nadler. Well, that is not saying much.
Mr. Wynne. This is a very robust conversation inside the
helicopter community. Many helicopter operators would like to
utilize drones because they are less expensive and somewhat
more capable for certain kinds of missions and certainly safer
than a 3,000-pound vehicle in the air.
So, so I think we've got the same kinds of conversations
going on that we always have in aviation. Noise abatement is--
is an extremely important topic, and it's one that will be. As
we have more and more drones in the air, it will be----
Mr. Nadler. You are going to have to deal with it. Thank
you.
Mr. Calabrese, in your testimony, you point out that
Americans have a First Amendment right to take photographs of
things visible--visible from public places, and you warn that
some drone-specific privacy laws may run afoul of the First
Amendment. Do you think the First Amendment poses a barrier to
reasonable restrictions on how data collected by drones is
used, stored, or shared?
Mr. Calabrese. I don't think it's a barrier so much as
something, a balancing that we need to do between our right to
privacy and our right to the First Amendment. I think, as an
initial matter, it's not the subject of this discussion, but
certainly, we could require a warrant for law enforcement use.
That has nothing to do with the First Amendment.
Secondly, industry could adopt voluntary codes of conduct,
and I urge them to do so. We're part of the NTIA process. That
also would not violate the First Amendment.
And then I think that there are non--you know, we can have
neutral regulations that, for example, protect data or make
people reveal exactly who was flying a drone, their privacy
policies, all of those issues can obviously be addressed in a
way that doesn't affect the First Amendment. But there are
going to be some areas----
Mr. Nadler. Yes, well, let me ask you a specific on that.
You say that Americans have a First Amendment right to take
photographs of things visible from public places?
Mr. Calabrese. Correct.
Mr. Nadler. Is 200 or 300 feet above my backyard, which is
fenced in, a public place when that drone may be looking at my
children playing in the backyard or my wife sunbathing there,
or whatever?
Mr. Calabrese. It's a very difficult question. I mean,
there are some, obviously, privacy torts that would apply here,
as well as the peeping tom laws. But I mean, it's worth
remembering that the Rodney King video was shot from a balcony.
You know, there are going to be places, times, when you are
going to be above a fence, and things are going to happen, and
they are going to have--deserve First Amendment protection. So
it's not an easy question.
Mr. Nadler. And finally, I think my--I see my time is
running out. But what rights do an individual whose data is
captured by a drone have to determine how this data is used, if
any?
Mr. Calabrese. Right now, very few rights.
Mr. Nadler. Right, right. Let me rephrase the question.
What rights should they have?
Mr. Calabrese. I believe they should have the right to know
what's being collected in most cases. They have the right, you
know, and I believe that what we should do or I hope we can do
is find a way to get all of these advantages, many of which
have nothing to do with data collection about individuals, and
then limit this data collection and agree to not collect it or
not store it. So we can get all of this advantage without the
privacy invasions.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think it is going to be a continuing thing, but I don't
think there is very many probably on the panel that would not
see the benefits of a drone and the benefits to business,
benefits to many others. As someone in the military who
actually also worked with them in Iraq, the benefits on the
military are substantial.
And I think the interesting issue, and I think it is going
to be drumbeat by both sides here today, though, goes back to
these issues of privacy, these issues of how we store, how we
do these things. And I think, going off of what the gentleman
from New York was just talking about, is really we are in a
society today in which big data, big collections have sort of
blurred those lines of what is a public--public or what is a
reasonable expectation of privacy?
We have been going through this for a while. In fact,
Justice Sotomayor in U.S. v. Jones made an interesting
statement. She quoted Justice Alito, ``As Justice Alito
incisively observes, the same technology advances that have
made both possible nontrespassory surveillance techniques will
also affect the Katz test by shaping the evolution of societal
privacy expectations.'' That is already happening now.
And so, the questions that I want to go off of is, you
know, the difference between one shot and a video, one picture
as opposed to a tracking? How do we, you know, look at ongoing
behavior? I think it is--and I would like to get--this will be
a free for all. I will just let anyone jump in on this.
Mr. Calabrese, if you want to start or wherever. It is a
fine line here. I am out doing this, and I decide, well, I just
want to give this to another agency. Or I want to share this.
Where--where are we headed here with who can access this, and
what is appropriate?
Mr. Calabrese. It's a wonderful question. Thank you.
Sir, clearly, the Supreme Court is grappling with this
question of what I would call a mosaic whereas we're collecting
so much information that we have a detailed profile about
someone's life. That's something that we are very worried about
in a wide variety of contexts and technologies.
I think here there are so many beneficial uses that,
hopefully, we can avoid the mosaic. I mean, if you go to Google
Street View, you'll see people's faces are blurred. You know,
there are ways that technology can also be used to protect
privacy in data collection. Most of the uses that I've heard
here are not things where someone wants to be invading
someone's privacy in their backyard.
And I would hope that what we can do is have industry agree
that they're going to, for example, not create a pervasive
surveillance, that they're going to discard information
immediately that has nothing to do with what they are trying to
accomplish so we can sort of avoid this pervasive surveillance.
Mr. Collins. But what if they don't? I think that is the
question.
Mr. Calabrese. Right.
Mr. Collins. And Mr. Polychron, from a realtor's
perspective, I know there is a--you could see it sort of from a
we are just looking at land or looking at this. But what if
there is an action or a data kept that is breached? It is
hacked. It is something that gets in, and we are keeping data.
Why are we keeping data? How long are we keeping data that
may or may not deal with realty or anybody else that wants to
deal with this? I would like your perspective----
Mr. Polychron. In other words, if they accidentally get
something?
Mr. Collins. It gets out there or is used. The data
retention part is becoming the issue, and I think the concern I
have, and again, looking at that, how do we protect against
that and especially in light of a mosaic that is developing out
there?
Mr. Polychron. Well, you know, speaking from a realtor
viewpoint, I mean, we have a code of ethics from 1908, which
private property rights is the central tenet of that document.
And I feel like realtors are going to respect privacy. I--the
rules that we set to engage that I think are going to be very
important.
Mr. Collins. And I am--and I am dealing with realtors, a
great realtor right now in some different areas, and I am not
questioning the realtors. And I am also questioning the concern
here is what about the retention? How long is that property pic
used or that video used that could have something? Could it be
turned over?
Is that--you know, it is just a lot of issues. Mr. Karol,
anything to weigh in on this? And I am just trying to get a
good perspective here because it is an interesting issue.
Mr. Karol. With respect to at least the commercial use by
our members, the insurance members, we're focusing very hard on
the technological side of that to capture data that is not
personal information. If we're looking at hail damage to a
roof, we're looking at technology that will capture
spectrographic components of that roof to show damages and
wouldn't capture images of people.
And to try to define what is private and personal
information and what is not private and personal information
and to collect that for our commercial purposes to collect only
that information in which relates to our business. We don't--we
understand very highly the protections with respect to
information on the financial side, and we want very strongly to
avoid that.
Mr. Collins. All right. Mr. Polychron, do you have
something?
Mr. Polychron. I was just thinking, I mean, bottom line is
we're going to be taking pictures of houses----
Mr. Collins. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Polychron [continuing]. Primarily. We're--we're--I
mean, I don't know----
Mr. Collins. Well, I think you may have one of the more
unique--and I am not going to, you know, say realty has this
difference. I think it is just a blending of the whole, you
know, issue and how do we deal with it going back to really
right now on a Federal level you said mosaic, but there is
just--there is a--the courts are having to piece together law
as we go, and I think that is the concerning part here on how
we go in with that.
Mr. Chair, I know my time is up. But I will--much more we
could describe it. I will yield back.
Mr. Issa. You know, ending on the term ``mosaic'' is always
a winner. [Laughter.]
With that, we go to the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Chu.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Wynne, I want to ask you about a rather
serious issue we are dealing with in California. We see several
wildfires each year, and the severity ranges with each one.
Some can be put out rather quickly without much harm, while
others may destroy homes and even take lives.
Combating the fire from the air is rather common. However,
in recent years, firefighters have had to ground their aircraft
because they see drones in the area. These aerial attacks are
called off when the drones are spotted because the consequences
of a collision are too great.
So I wanted to know whether your organization has looked
into this issue, and if so, do you think the FAA should address
this?
Mr. Wynne. Yes, ma'am, I sure do. And my son is a
firefighter and, believe it or not, actually aspires to being
in a place where he can fight wildland fires, which,
unfortunately, is a growing business.
I have phenomenal respect for people that fly and drop fire
retardant on fires, not only doing something very useful and
very valuable for public safety, but they're doing something
that's highly, highly dangerous to do. So this is extremely
important for us to get right.
Anyone that puts an aircraft in danger, a manned aircraft
in danger or any aircraft in danger, is violating FAA rules
already. It's careless and reckless. And so, the FAA already
has the capability of doing something about this today.
In addition to that, in most instances for wildfires,
there's a temporary flight restriction, TFR, put up around the
fire, particularly when there's air operations going on. So
anyone that's flying in that TFR that's unauthorized is
automatically breaking the law, and they should be prosecuted
for doing that.
The irony here, ma'am, is that--is that, and there's a
great YouTube video now from a wildfire, I believe in
Washington State, just this past week where they were utilizing
a UAS to look down on operations to make certain that they were
putting their fire retardant in the right place. This
technology can be used and will be used and is being used by
firefighters to create greater situational awareness.
It's a tremendous tool for the person that's in charge of
that operation on the ground who's responsible for lives and
property. So we want to be responsible users, and we want those
who are flying recklessly and carelessly to be prosecuted.
Ms. Chu. So the tool is already there to remove those
drones or at least to prosecute against them in these wild----
Mr. Wynne. I'm sorry, ma'am. I can't quite hear----
Ms. Chu. The tool is already there?
Mr. Wynne. Yes, ma'am. I believe they are.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Mr. Polychron, you state that there is
currently no standardized protocol for notice to bystanders
before or during a drone flight, and this is a question about
bystanders. And you asked the FAA to provide greater detail
regarding what is expected of the drone operators when
providing notice to and protecting the safety of individuals
who are near the location of a UAS operation.
So, in other words, a drone could be taking pictures, but
there are bystanders that have not given their permission to be
filmed, and so do you or the NAR have a suggested protocol that
the FAA should consider?
Mr. Polychron. I do not think we have a protocol at this
time. I see your question. I understand your question. And I
can certainly tell you I think we should.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Calabrese or Wynne?
Mr. Calabrese. I will just--I think that one of the things
that we need to deal with as a baseline matter, which is sort
of a privacy issue, but it's also a notice issue, is just
knowing who's flying a drone, you know? And just having an
ability to recognize and know whether that's the CNN drone or
your realtor's drone, know where the data is going. And then
you have the opportunity to contest it or say, ``I think that
this was improperly collected of my private property'' and, you
know, is a tort that maybe I can bring a civil suit.
But the baseline is that I know the data collection
practices. I know who is doing the collection. I know where
it's going.
Ms. Chu. Yes. And Mr. Calabrese, we have talked about the
drone that can look into the backyard from 200 feet above. Of
course, on the other hand, the human eye and the helicopters
can be doing exactly the same thing. Should there be
restrictions, and does the industry code of conduct developed
by the Association of Unmanned Vehicles System International
provide meaningful protections?
Mr. Calabrese. I mean, with all due respect to AUVSI, I
don't think that their current code does provide enough
protection. And we can--and I hope that the industry will do
more as part of the NTIA process.
We're really concerned that drones are different than being
in an airplane. They're just much less expensive. They have the
potential, for example, if they're a blimp, to stay up much
longer, and they have just the potential to be much more
invasive.
We're not picking on the technology. All technology can be
good or bad, but this deserves some regulation.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman--oh, I am sorry. We now go to
Mr. Marino. Thank you for being so prompt.
Mr. Marino. Chairman, I am sorry. I was delayed longer than
I thought I was going to be, and I am sure the questions I was
thinking of asking are already asked.
Mr. Issa. None of the good questions have been answered
yet. They are all available to you.
Mr. Marino. Okay. I will be very brief. Thank you.
I apologize if this question was asked, but who are we
going to put in charge of making certain that whoever--if I own
a drone and I am out there flying it, who is responsible for
having that information, and do we want people to have that
information?
As I read an article in the newspaper not too long ago,
that there was a drone flying over a man's property while his
teenage girl--daughter and her girlfriends were in the swimming
pool. And the drone was hovering over, obviously, watching the
girls. The guy went in and got a shotgun and shot it out of the
air.
Now he got arrested for that. I don't know the details of
was it in the city or how it worked, but how do we keep people
accountable for and know who has a drone if we are going to
down that road? Anyone, please?
Mr. Karol. I believe what he was arrested for was
discharging the firearm in an area that was not allowed. I
don't think he was charged with firing at the drone.
But I think your question goes to the fundamental concept
of the property rights because the property rights, to a large
extent, decide the privacy rights. If the drone is where it's
allowed to be by the property owner, then the privacy issue
becomes substantially different than if it's not allowed to be
there.
So that if the property owner allows the drone to be on
that property, that's one area. But if it's--and to some
extent, it's very different if, for example, an insurance
capability, if an adjuster is on the roof taking pictures of
the damage from the roof, it's no different than if the drone
is up there taking pictures.
So that the property owner has given his permission and the
access from that permission so that the privacy of that area is
defended thereon.
Mr. Marino. Mr. Wynne and Mr. Polychron--am I pronouncing
that name correctly?
Mr. Polychron. Polychron.
Mr. Marino. Polychron, okay. I have a question that we
wrote down. We know that while the FAA drags out the proposed
rulemaking process, UAV innovation continues to move forward
abroad. This not only hurts innovation in the drone industry
itself, but the industries who would benefit most as well, two
of which are critical in my district, agriculture and energy.
Where do you believe the U.S. currently stacks up, and what
impact could this drag have on our economy and jobs if the
regulatory environment continues as it is, as it currently
stands? So, Mr. Wynne and then----
Mr. Wynne. I'm having a little difficulty hearing, sir. Was
it the question was----
Mr. Marino. I am sorry.
Mr. Wynne [continuing]. Are we falling behind?
Mr. Marino. Are we falling behind?
Mr. Wynne. I think we are----
Mr. Marino. Nicely put.
Mr. Wynne [continuing]. To some extent. I don't think it's
irreparable at this stage in the game. So it's not an argument
that I'm fond of trotting out. We spend a lot of time working
with our counterparts overseas, and ultimately, our objective
is to have global harmonization of regulations around the
world.
So, so in some respects, if we could get the FAA to finish
the rules that have been proposed, some ways we kind of zoom
ahead of some countries that are out there, and I think that
would allow us to unlock a great deal of value for a number of
industries, including the energy sector and the agriculture
sector, which I heard you refer to.
Mr. Marino. Okay. And my last question. It was mentioned
that the FAA has received more than 2,700 requests for
exemptions to be able to fly drones, only 1,400 of which were
granted in the absence of a finalized rule. What does this mean
to us as far as moving ahead in the process? Anyone again?
Mr. Wynne. Well, I think the significance of the numbers
right now is that, you know, we're operating--we're regulating
by exemption, and we'll never keep up. There is vastly more
people out there, whether they're real estate--real estate
brokers or--or large utility companies or insurance companies
that want to fly.
So we're just scratching the surface. There is a--I want to
say a more bureaucratic process in place now than there will be
once we have final regulations. But one way or the other, it's
no way to regulate. We don't want to be regulating by
exemption.
We want to basically put the rules out there. We want to
encourage certification of operators. We want to train
operators. We want to stand up an aviation community here that
can actually act safely and responsibly under FAA regulations.
Mr. Marino. Sir?
Mr. Polychron. I would like to add that from a realtor's
standpoint, time is a deal killer. That's just a saying that we
use in our business.
Because only a few realtors are, you know, permitted to do
this under the Section 333, it puts some of us at a
disadvantage if we cannot present a listing in a manner that
someone does. So from a competitive standpoint, time is of the
essence.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Thank you. And again, I apologize if
these questions are already asked.
And Chairman, thank you very much. You have been more than
fair to me. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman for yielding back, and we
will take that extra time and go to the gentleman from
Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I guess I will kind of start where Mr. Marino went a
little bit about who is flying the drone and not in terms of
data collection, but about public safety. And we have dealt
with this issue in homeland security also because the question
arises, can an individual or law enforcement shoot down a drone
if they determine that that drone is a safety risk?
And the information we have, and I would like your opinion
on it, is that law enforcement can't do anything with it
because it is considered an aircraft. Is that consistent with
what you all see and hear?
Mr. Karol. I'll take a shot. My understanding is that the
FAA rules prohibit the interference with an aircraft, but at
the same time, at the State level, there are privacy rights.
And under the basic restatement of torts, if something
trespasses, you have the right to protect yourself.
So, again, it goes to the central issue we have is it's not
particularly clear to us which law would prevail there. Because
the State law that says that you have the right to protect your
own property supersede the FAA's interference with an aircraft
provision. It's very difficult to understand.
Mr. Richmond. Well, I will tell you the testimony that we
heard, and the example was if a drone was flying over a high
school football game and law enforcement could not determine
whether it was adversarial or just a hobbyist flying a plane
over. And their comment was if we found out it was adversarial,
we do not have the permission to take it down.
And I guess I am giving you all that charge because I think
as we push Government to rush to some sort of rules, we have to
also look at the safety concerns that are there also. You can
go on YouTube right now, and you can look at a Russian assault
rifle attached to the drone that they sell in Sam's Club, and
it is shooting mannequins.
And the question for me while we rush to get things to
market in all due speed, to make sure that we have policies
that also protect our families. So when we were--and I started
getting interested when you started talking about the ability
to know who is flying the drone. And maybe that technology
about who is flying the drone can help us in terms of knowing
where they are and help us decipher some other intentions.
So I just want us to think about that because from a
homeland security standpoint, we are absolutely terrified in
the position of how do we protect mass gatherings and other
things when we start talking about unmanned aircrafts and not
only the privacy concerns, but the safety.
And Mr. Karol, just with the 10th anniversary of Katrina, I
just can't help but to say I would be very excited about using
unmanned aircraft to assess property damage so that you all
could get the information very quickly. I would also be in
favor of you delivering the checks that way, too----
[Laughter.]
So that people could get them in a very quick manner. But I
think what my biggest charge to you all, then I will yield back
the rest of my time, is that I think that industry is going to
have to get together and figure out some parameters because, as
Government makes the rules, we can't make them fast enough to
keep up with technology.
And we are going to have to find a balancing act between
the commercial interests, public safety, public privacy, and
all of those things. And I think that if we can get the
interested parties at the table to really start digging into
that, it may help us along in terms of how quickly we can get
to a comfort zone.
Because I will just tell you--and my colleague Ms. Jackson
Lee from Texas is also on Homeland--we have very--we have a lot
of unreadiness coming from Homeland Security Committee in terms
of the safety of unmanned aircrafts and how we protect our
citizenship. So, hopefully, you all can help us in that
respect.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank you.
We now go to the gentlelady from Washington, a tech leader
in her own right, Ms. DelBene.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thanks to all of you for being here with us today.
Mr. Wynne, you talked about a code of conduct, and Mr.
Calabrese, you also talked about the code of conduct and also
kind of the Know Before You Fly program. Could you describe in
a little more detail what is in the code of conduct, and also
Know Before You Fly, what is made up as part of that program?
Mr. Wynne. I'd be happy to provide our code of conduct for
the record, ma'am. And, but the--by and large, we've covered
that a little bit in my earlier--I mean, at the end of the day,
it's really about common sense.
There's--you know, I think, by and large, as I indicated,
this is an industry that recognizes that if it doesn't fly
safely and responsibly, it will not be sustainable. We will
have all kinds of challenges not only at the Federal level, but
at every State level and potentially at the municipal level.
We do have a code of conduct. You know, the word
``potential'' is being used a lot on this panel. Potential for
this, the potential for that. I would urge us not to try and
solve, you know, create solutions for problems that don't yet
exist. But I would commit to you that this--I represent a
community that will fly safely and responsibly, and as our code
of conduct needs to be strengthened, it will be strengthened.
One of the reasons why we need regulations from the FAA is
because we need more trained operators out there. As with
aviation, it is a self-policing community. We do not tolerate
careless and reckless behavior. If I see someone doing
something careless and reckless with an aircraft, I report
them. I talk to them, and I report them.
Know Before You Fly is a campaign that was largely stood up
in conjunction with the Academy of Model Aeronautics and the
FAA to train nonaviators, which are the people that anyone can
now walk into an Apple store and buy a drone and go fly. But
that doesn't mean that they're in a place where they should.
So the whole idea is to try and train people about where
it's appropriate to fly and where it's not appropriate to fly.
And there are an increasing number of tools that are available
to the general public and to nonaviators, things that I just
have on my iPad already, which would allow me to look at and
see how far am I from an airport, for example, and so forth.
There is also technology that is coming into these
different devices that will help for, you know, to make certain
that the device won't fly----
Ms. DelBene. Yes, I was going to ask you about that. So you
could use technology to limit, using GPS and other things, to
limit where a device was able to go. Are folks looking at
implementing that type of technology so that even if you wanted
to, you couldn't go, for example, into airspace that is--that
is off limits?
Mr. Wynne. That's never a substitute for airmanship and
education. But those technologies increasingly are going to be
leveraged going forward. They can also be disabled by people
who wanted to do that.
So, again, it's important to have trained operators out
there. And increasingly, not only will our community have its
own code of conduct and its own safety best practices, but
every single industry that's utilizing this technology will be
doing the same thing.
Ms. DelBene. Mr. Calabrese, any comment?
Mr. Calabrese. Yeah, I think it's important to say that we
don't have codes of conduct that are really robust yet. And
clearly, we need them. And I think there's a great example is
the delivery aspect of drones, right?
No one sees a lot of data collection need in the delivery
of things. I mean, there may be some, but it's relatively
limited. So why don't we find ways that we can constructively
say we may have drones all over the place in 5 years delivering
my packages, but none of them are going to be collecting data.
Or if they are, we have the flexibility to say it's immediately
deleted.
So, you know, we're not trying to be overly prescriptive.
CDT believes in the power of technology to make things better.
But we also believe that we have to be responsible about the
data we collect, and so a lot of these industries, and we've
already heard that, can do more to collect less, if you will.
And so, I think we all need to push for codes that do that, and
Congress needs to step in if they don't.
Ms. DelBene. Well, we know that we are behind on some laws,
even things like Electronic Communications Privacy Act. So we
have a lot of work to do to make sure our laws are up to date
with the way technology works, and this is another place where
we want to make sure we support innovation, but also make sure
we protect privacy and safety.
And that is why I think it is very, very important that we
continue to work hard on all these efforts so that we have--we
understand there are incredible uses like agriculture or
wildfires, as you brought up, in Washington State. We have--
there are important uses, but we also have to make sure we have
consumer protections in place as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
We now go to my colleague and seatmate on many airplane
flights from California, Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, this expectation of privacy thing is I feel like
I am in a really complicated law school exam. But let me first
ask about wildfires, just to follow up on Ms. Chu.
Has someone talked about the balance between interfering
with firefighting and the ability to assist with firefighting
and how that might be arbitrated? Anybody?
So I am sorry. So in terms of the use of UAS, we have
already seen instances where they have interfered with, you
know, people are looking, interfering with firefighting. There
has been a number of efforts. I think those are more simple to
deal with restricting the use of these vehicles in the course
of a wildfire.
Has someone--are you aware of any efforts or any models,
you think, to talk about how it is useful to use these
implements or this equipment in the course of helping with
firefighting?
Mr. Wynne. As I indicated, there are firefighting
departments that are already embracing and leveraging the
technology, but it has to be authorized use. You know, if
there's an air boss at a site, then, you know, they're going to
leverage that technology.
If someone gets in the air that's not in positive control
of the air boss, that's a problem.
Mr. Peters. Is it in process with the FAA? Do you know that
those discussions are taking place now?
Mr. Wynne. Well, you know, I've discussed this with the
Administrator. You know, at this point, if there is a TFR up,
we just--you know, it's a little bit like the campaign about
the Super Bowl, right?
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Wynne. It was a very successful campaign because nobody
flew at the Super Bowl.
Mr. Peters. Right. Okay.
Mr. Wynne. We were discussing the potential for doing
things at--you know, broader for sporting events, not unlike
the problem with laser pointers. There's got to be a very
targeted campaign, no pun intended. And now there is a very
good campaign--If You Fly, We Can't--by those that are fighting
wildfires. And that's, you know, whatever is in the air. They
need to be in control of it----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Wynne. - when it's inside of that space.
Mr. Peters. Let me go back to Mr. Marino's swimming pool
example. I think it is a little bit different when you think
about expectation of privacy to envision someone looking at you
from a balcony rather than high above the sky. And is it were
you just going to expand expectation of privacy so that there
is no expectation of privacy? Is that what is going to happen?
Mr. Calabrese. I certainly hope not. I've spent my whole
career trying to avoid that outcome, and I do think the
technology allows you to be more invasive, and so you need to
be--you need better protections. The reality is that the First
Amendment makes this hard.
I mean, we have First Amendment protections. You can take
video from a public place. That's--that is a cherished First
Amendment value, and we just never had a circumstance where you
could take so much video and keep it forever. And I think----
Mr. Peters. From a place where you are not even visible.
Mr. Calabrese. What's that?
Mr. Peters. From a place where you are not even visible to
the person being filmed.
Mr. Calabrese. And there are--there are tricky First
Amendment questions there. So I guess what I would say is we
look at privacy torts. We look at things like peeping tom laws.
We start there. Then we look at data collection generally and
whether we can, for example, create technologies where you can
geotag a space and say, ``No drones allowed in this space.''
Mr. Peters. Yes.
Mr. Calabrese. And then, you know, keep people out. So
there are ways that we have to try to do this, but we do have
to navigate the First Amendment.
Mr. Peters. So here is another question that occurred to
me, just the two of you gentlemen talking about your two
proposed--or your two issues, is suppose, you know, you have
real estate agents flying around. There is no intention on
their part to be deleting this data, but they're also filming
swimming pools at the same time.
Mr. Calabrese. Certainly I just would say to Mr. Polychron,
given that the realtors have said pretty clearly they don't
want to photograph people, maybe it becomes we have a code----
Mr. Polychron. Yeah, let me go a step further. In our code
of ethics, there is also, of course, we protect----
Mr. Peters. Is your microphone on, sir?
Mr. Polychron [continuing]. Their information, and data is
very private. So at the same time, I know that our staff is
working with the NTIA to try to establish an industry standard.
When I spoke earlier to Mr. Marino, we haven't done that
yet, but we are working on it. So we are very cognizant of
privacy and always have been and will continue to be.
Mr. Peters. But that doesn't really--that doesn't answer
what the standard is going to be and how you are going to come
to--how you come to balancing that. I mean, you are going to--
you want to capture pictures of real estate. I mean, I suppose
there are ways to delete----
Mr. Polychron. It is not our intent to take pictures of--
let's just say we would love to take a picture of that swimming
pool while no one's there. But I don't think----
Mr. Peters. Good luck this week in San Diego finding a
swimming pool with nobody in it. So----
Mr. Polychron. Or in Arkansas, as far as that goes. But you
can do that.
Mr. Peters. Okay. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go--we are on a California roll. We now go to the
gentlelady from just north of our districts, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you.
I think this has been a very useful hearing. Getting back
to the security/privacy question, what--what is the industry
doing, either, you know, the association or the realtors, to
make sure that the data that is collected is encrypted and
secure from hacking?
Mr. Polychron. As I just stated, in our code of ethics, our
data and information is very private. And I would go a step
further to tell you that if I had a client and I was abusing
this privilege, they wouldn't be my client very long.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I don't mean--certainly I don't question
your intent. The question really is about the technology. Is
your data encrypted or not?
Mr. Polychron. Encrypted from what standpoint? Just----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, you can encrypt data so that it can only
be opened with a key. Is it encrypted, or is it kept open in
the----
Mr. Polychron. Well, I mean, when you look at the data of a
listing, I mean, you know, I'm going to----
Ms. Lofgren. No, no, what you are collecting.
Mr. Polychron. You're going to be able to look at it on
Realtor.com or Zillow as well, a lot of that information. So it
can't be encrypted.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, yes, it could, and then you could----
Mr. Polychron. Well, I mean right now.
Ms. Lofgren. And you could selectively make available--if
you get pictures of, you know, people in a pool, you are not
going to delete that necessarily. But you are not going to make
it available because you want--you know, you respect. I don't
question your ethics at all. I am just asking about the
technology.
Mr. Karol. I can speak for the insurance industry at least.
What has been done so far is predominantly the capture of
single pieces of property--of data from that single pieces of
property in a unit underneath the UAS, which is then directly
loaded into the systems of the insurance company, which is not
open to anyone else.
So that there is no distribution of that data. It's used
internally for appraisal values and damage assessment. So
there's no--there's no openness to that system that would
require any sort of encryption to prevent any problem.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I question that because look at the
number of, well, material that was supposed to be secure but
was hacked, and when it was hacked, it was available because it
wasn't encrypted, including, unfortunately, a lot of
information--sensitive information that the Government held
that was supposed to be secure.
Mr. Calabrese. Yeah, I mean, CDT certainly believes that we
do need encryption between the device----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I was going to ask about that, too.
Mr. Calabrese. Right, yeah. I mean, it's between the
aircraft and the operator that the information needs to be
encrypted so it can't be intercepted so the control of the
aircraft itself can't be taken over by someone else. I mean,
clearly, encryption needs to be a best practice.
It seems like maybe we've got a ways to go before we get
that--get there in terms of how the devices are operating now.
Ms. Lofgren. It sounds like we do. In terms of--that was
the other question, I guess, for the association. What--is the
control encrypted, and is there authentication between the
control link of the operator and the vehicle?
Mr. Wynne. I'm going to say yes because there is a strong
desire, a requirement really, to keep the control in one place.
So, you know, this is probably point number one, the
reliability, the fidelity of the link is also extremely
important and as well as building in safeguards, in fact, if
that connection is lost. But we don't want anyone hacking that
link.
Ms. Lofgren. Right. Do you know that is there an industry
standard? Or if I go down to the Apple store and buy a drone,
is the link between the controller and the unit authenticated
and encrypted, do you know? I mean, is----
Mr. Wynne. I'm going to--I can't answer that question
specifically, but I will follow up for the record with an
answer.
Ms. Lofgren. Okay. I just think that there are a lot of
difficult questions that have been gone through, and some of
these questions are policy, but the implementation of that
policy is going to be technological. And you know, so often, we
think about the technological protections after the fact, and
it would be really super to think about them before the problem
occur in this instance.
And I am going to yield back because we are going to have
votes in 10 minutes, and I want my colleague----
Mr. Issa. And with one intermission, he will be next. With
that, we go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Poe.
Mr. Poe. I thank the Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
Mr. Calabrese, it is good to see you again. Thanks for
coming to Houston during our privacy forum, and thank you for
your work on the Preserving American Privacy Act that I am a
sponsor and Ms. Lofgren is the cosponsor on the minority side.
Privacy is an issue with me. Technology in the United
States is the best, I think, in the world, especially even in
this area, and we are moving faster than anyone ever thought,
at least I thought we would, in the area of drones.
We have had the issue of drones pending in the Judiciary
for a while, a year at least. We have the domestic use of
drones regarding private companies and people, and then we have
Government use of drones. And we leave all of this drone
regulation up to the FAA, of all people, to decide who gets a
drone and when they get a drone.
Do you think that we should let a Government agency
determine and determine the Fourth Amendment right of privacy,
whatever it means? Mr. Calabrese?
Mr. Calabrese. Well, of course, we're strong supporters of
your bill. So I think you already know the answer. The central
tenet of your legislation, at least from our perspective, is,
you know, get a warrant to use a drone if you're the police.
And we think that is a constitutional standard that has, you
know, long served us and should continue to be the standard.
So when it comes to law enforcement use, and I think that
is a lot of the public concern in this area, we should have a
warrant standard. It doesn't mean that we don't have exceptions
for things like exigency and emergencies and, you know, hot
pursuit and consent. But the standard should, by and large, be
a warrant-based standard.
I think that deals with a lot of the problems on the law
enforcement side, and then, you know, once we've dealt with
that and once the Government is not going to kick down your
door, then we can take on some of these other thornier
questions about commercial data collection and getting the
right standards in place for that.
Mr. Poe. My question is should we just let the FAA deal
with this? And then the courts decide years from now was this a
violation or not of the Fourth Amendment when the police or a
private citizen using a drone got information? Should we just
let the courts decide? I mean, that is what we hear around here
all the time. Let the courts decide.
Mr. Calabrese. Yeah, no. Congress. Congress should step in.
Clearly, they have a constitutional role in this process, and I
don't think the FAA is going to feel like it has the ability to
dictate Fourth Amendment standards to local law enforcement,
and I think that's why Congress needs to make clear right now
what the right standard is.
Mr. Poe. I agree with you. I think that Congress has an
obligation to set the standards, the rules, whatever they are,
protect the right of privacy, but also put everybody on notice
what the rules are, what the law is.
I would think that the folks in the drone industry would
like to know when and when they cannot use one of these even in
civilian areas. And I think that is our obligation, along with
the other privacy issues that are pending that we have not
resolved as well.
In your testimony, you mention now that 16 States have
privacy laws regarding drones. What about letting the States
just make up their mind? What is privacy in Texas may not be
privacy in California or whatever. So should we just let all 50
States and the territories make the decision as to drone
regulation regarding the issue of privacy?
Mr. Calabrese. You know, that's a tough question. I mean,
I--some of the--some of the State laws have been really
progressive. Some of them have raised concerns, frankly, around
First Amendment issues. I think CDT believes that until we get
the floor of a search warrant across the country, Americans
won't have the privacy they deserve from Government access to
their personal lives. So I think that's the standard.
Whether it comes to the States or the Federal Government I
think is less important, though I think the way things are
going right now, we really are going to need a Federal fix.
Mr. Poe. Congress sets the right of privacy, whatever
expectation of privacy is, makes it law, and then everybody is
on notice. And for the record, I am a big supporter of the use
of drones. Everybody just needs to know what the rules are, but
Congress needs to come up with what the rules are.
And I will yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to another gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In addition to insurers and realtors and retailers like
eBay, you know, you got law enforcement, all of these
operations using drones. And you have even got hobbyists out
there who have their drones. And so, everybody is participating
in the use of drones in the airspace, and it creates--in
addition to privacy issues, it creates safety issues and other
areas of interest.
It is an important issue that needs to be regulated. Now
the problem that we have here in Congress is that we are in the
midst of an anti-regulatory crusade. There are those who adhere
to the Grover Norquist philosophy of making Government so small
that you can strangle it in the bathtub. In other words, people
who don't believe that Government, that the Federal Government
should be involved in anything other than the defense of the
Nation. Everything else left up to the States and the private
sector.
And speaking of Grover Norquist, in the 114th Congress, 218
Republicans, that is just one over the number it takes to
constitute a majority in the House of Representatives. So they
can pass whatever they want to pass. Two hundred eighteen have
signed onto the Grover Norquist ``no new tax money'' pledge,
and 49 in the Senate have done so, just shy of a majority.
And so, we are in the midst of an anti-regulatory, anti-
Federal Government binge among those who are in control, and
that bumps up against this 2012 order for us. We knew it was
coming. We knew all of these segments would be flying drones.
We knew what was coming, but yet what did we do?
We passed the Budget Control Act of 2011, the Ryan Budget
Control Act, the Republican Budget Control Act, sequestration,
cutting 10 percent for year after year. And so, if that is not
stifling the private sector as it seeks to develop the drone
business, I can't think of anything--I don't know what else is
stifling the private sector.
And then we are hearing on this very Committee, we--during
this same session of Congress, we are doing everything we can
to gum up the regulatory workings of Government. We don't want
the Government to issue the regulations.
We have passed out of this Committee what is called the
REINS Act, which purports to rein in an out-of-control
Government seeking to over regulate, when we know we don't have
the regulations that we need in this particular area that you
all are here concerned with. We voted out the ALERRT Act. Both
of these acts would essentially stop the rulemaking process.
So while we are having this hearing and we are talking
about the need for the rules, overall, we are doing everything
we can to not do anything in this area. And so, what is at risk
is the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, and it is
also the ability of our country to compete on a global level.
Mr. Wynne, do you agree that these budget cuts have
prevented the expansion of private industry?
Mr. Wynne. Congressman, I certainly agree that this is a
community that's asking for regulation, and Congress has
mandated that this area be regulated.
Mr. Johnson. We are working at cross purposes with that
objective. Mr. Calabrese, how do you see it?
Mr. Calabrese. I have to admit I'm not familiar with the
REINS Act. So I can't really comment on its----
Mr. Johnson. Well, but you do understand the financial
implications of the--of the Ryan Republican Budget Control Act
of 2011, do you not?
Mr. Issa. The time of--the gentleman's time has expired,
but to the extent that you are very familiar with that, you may
answer. [Laughter.]
Mr. Calabrese. I am going to take the opportunity to pass
on that. Sorry, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I know it is a difficult question to
answer, but I think we----
Mr. Issa. It is perhaps too complex for a drone hearing.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I do think we must look at things
overall. We must look at it holistically. What is the role of
the Federal Government in the affairs of the Nation? I think
that is basically the overarching issue, and right now, our
Government is gummed up with gridlock. We can't even pass a
budget for the next fiscal year, 2016.
We are going to put it all on the line because we want to
defund Planned Parenthood. So while we have these important----
Mr. Issa. Would the gentleman wrap up this? The gentleman's
time has expired.
Mr. Johnson. I will, and I appreciate the Chairman's
ability to let me speak. And so, with that, I think I have made
my point, and I will yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. He did make his point.
And with that, I would like to make my point. So, Mr.
Karol, if you would pick up that piece of Styrofoam. I am not
going to ask you to estimate the exact weight, but does it
weigh practically nothing in your hand?
Mr. Karol. Practically nothing.
Mr. Issa. Okay, and the rest of it is here balanced on this
pencil, and I am going to guess it weighs a pound and a half, 2
pounds. We have been talking about a lot of things here. I
think Mr. Calabrese or, actually, Mr. Wynne I am going to start
with, aren't we talking about a multitude of different products
here? I just want to go through it.
We are talking about things like this, which are really,
they are the equivalent of the toy that we all grew up with,
extremely lightweight, really doesn't--couldn't get over 400
feet, can't go a long distance. Notwithstanding that it might
have a camera mounted on it, this is, in fact, an extension of
what children grew up with, remote controls that were available
50 years ago. Is that right?
Mr. Wynne. Well, I don't think so, actually. I think it
looks a little bit like what my son used to play with, but
honestly, it's a little bit like the difference between a plug-
in phone and an iPhone.
Mr. Issa. Well, but and I want to make sure I get to the
point, which is--and Mr. Karol, I started with you--from a
safety standpoint, the damage that this product would do from a
safety standpoint, if it falls on your roof and so on, is
substantially similar perhaps to what that old little alcohol-
fired plane that I grew up flying would do, right?
Mr. Karol. That particular drone, yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So the first question we have to ask is are
we addressing products based on their risk of safety, right, is
something that your company deals with?
Mr. Karol. That's correct, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And the second one, of course, is the FAA.
And I heard a lot of comments. I don't know how many pilots are
in the room. If there are, they are all better pilots than I
am. But for four decades, I have been flying, nearly. And
during those years, the one thing I knew was that my floor was
500 feet.
And the ceiling of these products is 400 feet, and there is
a reason for that, which is that I am not allowed to come down
except by an airport into the remote control toy airspace, and
these products, if they want to remain unregulated, have to
stay below where I am allowed to fly. Again, reasonable safety
standard today.
Is that correct, in your estimation?
Mr. Karol. I think for that particular aircraft, yes. But I
think that there are many other different aircrafts.
Mr. Issa. Right. And we are talking about heavier aircraft,
the 30-pound, 40-pound drone is still covered by the 400-foot
lid. But there is a different question of if it falls. So I
want to go through a number of quick questions.
Mr. Calabrese, you are not an advocate of the status quo.
That is a given. But let me ask a couple of questions. Today,
the realtors, or association represented by Mr. Polychron next
to you, if they have the permission of the owner and they fly
only over the owner's airspace or ground space, unless they
have the waiver for commercial use, they are breaking the law.
Flying this product or one very similar over somebody's own
private property with their permission, they have to get a kind
of a weird exemption that says they can use it for commercial
purposes. It takes time. They have to describe in detail.
Wouldn't you agree that the private use or even the
commercial use over one's own property is an example where
perhaps the Government needs to weigh in and say you know what,
commercial use with the owner's permission in which you are
only flying over their land, we never should have had
regulations over it. Is it really any different than if I raise
a balloon up that has a camera on it?
And I would just like to get your comments on it because I
want to try and divide the concerns we all have with a question
of are we even approaching this based on intrusion into my
privacy versus the right of a landowner to regulate what goes
on in their own area?
Mr. Calabrese. So certainly from a privacy point of view,
and I can't speak to the safety issues, you've always had the
ability to consent to sort of essentially your own--giving up
your own personal information, and I think it probably is an
appropriate--I'm sure I could think of a fact pattern where it
wasn't the case.
But by and large, you can certainly make a case that that
falls under consent and that collection is appropriate. You
know, typically, the drones are not limited in that way. So
that makes it harder. But certainly, that's a place to start.
Mr. Issa. Sure. Well, and I am going to ask you to answer
sort of on behalf of realtors. If in the near future, the FAA
looks and says if a commercial use is only over somebody's own
property, now that would include I am a farmer. I am flying it
over my own property. But that is a commercial use when I do
so. If I am exclusively flying over my own property, taking my
own risk and so on, do I need a commercial waiver or, in fact,
should we take those out and eliminate the bureaucracy of it?
And in your case, if you are only photographing and flying
over the property of the client, if you will, is there really
any reason in your estimation that that isn't a consent for
these products? And let us assume for a moment we are talking
about the 30-pound aircraft and below.
Mr. Polychron. I would concur explicitly that I would want
the right to do that, yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And I am going to close fairly quickly,
even though there is nobody else left. But with just a couple
of quick questions.
Mr. Calabrese, you had a lot of concerns. Let us talk about
privacy for a moment. I am going to ask you because this
Committee does have beyond the commercial questions of this
hearing, we certainly are the Committee of people's civil
rights and people's constitutional rights, including privacy.
These vehicles, large and small, represent a cheap and easy
extension of a problem that is as old as the Brownie instamatic
camera, isn't it?
Mr. Calabrese. Yes.
Mr. Issa. And we are dealing with something where, in your
estimation, I am leading you, but that this Committee should
look at a privacy questions, and my question to you in a more
open format is should we look at them, assuming that these are
going to make it pervasive. But should we look at them equally
based on, if you will, the body camera, this product, the man
who simply has a hillside and a telephoto lens that looks down
on your backyard?
Should we be looking at those holistically, and should this
Committee begin to look at that in light of, if you will, the
pervasiveness of high-resolution, long-range capable cameras?
Mr. Calabrese. Certainly the Committee should explore all
the new technologies. I mean, that's something that we've
talked about for a while. I mean, a great example of this is--
that we haven't talked so much about is stingray devices that
can capture cell phone and can be used to learn your location
from your cell phone.
Mr. Issa. We have been working pretty good on those in
Congress.
Mr. Calabrese. Yeah, they're--yeah, you're making some
headway. You're definitely raising some attention.
So I do think that all of these need to be addressed. I
don't think they all need to be addressed together. I mean, I
think that's a very big bite. And nor are they all the same.
They don't raise the same issues.
So I guess I would encourage Congress to continue to look
at some of these different things. Mr. Poe's bill, I think, is
a great way to say let's have the warrant standard for
Government access, and then we can, again, deal with some of
the trickier issues around how private collection happens.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And I am going to follow up quickly on the
warrant, and if somebody else wants a second round, I am going
to give them that until the bell rings.
But you mention warrant, and that is an area of interest to
me. Let us assume for a moment that police have a myriad of
good reasons and other law enforcement, safety, and so on to
fly, just to see what is happening. In other words, to be in
the air to see if there is a fire, to be in the air for other
reasons, and that those reasons are broadly in the public
interest. Would you agree that that can happen?
Mr. Calabrese. Sure.
Mr. Issa. So, again, this Committee, the Committee of the
Constitution, you suggested that we look at it. You mentioned
Judge Poe's bill. Aren't you also in a sense saying that we
need to address the question of if you collect it through other
purposes, but you are law enforcement, public safety, that you
are perfectly willing to collect it. But you have still got to
get a warrant and recollect it in order to be able to use it.
Is that sort of implied in yours that we will collect all
the time, but the question of, for example, knocking on the
door is a question of, jeez, somebody reported that we saw
something. What is the basis then to enter the home?
Because this is going to happen. There is no question at
all you are going to have drones in the air on behalf of public
safety.
Mr. Calabrese. So there's a lot there. Thank you for the
opportunity to address it.
I think, first of all, talking about non-law enforcement
use is not talking about warrant. So if we're talking about how
the police--or excuse me, how like a firefighter can use a
drone, we're talking about Government use, but not law
enforcement use, and I don't think we're talking about a
warrant.
I do think that we can see exceptions to the warrant
requirement. So if you're flying for, for example, in a public
place and you see a criminal activity or you see a fleeing
suspect, you can continue to follow them the same way law
enforcement could continue to follow them. We have clear rules
around exigency there.
We also could, I think, see some exceptions for if we had a
suppression remedy, for example. So I'm a law enforcement. I'm
looking for a missing person. I'm not looking for criminal
conduct, and I happen to find some.
If there is a clearly defined non-law enforcement, but
police activity, you may be able to do that collection. It may
fall under an exception or may or may not be admissible in
court. I mean, there are fine gradations that we have to have
here.
So I don't want to oversimplify the issue, but I do think
that given the ability and the possibility of persistent long-
term surveillance, something I think the public rightly fears,
they should have the security of when they see that drone up
there, knowing that the police have gotten a neutral third-
party judge to approve that kind of surveillance on them and
that there's a good reason for it.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And I am going to quickly close with a
story.
Last weekend, I was at my home in the backyard, and a drone
flew over, and it hovered over my backyard. Now as far as I
could tell, it is a Phantom 3 Professional. And it had a camera
onboard, nicely stabilized, and it hovered over exactly where
it could see me. And then it went away, and I jumped up,
followed it, found that one of my neighbors had a friend, a
very adult friend, who had flown it on this mission.
I have no idea what he is going to do with it. Being a
politician, I am going to assume that it will show up
somewhere, some day, somehow. What was interesting for me was I
know how easily violated people feel when there is a camera
that is no more able to track me than across a ravine, somebody
with a long-range camera would, but it felt very personal.
So as a Member of one of the Committees that has been
called on to have a likely series of hearings on this, I want
to make it clear today was about commercial, and I brought up
one of the many points of are there exemptions where we can
carve some of the commercial out so that we take that out of
the clutter. And we start viewing some of the issues that are
particularly important to Mr. Marino, as a former prosecutor,
and others on the Committee, and we start dealing with the
privacy, the warrant questions and so on, that come from it.
So although this hearing was limited in scope, I want to
thank you all for helping us expand our understanding and, of
course, probably define some of the future areas of other
hearings of this Committee.
I want to ask all of you if you have additional comments or
statements, I will keep the record open for 5 remaining days so
that you can add supplemental material and would also ask that
if we receive any questions, would you be glad to respond to
those in writing from Members that were not able to be here
today?
I want to thank you for the answer in the affirmative, and
looking left and right, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:44 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Prepared Statement of the Motion Picture Association of America
The Motion Picture Association of America is excited to be on the
forefront of small unmanned aircraft system innovation. The MPAA has
worked closely with the Federal Aviation Administration and sUAS
operators to secure cinematography as among the first approved
commercial applications of unmanned aircraft in the United States.
Incorporating sUAS in domestic film and television production is not
only safely advancing aerial photography and helping tell stories in
new and exciting ways. It is also starting to generate the economic
benefits that the technology can bring our country by reducing costs
and keeping film productions here at home rather than sending these
jobs overseas.
As the voice of the motion picture, home video and television
industries, the MPAA submits this statement on behalf of its members:
Paramount Pictures Corp., Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc., Twentieth
Century Fox Film Corp., Universal City Studios LLC, Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures, and Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. The film and
television industry is currently employing sUAS under exemptions the
FAA granted vendors to use the aircraft in scripted, closed-set
filming. The controlled nature of our sUAS use greatly limits exposure
to the general public, minimizing any safety or privacy concerns.
When the first handful of sUAS operators received exemption
approval from the FAA last year at this time, Senator Dodd, MPAA's
Chairman and CEO, called the announcement ``a victory for audiences
everywhere as it gives filmmakers yet another way to push creative
boundaries and create the kinds of scenes and shots we could only
imagine a few years ago.'' The MPAA and its members look forward to the
continued development of this budding sector of the film industry as we
work with the FAA to establish formal rules allowing the continued use
of sUAS in domestic movie and television production.
Filming with sUAS is already authorized abroad and we have now
built a positive safety track record here at home, having completed a
growing number of successful flights. One of the small businesses we
work with that received an exemption from the FAA in September 2014,
has already completed more than 60 film projects to date totaling more
than 1,200 successful flights. Advancing such domestic use will help
keep production revenues from leaving our shores, promote jobs, expand
the U.S. aviation industry, and provide real-world experiences in
controlled environments to help pave the way for other uses of sUAS.
Looking ahead, we asked the FAA earlier this year in the formal
rulemaking proceeding to allow additional flexibility, such as night
flying, for filming in controlled environments as technology advances.
We are in the initial stages of sUAS cinematography in the United
States and, as use grows, the capabilities of the systems will likely
evolve rapidly and beyond what we can predict now.
We thank Chairman Issa and Ranking Member Collins and the other
members of the Committee for their attention to this matter. We are
excited to continue our work to further integrate the use of sUAS into
domestic film and television productions, and are eager to see how the
creative minds of our industry use the technology to the benefit of
audiences around the world.

[all]
