- EXAMINING THE ADEQUACY AND ENFORCEMENT OF OUR NATION'S IMMIGRATION LAWS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ADEQUACY AND ENFORCEMENT OF OUR NATION'S IMMIGRATION LAWS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-080 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUUL LABRADOR, Idaho                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 3, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3
The Honorable Trey Gowdy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of South Carolina, and Member, Committee on the Judiciary     7
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Texas, and Member, Committee on the Judiciary     8

WITNESSES

The Honorable Paul Babeu, Sheriff of Pinal County, Florence,
Arizona
Oral Testimony.................................................    34
Prepared Statement.............................................    36
Jan C. Ting, Professor of Law, Temple University Beasley School
of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    41
Prepared Statement.............................................    43
Jessica M. Vaughan, Director of Policy Studies, Center for
Immigration Studies
Oral Testimony.................................................    58
Prepared Statement.............................................    60
Marc R. Rosenblum, Deputy Director, U.S. Immigration Policy
Program, Migration Policy Institute
Oral Testimony.................................................    67
Prepared Statement.............................................    69

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................     6
Material submitted by the Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Virginia, and
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary...........................    11
Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................    17
Material submitted by the Honorable J. Randy Forbes, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Virginia, and
Member, Committee on the Judiciary.............................    96
Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................   105
Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................   108
Material submitted by the Honorable Hakeem Jeffries, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York, and
Member, Committee on the Judiciary.............................   134
Material submitted by the Honorable David N. Cicilline, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Rhode Island, and
Member, Committee on the Judiciary.............................   141
Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, and Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................   152

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Question for the Record submitted to Jessica M. Vaughan, Director
of Policy Studies, Center for Immigration Studies..............   168
Response to Question for the Record from Jessica M. Vaughan,
Director of Policy Studies, Center for Immigration Studies.....   170

EXAMINING THE ADEQUACY AND ENFORCEMENT OF OUR NATION'S IMMIGRATION LAWS

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2015

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:06 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Bob
Goodlatte (Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Smith, Chabot, Issa,
Forbes, King, Franks, Gohmert, Jordan, Poe, Marino, Gowdy,
Labrador, Farenthold, Collins, DeSantis, Buck, Ratcliffe,
Bishop, Conyers, Nadler, Jackson Lee, Cohen, Johnson, Deutch,
Bass, Richmond, DelBene, Jeffries, and Cicilline.
Staff Present: (Majority) Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff &
General Counsel; Branden Ritchie, Deputy Chief of Staff & Chief
Counsel; Allison Halataei, Parliamentarian and General Counsel;
Dimple Shah, Counsel; George Fishman, Counsel; Kelsey
Deterding, Clerk; (Minority) Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff
Director & Chief Counsel; and Tom Jawetz, Counsel.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good morning. The Judiciary Committee will
come to order.
And, without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on examining
the adequacy and enforcement of our Nation's immigration laws.
And I will begin by recognizing myself for an opening
statement.
When President Obama announced unilateral changes to our
immigration laws with a wave of his pen and cell phone on
November 20, 2014, he indicated that he would allow millions of
unlawful and criminal aliens to evade immigration enforcement.
He did this with the issuance of new so-called priorities for
the apprehension, detention, and removal of aliens.
Under the Obama administration's new enforcement
priorities, broad categories of unlawful and criminal aliens
will be immune from the law. This means that these removable
aliens will be able to remain in the United States without the
consequence of deportation.
To make matters worse, even the most dangerous criminals
and national security threats can cease being a priority for
removal if there are undefined, compelling, and exceptional
factors.
On the same date, President Obama effectively announced the
end of Secure Communities. Despite the fact that the President
claims he took action to prioritize immigration enforcement
against criminal aliens, he is scrapping a tool that identifies
criminal aliens booked in jails across the United States so
that Federal law enforcement officials can prioritize their
removal.
Secure Communities, created in 2008, is a simple and highly
successful program to identify criminal aliens once arrested
and jailed. It protects Americans from those who are a danger
to their communities.
As the Department of Homeland Security has said on numerous
occasions, Secure Communities simply uses an already existing
Federal information-sharing partnership between ICE and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation that helps to identify criminal
aliens so that ICE can take enforcement action.
As of August 2014, the Administration indicated that over
375,000 aliens and 121,000 level-one convicted criminal aliens,
who the Obama administration deems the worst of the worst, were
removed as result of Secure Communities.
Based on the Obama administration's new policies announced
on November 20, 2014, we have learned that the average daily
population of aliens in detention facilities has declined to
approximately 27,000 beds. This has occurred despite the
statutory mandate in current law that ICE maintain a 34,000 ADP
in detention facilities.
Many factors have contributed to this decline, including
the collapse of issuance and compliance with ICE detainers
because of ICE's own detainer policy issued on December 21,
2014, ICE's failure to defend its detainer authority, ICE's
immediate implementation of its new enforcement priorities on
November 20, 2014, and the demise of the Secure Communities
program on this same date.
Detainers are notices issued by ICE and other DHS units
that ask local, State, and Federal law enforcement agencies not
to release suspected removable aliens held at their facilities
in order to give ICE an opportunity to take them into its
custody. Detainers, often called immigration holds, are a
primary tool that ICE uses to apprehend the suspects it is
seeking.
Irresponsible policies have led to a drop in the number of
detainers issued by ICE. And given that ICE refuses to defend
its detainer authority, many jurisdictions refuse to cooperate
with ICE on detainers out of fear of civil liability. The
results are distressing. ICE developed a methodology to track
the number of detainers not honored by local law enforcement
jurisdictions.
From January 1, 2014, to September 30, 2014, over 10,000
detainers were not honored. Through September, the recidivism
rate for these aliens was 25 percent in just a 9-month period.
There were over 5,400 subsequent arrests and 9,300 criminal
charges. The end result of these policies: The number of
unlawful or criminal aliens that ICE has removed from the
interior of the country has fallen by more than half since
2008.
Given this Administration's failure to enforce our
immigration laws, we could line Border Patrol agents shoulder
to shoulder at the southern border and it would not matter.
Why? Because once apprehended by the Border Patrol, many of the
children, teenagers, and adults arriving at the border simply
game our asylum and immigration laws that the Obama
administration has severely weakened.
The Administration has done little to deal with this
problem other than ensure that these claims be heard years down
the road. In the meantime, these aliens can abscond and
eventually fail to appear for their hearings. The Wall Street
Journal just reported that the Justice Department has a special
date reserved for thousands of immigrants awaiting their day in
court, the day after Thanksgiving in 2019.
If word got out that bogus credible fear and asylum claims
were not being rubber-stamped and that claimants were not
rewarded with almost certain release into the U.S. along with
work authorization, the vast increase in claims might quickly
abate. In the end, it doesn't matter how many aliens are
apprehended along the border if apprehension itself becomes a
golden ticket into the country.
Successful immigration reform must enable effective
interior enforcement. This is an integral piece of the puzzle.
We can't just be fixated on securing the border while
undoubtedly an issue of paramount concern.
We must focus on interior enforcement or, more precisely,
what to do with unlawful immigrants who make it past the border
and legal immigrants who violate the terms of their visas and
thus become unlawfully present in the United States.
One reason why our immigration system is broken today is
because the present and past Administrations have largely
ignored the enforcement of our immigration laws. If we want to
avoid the mistakes of the past, we cannot allow the President
to continue shutting down Federal immigration enforcement
efforts unilaterally.
In the coming weeks, this Committee will hold hearings and
address legislation that deals with the problem of the
Administration's failure to enforce our immigration laws. We
will not only provide the Administration with the tools it
needs, we will also act to ensure that the President cannot
unilaterally shut down immigration enforcement in this country.
Only then will immigrants seeking to enter the U.S. have an
incentive to obey our Nation's immigration laws. We must ensure
enforcement of our immigration laws so that we can then move on
to address other broken aspects of our immigration system, such
as high-skilled visa reform and addressing our broken
agricultural guest worker program.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the Judiciary Committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Conyers, for his opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte.
As we convene our first hearing of the 114th Congress, I
continue to hope, as I have in past Congresses, that we will be
able to work together in this Committee to address important
challenges and advance the cause of justice. But as we look to
the future, we must first remember where we have been
particularly when it comes to the issue of immigration.
In 2013, the Chairman began the very first hearing this
Committee held by saying, ``This year Congress will engage in a
momentous debate on immigration.'' Unlike the Senate, which
engaged in that momentous debate and passed a bill with strong
bipartisan support, the House never had the opportunity to hold
that debate.
Bipartisan reform bills in the House and Senate received no
action at all. Instead, we just voted again and again to take
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, DACA, away from young
people to deny due process protections to children fleeing
violence and to block other sensible administrative reforms.
Although the first hearings held by this Committee in each
of the last two Congresses has dealt with immigration, the
titles of the hearings and the witness lists could not be more
different. In the last Congress, the hearing was titled
``America's Immigration System: Opportunities for Legal
Immigration and Enforcement of Laws Against Illegal
Immigration.'' We discussed the need for immigration reform,
including reforms to our legal immigration system. We even
discussed the important question of how we treat the millions
of undocumented people who are living in our communities today.
The title of today's hearing, ``Examining the Adequacy and
Enforcement of our Nation's Immigration Laws,'' focuses only on
the issue of enforcement. And reading the testimonies submitted
by our witnesses and the majority's press releases, it is clear
that this hearing will not address opportunities for legal
immigration. Instead, this hearing will address only claims
that our immigration laws are, against all the evidence to the
contrary, somehow not being adequately enforced.
From the endless list of grievances, it is even hard to
know what the focus of the hearing will be. Here are just a few
of the topics that the majority and its witnesses plan to
discuss today: The legal authority for the Administration's
executive actions on immigration, the elimination of the
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, the need to
eliminate the credible fear process and tighten asylum laws
designed to protect people from persecution and torture, the
security of our borders, and the Administration's decision to
set priorities when enforcing immigration laws in the interior.
The list goes on, but I think I made the point that I wish to
make here.
We also know that this hearing sets the stage for a number
of legislative hearings that the Subcommittee on Immigration
and Border Security will be holding over the next 8 days--two
legislative hearings on four bills that would make our
immigration system more dysfunctional and unfair, not less so.
Finally, the irony is not lost on me that the majority will
spend the next several hours attacking this Administration for
not taking enforcement seriously, but they are now threatening
to shut down the Department of Homeland Security for the second
time in just 15 months.
Just last week all three former secretaries of Homeland
Security, including two appointed by President George W. Bush,
urged Congress not to jeopardize the Department's funding.
They wrote, ``Funding for the DHS is used to protect our
ports and our borders; to secure our air travel and cargo; to
protect the Federal Government and our Nation's information
technology and infrastructure from cyber attacks; to fund
essential law enforcement activities; to guard against violent
extremists; and to ensure the safety of the President and
national leaders.''
I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to enter that letter
into the record.
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, it will be made part of
the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________
Mr. Conyers. Thank you.
I hope we can get serious about legislating real solutions
for our businesses, families, and national security.
I thank our witnesses for being present and joining us
today.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And it is now my pleasure to recognize the Chairman of the
Immigration Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, the
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The consensus, Mr. Chairman, in this country is our current
immigration system is broken, unworkable, and, frankly, not in
the best interest of our fellow citizens. It is also the
consensus that the current system is not being enforced, which
undercuts the very foundation of this Republic, which is
respect for and adherence to the rule of law.
Previous attempts at immigration reform proved to be
insufficient because, if they had been sufficient, we wouldn't
be having another hearing or another national conversation
about immigration reform. Decisions by Administrations,
frankly, from both parties, to selectively enforce our
immigration laws have had a negative effect on our system. In
addition, both parties, through the selective enforcement of
laws, have undercut the most fundamental of American virtues.
Simply put, while most Americans realize the current system
does not work, they are also skeptical that Congress will
actually do what it is supposed to do or that this or future
Administrations will actually enforce what reforms do pass, and
this cynicism is well earned.
An oft-repeated statistic bears mentioning again, Mr.
Chairman: About 40 percent of those who are in the country
unlawfully originally entered through lawful means. So while
real and verifiable border security is critical, immigration
reform cannot and will not be done without real, verifiable,
and robust border security.
A sovereign country should never apologize for having a
secure border any more than this Congress or this Capitol
apologizes for having metal detectors at every single
entranceway.
But just as border security is a condition precedent, so,
too, is enforcement of our internal immigration laws if we are
going to have a system that works and has any credibility in
the eyes of both the American public and those who wish to
legally emigrate here.
This Administration, Mr. Chairman, has in the past claimed
to have removed record numbers of unlawful or otherwise
removable aliens from the United States, but ICE's own report
indicates just last year more than two-thirds of all removals
claimed by ICE involved aliens apprehended by the Border Patrol
along the border or intercepted by inspectors at ports of
entry.
At the same time, under the guise of prosecutorial
discretion, the Administration has handcuffed Federal
immigration officers by--and I want you to note the irony, Mr.
Chairman--telling law enforcement officers not to enforce the
law. Therefore, a sustainable immigration solution needs to
have mechanisms to ensure that the President, whether the one
we have today or the one we have 10 years from now, cannot
simply turn off the switch on enforcement.
State and local law enforcement have a role in every single
facet of law enforcement. So why can't we give them a role in
immigration enforcement? We trust State and local law
enforcement officers to enforce every category of the law from
murder, to child sex cases, to narcotics trafficking, to child
pornography.
Mr. Chairman, they even have primary responsibility to
patrol and enforce something as inherently interstate as the
interstate highway system. But, yet, we can't seem to muster
the confidence in them to give them a role in enforcing our
immigration laws. So we trust them with murder cases. We just
can't muster the courage to trust them with immigration cases.
So I want to know why we can't grant States and localities
the specific congressional authorization envisioned by the
Supreme Court that allows them to play a supporting role in the
enforcement of our immigration laws.
There are 5,000 ICE agents that have the responsibility for
enforcing our Nation's immigration laws, but there are 730,000
State and local law enforcement officers. And let's remember
that those State and local law enforcement officers are subject
to exactly the same constitutional restrictions as Federal law
enforcement officers.
So, in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, if we want a long-term
sustainable solution, we have to address interior enforcement.
Selective enforcement of the law is destructive to our system.
Ignoring laws simply because we wish they weren't laws is
destructive to the system. And the result has been a pervasive
sense that our law, frankly, just doesn't matter anymore.
So the American people rightfully expect and deserve the
laws we pass to actually be enforced. It would be a good idea
if the Congress had the same expectation.
With that, I would yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair thanks the gentleman and
recognizes the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, for her
opening statement on behalf of the Subcommittee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the yielding.
I have always held the proposition that, in the Judiciary
Committee, we are tied to the facts. And I think it is
important as we begin this oversight again that we make note of
the fact that President Obama's administration has in the last
years, in 1 year, detained a record 429,247 people.
He has, in essence, removed 1,570,510 in one term, almost
as many as President Bush did in two terms. The facts is what
is going to make this hearing, again, over and over again, a
relevant hearing.
I think it is important also to note that ICE, in 1 year,
detained and removed 216,000 of those individuals to be
deported who had been convicted of crimes in the United States,
an all-time high.
So I hope that our hearing this morning casts the wide lot
of telling the truth. The purpose of this hearing appears,
again, to criticize President Obama's administration that they
failed to enforce the law in the interior and at the border.
I have noted my good friend mentioning the idea of State
law enforcement officers and, constitutionally, what is yielded
to the Nation is yielded to the Nation. Collaboration is always
good, and we have done that over the years.
But, as you know, we are nearly a year and 8 months removed
from having passed out of the Judiciary Committee several
immigration bills, none of which have seen the light of day on
the House floor. The bills were agriculture, border security,
employment, and workplace compliance. But, since then, nothing,
Mr. Chairman, no Rules Committee hearings, no floor action.
In addition, the Senate acted by passing a bipartisan
immigration bill, S. 744, the ``Border Security, Economic
Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act,'' as a
comprehensive immigration reform that included provisions on
border security, interior enforcement, employment eligibility,
verification, and work site enforcement, legalization of
unauthorized aliens, immigrant visas, not immigrant visas and
humanitarian admissions, a bill that has never seen any
activity on the floor.
I have a bill, as I heard the Chairman mention about the
delay in immigration resolution of their cases, H.R. 77, that I
would hope this Committee would take up that calls for the
appointment of 70 additional immigration judges. That, I think,
would answer some of the concerns that have been raised to
process these cases.
Our Judiciary Committee colleagues on this side of the
aisle understand how important it is for the United States to
have in place an effective strategy that secures the Nation's
borders and commands broad bipartisan support from both
parties. So it is timely that we are talking about border
security immigration reform.
Unfortunately, neither bill that the Judiciary Committee
plans to take up, nor H.R. 99, the border security bill that
voted party-line votes--the Republicans voted for it in
Homeland Security--is the best legislative vehicle.
If House Republicans are serious--or were serious about
immigration reform, they would bring to the floor H.R. 15, a
bipartisan comprehensive immigration bill introduced in the
last Congress.
And if our friends in the majority were serious about
border security, they would bring to the floor for a vote the
highly praised and critically acclaimed bill that was favorably
and unanimously reported last session out of the Homeland
Security Committee, H.R. 1417.
Having recently visited the border in California--and there
were several other visits that I have taken, from Arizona, to
New Mexico, to my own State and many other States--asking
questions about the issues of border security, we found that,
when we work together collaboratively, we can solve our
problems. Casting accusations are not the solution.
The President's executive actions that we are probably
going to scrutinize again had to do with enforcement with the
idea of prioritizing because of limited enforcement resources.
Obviously, the shutting down of the Department of Homeland
Security will not help that situation.
House Republicans are focused on ending DACA and blocking
these executive actions with the ultimate goal of deporting
DREAMers and ripping parents away from their U.S. citizen and
lawful permanent-resident children.
The President's executive actions are meant to focus our
efforts on deporting felons, not families. Proposals championed
by Judiciary Republicans, like the SAFE Act, are meant to turn
families into felons.
We have educators in the audience, and I know they
understand the importance of educating all children. We are
simply trying to have a regular orderly system that these
children can be statused so they can be educated and
contributing to American society.
At the same time, House Republicans are refusing to fund
this Department. And I wonder what the 9/11 committee that
brought together this bipartisanship over an enormous tragedy
of 9/11 and created the Homeland Security Department as the
front lines of securing this Nation--what would they think of
us shutting them down?
So, Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by saying that the Border
Security Results Act of 2013 provided the Department of
Homeland Security with a road map that contributes to some of
the answers that will be responding to the questions that have
been raised by my colleagues. It asks for a national plan, a
situational awareness, metrics and results, independent
verification.
This is the approach that we should take, a collaborative
effort to ensure that we work together on behalf of the
American people, not in contrast, H.R. 399, that undermines the
very structure of leadership of the Homeland Security
department and, in actuality, has been criticized by Border
Patrol agents. This is not the way to go.
I hope this hearing today will be constructive, not
carrying a message of attack without information, because, in
actuality, we will not be able to provide for a rational, real
response to immigration or a rational, real response to border
security without the collaboration and the input of people
concerned about the American people and not making political
points.
With that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Goodlatte. I would like to ask unanimous consent to add
to the record a Wall Street Journal article entitled ``U.S.
Delays Thousands of Immigration Hearings by Nearly 5 Years,''
and an Associated Press article entitled, ``US: immigrant
families fail to report to agents.'
'
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

__________
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. What purpose does the gentlewoman from Texas
seek recognition?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to
enter the following statements into the record from the
following organizations: Women's Refugee Commission, Asian
Americans Advancing Justice, American Immigration Lawyers
Association, and the Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service.
I ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, they will be made a part
of the record.

[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. We welcome our distinguished panel today. If
you would all please rise, I will begin by swearing in the
witnesses.
Do you and each of you swear that the testimony that you
are about to give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Thank you very much. Let the record reflect that all of the
witnesses responded in the affirmative.
Sheriff Paul Babeu is the sheriff of Pinal County, Arizona,
where he was named America's 2011 Sheriff of the Year, as
selected by his colleagues in the National Sheriffs'
Association.
Since being elected to his first term in 2008, he has since
acted decisively to disrupt cartel activities along the
southern border and has emerged as a national leader on border
security.
Babeu holds an associate's degree in law enforcement from
the Arizona Law Enforcement Academy, a bachelor's degree in
history and political science from Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts, and a summa cum laude master of public
administration degree from American International College.
Mr. Jan C. Ting currently serves as a professor of law at
the Temple University Beasley School of Law, where he teaches
immigration law, among other courses.
In 1990, Mr. Ting was appointed by President George H.W.
Bush as Assistant Commissioner for the Immigration and
Naturalization Service of the U.S. Department of Justice. He
served in this capacity until 1993, when he returned to the
faculty at Temple University.
He received an undergraduate degree from Oberlin College,
an M.A. from the University of Hawaii, and a J.D. from Harvard
University School of Law.
Ms. Jessica Vaughan currently serves as the Director of
Policy Studies for the Center for Immigration Studies. She has
been with the Center since 1992, where her expertise is in
immigration policy and operations topics, such as visa
programs, immigration benefits, and immigration law
enforcement.
In addition, Ms. Vaughan is an instructor for senior law
enforcement officer training seminars at Northwestern
University's Center for Public Safety in Illinois. Ms. Vaughan
has a master's degree from Georgetown University and earned her
bachelor's degree in international studies at Washington
College in Maryland.
Dr. Marc Rosenblum is the Deputy Director of the Migration
Policy Institute's U.S. immigration policy program, where he
works on U.S. immigration policy, immigration enforcement, and
U.S. regional migration relations. Dr. Rosenblum returned to
MPI, where he had been a senior policy analyst, after working
as a specialist in immigration policy at the Congressional
Research Service.
Dr. Rosenblum earned his B.A. from Columbia University and
his Ph.D. from the University of California, San Diego, and is
an associate professor of political science at the University
of New Orleans.
Your written statements will be entered into the record in
their entirety. And I ask that each of you summarize your
testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help you stay within that
time, there is a timing light on your table. When the light
switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to conclude
your testimony. When the light turns reds, that is it. Your
time is up.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE PAUL BABEU,
SHERIFF OF PINAL COUNTY, FLORENCE, ARIZONA

Mr. Goodlatte. Sheriff, welcome. We will begin with you.
Sheriff Babeu. Mr. Chairman, Members, thank you for
welcoming us today.
Paul Babeu. I serve as sheriff of Pinal County, Arizona.
Where we are located, 5,300 square miles, larger than the State
of Connecticut, sandwiched in between metro Tucson and metro
Phoenix. We have had the unfortunate title of being one of the
largest smuggling routes for drugs in humans in the entire
Nation.
We experience in Arizona, just in the Tucson sector, one of
the nine southwest border patrol sectors, anywhere from 88,000
to 123,000 illegals that have been apprehended, and that is
just in recent years. And 17 to 30 percent of those, depending
on which leader of the Border Patrol you talk to, have a
criminal record already in the United States.
And according to the GAO, 56 percent of the border is not
under operational control like the Yuma sector is. And
regardless who you speak to--and everybody seems to have their
own facts--but this clearly shows that the border is not more
secure than ever.
Our county led the largest drug bust in the history of
Arizona, $3 billion against the Sinaloa Cartel. In 1 day, we
arrested 76 members of the Sinaloa Cartel, carrying 108
weapons, not just handguns--these are scoped rifles and AK-
47s--two of which were traced back to Fast and Furious
operation. This is in my county.
Drug cartel scouts. Last year we arrested--we continue to
pursue them as we speak--scouts. These are lookouts on
mountaintops in my county over a 50-mile swath of area along
Interstate 8 and 10, where they have binoculars and they are
looking out.
And they occupy these high-terrain features for 30 days at
a time, resupplied with food and water, have all electronics,
encrypted radios, that we don't even have, and they have solar
panels to recharge all this equipment. And every time a drug
load comes by, they get paid $100. And this is over this entire
swath of area.
When I tell a story like that, having served a tour in Iraq
and commanded soldiers in the Army, it almost appears I am
telling a story of some war-torn area. This is on American
soil. And that is what is so disruptive, is the fact that here,
as the sheriff where our primary job is to answer 9/11 calls,
how on Earth did we get here to this place that local law
enforcement is leading the effort to fight criminal syndicates
from a foreign nation on American soil?
Mass prison break. I want to talk to you about that.
February 23, ICE--this is again in my county, where we led this
effort to expose what had happened--we had a release of 400-
plus criminal illegals. Now, these are the ones that--everybody
has their own opinion about the 11-plus million illegals who
are here and what we should do.
Everyone, at one point, including the President, had agreed
that these 34,000 beds that this Congress has authorized--
which, to correct respectfully the Chairman, there is not
27,000 in there. I was updated last week there is 24,000
currently in beds in these facilities--that we had a mass
release 2 years ago of criminals that had everywhere from rape
charges, two that were charged with manslaughter, convictions
for child molestation, financial felony crimes, aggravated
assault against law enforcement, and armed robbery released
into my county.
I demanded the information--the names and the criminal
history of this information. It has been refused to this date.
I, as a sheriff, who swore an oath to protect the people of my
county, should have a right to that information.
Five, 10, 14, 16 times, these are the illegals that--don't
be scratching your head why they keep coming back. My deputies
are arresting them for State crimes. This one had been arrested
16--now it is the 17th time. In law enforcement, we call these
clues. Right? This is a clue that there is no enforcement. This
is this past year, folks.
Six-page memo from Secretary Johnson, the very night that
the President gave a speech. President said 5 years or longer,
deferred action. In reality, the truth of this is January of
2014. If you have been here from that date and before, you get
deferred action.
Thirty to 50 criminals released every day in my county from
ICE facilities, and this was told to me from the director for
Arizona for ERO, John Gurley. He is not going to be happy that
I shared this information. Two separate phone calls.
These were the people that everybody, including our
President, said were the bad actors, that, if anybody, the ones
who have committed serious violent felonies or multiple
misdemeanors have to be sent back to their country of origin.
Then, how is it okay now that we are releasing 30 to 50 of
these individuals a day right now?
And I would urge this Committee and this Congress to stand
up as a lawmaking body to enforce the laws, just as you expect
me and every other law enforcement officer locally to do, and
secure the border.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Babeu follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Sheriff. And my apologies for not
getting your name pronounced correctly.
Sheriff Babeu. That is all right.
Mr. Goodlatte. But we will improve on that.
Sheriff Babeu. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Goodlatte. Professor Ting, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF JAN C. TING, PROFESSOR OF LAW,
TEMPLE UNIVERSITY BEASLEY SCHOOL OF LAW

Ms. Ting. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all Members of the
Committee.
I have submitted written testimony.
And in part I of that testimony, I discuss the basic
question of whether we are going to have a limit on immigration
in the United States or, alternatively, whether we are going to
have no limit or whether we are going to enforce the limit.
In part II, I discuss various initiatives that amount to
abandonment of deterrence in our immigration law enforcement
and the consequences thereof.
In part IV of my written testimony, I discuss what I think
is the primary reason for having immigration law, which is to
protect the jobs and wages of American workers from foreign
competition.
But I want to discuss with you part III of my written
testimony, which is ``Asylum Abuse and Expedited Removal.''
When I last testified in this hearing room about a year
ago, I suggested that making asylum claims has become
commonplace as a path to an immigrant green card for aliens
without other alternatives and that false asylum claims have
become common and often deceive U.S. asylum adjudicators into
granting asylum status.
The perception that false asylum claims often work and at
least delay removal of illegal aliens from the United States,
sometimes for long periods, adds to the benefit side of the
cost-benefit analysis, which is attracting additional illegal
immigration into the United States.
Convictions for and exposures of false asylum claims are
very difficult and expensive to attain. The difficulties are
compounded when the number of asylum applications is
increasing. And I have submitted some statistics documenting
that.
The concept of ``credible fear'' was instituted by the
former Immigration and Naturalization Service as an informal
screening-out device for the large numbers of Haitians
interdicted on boats on the high seas headed for the United
States after the Haitian coup of 1991. The idea was that people
interdicted on boats who could not articulate a credible fear
that could qualify them for asylum would be repatriated to
Haiti without further deliberation.
When Congress enacted ``expedited removal'' in 1996 for
certain arriving and recently arrived aliens who lacked
documentation, it incorporated the concept of ``credible fear''
into the statute in the hope that it could also be used as a
screening-out device for aliens making asylum claims.
Unfortunately, what has happened is a high approval rate
for credible fear claims--the stories have spread as to how to
achieve a credible fear--and the resulting backlog in the
immigration court system, which the Chairman has referred to,
have meant that, in practice, ``credible fear'' has served to
screen into the United States undocumented aliens who don't
really have an asylum claim, but can meet the ``credible fear''
test, the low threshold.
That explains why so many illegal border-crossers don't run
from the U.S. Border Patrol, but instead seek them out to make
their ``credible fear'' claims subject to that low threshold.
Congressional intent in enacting ``expedited removal'' has
been frustrated by the presence of this low-threshold
``credible fear'' screening-in device. But Congress can and
should amend the immigration laws to remove the role of
credible fear in frustrating expedited removal.
All Border Patrol and other Customs and Border Protection
agents should be mandated to receive training and asylum law as
part of their basic training. Such trained agents should be
authorized to make asylum adjudications as part of the
expedited removal process. Expedited removal was created by
Congress. Congress can amend the law. All references to
credible fear in further hearings by an immigration judge
should be removed from the expedited removal statute.
The statute could then be amended to read, ``If an asylum-
trained officer determines that an alien does not have a well-
founded fear of persecution pursuant to Section 208, the
officer shall order the alien removed from the United States
without further hearing or review.'' That is not that different
from the statute the way it reads now.
Additionally, just as the credible fear standard may have--
and let me just say I think that is the single most effective
change to facilitate immigration enforcement that can be made,
is strengthening the expedited removal process at our border.
Additionally, just as the credible fear standard may have
lost value as alien smugglers game the system and spread the
stories that work, so the asylum statute itself, 208, while a
useful addition to our immigration law when added in 1980, may
have lost value as the stories have spread that work in
convincing an adjudicator to grant asylum.
How did we meet our obligations before 1980 when 208
entered our law? We had a statute, withholding of deportation,
that prevents the removal of aliens if the alien's life is
threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, social
group, or political opinion.
I would like to see Congress consider enhancing the
withholding of removal statute by adding to it some of the
benefits of asylum with the goal of having a single enhanced
withholding of removal statute for the protection of refugees.
That statute has and will have a higher burden of proof than
the asylum statute and should, therefore, be less susceptible
to fraud.
I thank the Chairman and the Committee.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Ting follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Professor Ting.
Ms. Vaughan, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF JESSICA M. VAUGHAN, DIRECTOR OF
POLICY STUDIES, CENTER FOR IMMIGRATION STUDIES

Ms. Vaughan. Good morning. And thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
Currently, immigration enforcement is in a state of
collapse. The vast majority of illegal aliens face no threat of
deportation, regardless of when or how they arrived. New
illegal arrivals continue from land, air, and sea, and the size
of the illegal population stopped declining several years ago.
We now know that millions of these illegal aliens and short-
term visa-holders have been issued work permits outside the
limits set by Congress.
The Obama administration's deliberate dismantling of
enforcement has imposed enormous costs on American communities
in the form of lost job opportunities, stagnant wages for
native workers, higher tax bills to cover increasing outlays
for social services and benefits, compromised national
security, and needless public safety threats.
One of the most urgent tasks now before Congress is to
restore integrity to our immigration laws by ending the massive
catch-and-release scheme put in place by the Obama
administration. This has to include the establishment of more
effective deterrents to illegal settlement and tools for more
efficient enforcement.
But it has now become clear that, even if those
improvements are made, just as the Border Patrol's good work in
apprehending illegal border-crossers is undercut by policies
that result in their release, good work by ICE can be undercut
if those same illegal aliens that they arrest in the interior
are simply released and issued a work permit. That is a
benefit. That is not prosecutorial discretion.
Statistics published by the DHS show clearly that, over the
last several years, even as illegal border crossings have grown
and the number of over-staying visitors is large, the number of
deportations has plummeted and the number of illegal aliens
allowed to stay and work in the United States has increased.
Apprehensions, which are generally considered an indicator
of the number of people trying to enter illegally, have
increased by 43 percent since 2011, and this is largely due to
the increase in unaccompanied minors and family units who
arrived last summer.
Those arrivals are continuing, by the way, and the numbers
for unaccompanied juveniles are still about double the rate of
2 years ago. The apprehension statistics are concerning enough,
but they don't tell the whole story. CBP has yet to disclose
how all these cases were disposed of, specifically how many of
those apprehended were released into the United States instead
of removed and how many of them may have been issued a work
permit.
From other government data, we do know that only a few
hundred of the surge arrivals have been deported. While it is
generally accepted that 40 percent of the illegally residing
population is comprised of over-stayers, they are not a high
priority for deportation.
In 2013, only 3 percent of ICE deportations were classified
as overstays. The most concerning aspect of the thoroughly
dismal enforcement numbers are the interior numbers, which are
important because they have a direct effect on American
communities. ICE deportations from the interior have dropped
nearly 60 percent since 2009, and they are already down another
20 percent from last year.
Despite Administration claims of a focus on felons,
criminal alien deportations are down, too. Criminal alien
deportations are down 30 percent over last year at this time
and 40 percent since 2012, and this is despite the fact that
ICE is able to identify more criminal aliens than ever before
as a result of the Secure Communities program.
The Administration's so-called prosecutorial discretion
policies that are responsible for this lawlessness have public
safety consequences. We learned earlier this year that ICE
released more than 36,000 convicted criminal aliens from its
custody, many with serious convictions, and now we know that a
large number of them have been arrested again for subsequent
offenses.
In 2014, ICE released another 30,000 convicted criminal
aliens. It is bad enough that they are released, but ICE has
cut back on the supervision as well. More and more are released
on bond or recognizance, and there have been tragic
consequences, as recently happened in Arizona, where an illegal
alien who was a convicted felon on burglary charges was
released by ICE without supervision and then, while waiting for
his deportation hearing that still is unresolved 2 years later,
murdered a 21-year-old convenience store clerk over two packs
of cigarettes.
So it has been reported that this Committee is hard at work
on legislation, and I look forward to seeing the results. But I
again want to emphasize that, unless Congress acts immediately
to rein in executive abuse of power, specifically the issuance
of work permits and catch-and-release, all of the good work
that comes about as a result of enforcing the laws is for
naught.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vaughan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Ms. Vaughan.
Dr. Rosenblum, am I pronouncing your name correctly?
Mr. Rosenblum. ``Rosenblum.'' Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. ``Rosenblum.'' Okay. Well, I am only two for
four here today, but we will work on that.
And welcome. Thank you.

TESTIMONY OF MARC R. ROSENBLUM, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, U.S.
IMMIGRATION POLICY PROGRAM, MIGRATION POLICY INSTITUTE

Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you.
Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Conyers, Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
In any immigration system, illegal immigration depends on
three factors: the economic, social, and demographic drivers of
my migration flows; the laws that define who may enter legally;
and immigration control measures to enforce these rules. When
the drivers of migration exceed the legal limits, the result is
illegal immigration, unless adequate enforcement measures are
in place to prevent it.
In the U.S. case, large-scale illegal immigration began in
the late 1960's after two legislative developments: Congress
eliminated the U.S.-Mexico Bracero Program, which had admitted
450,000 guest workers per year; and it passed the 1965
Immigration and Nationality Act, which imposed the first
numerical limits on permanent migration from Mexico and Latin
America.
These changes occurred as America's transition to a post-
industrial economy boosted demand for low-skilled, low-wage
workers and as demographic changes resulted in a growing prime-
age workforce in Mexico and an aging workforce in the U.S.
Congress held hearings on illegal immigration starting in
1970, but didn't pass legislation until 1986, and serious
enforcement only began in the mid-1990's. With strong migration
drivers, limited legal visas, an inadequate enforcement system,
the unauthorized population increased from fewer than 2 million
in 1970 to 12.4 million at its peak in 2007.
The story is different in the post-9/11 period and
particularly in the last decade. Following passage of the
Secure Fence Act, DHS has installed over 650 miles of border
fencing covering every part of the border the Department has
identified as appropriate.
The Border Patrol has virtually eliminated the use of
voluntary return for border-crossers. The proportion of border
apprehension subject to voluntary return fell from about 95
percent during the 1990's, to 82 percent in 2005, to less than
10 percent today.
Following implementation of the Streamline program and
other efforts to expand border prosecutions, almost one in four
people apprehended at the border now face criminal charges, up
from just 3 percent in 2005. Perhaps the biggest change since
2005 is with respect to interior enforcement.
Removals from within the United States increased from fewer
than 50,000 per year to 188,000. Criminal removals have more
than doubled, from 91,000 in 2003 and just 30,000 in 1995, to
207,000 in 2012. And overall removals have averaged 406,000 per
year since 2009, the 6 biggest years in U.S. history.
So one point I want to emphasize is that the changes since
2005 have produced results. As I describe in my written
statement and in two recent MPI reports on deportation policy,
which I ask also be entered into the record, new resources and
strategies have had a dramatic impact.
When you look at what we know about the proportion of
border-crossers being apprehended, add smuggling fees, add
recidivism and deterrence, it is clear that the costs of
illegal immigration have increased and that tough enforcement
influences people's migration decisions.
So what we have seen is that apprehensions of Mexicans at
the southwest border fell from 1.6 million in 2000 to 226,000
in 2014. That is an 86 percent reduction in 15 years and the
lowest level we have seen since 1969.
Most importantly, the total unauthorized population has
fallen by 1 million people since 2007, the first time we have
ever seen a drop in this number other than through
legalization. And the latest numbers I have seen say that it is
still falling, that it is down to 11 million in 2013.
The other point I want to emphasize that these gains have
not come cheaply. The United States has spent $208 billion on
immigration enforcement since 2001. We spend more money on
immigration enforcement than on all other Federal criminal law
enforcement agencies combined. Immigration now accounts for 47
percent of all cases in Federal, district, and magistrate
courts, crowding out other issues.
Hundreds of cities and counties, along with three States
and the District of Columbia, have passed legislation limiting
how local law enforcement can cooperate with DHS because they
believe aggressive enforcement endangers their communities.
And more than 3.6 million deportations since 2003,
including more than 1.3 million of people living inside the
United States, have had a huge impact on U.S. families and
communities. A growing number of Americans rejects this
approach.
We know what it would take to design a more efficient and
sustainable enforcement system. Illegal immigration is a three-
dimensional issue based on the underlying demand for migration
flows, the supply of visas, and enforcement. Yet, for 40 years,
U.S. policy has focused almost entirely on enforcement. By
failing to address the structural roots of immigration flows or
the policy roots of illegality, we have battled illegal
immigration with one hand tied behind our back.
I urge this Committee to support a more balanced set of
policies that also address these supply-and-demand issues that
are the root causes of illegal immigration. Balanced policies
in the long run will be more efficient, more effective, and
more humane.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rosenblum follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Dr. Rosenblum.
I'll recognize myself first for questions.
Professor Ting, I was particularly taken by your statement,
which I agree with, that the primary purpose of our immigration
laws is to protect the jobs and wages of American workers.
Would you elaborate on that and tell us whether you think
that the current Administration is fulfilling that purpose.
Mr. Ting. Mr. Chairman, it seems like every month we have
new employment figures come out and the Administration does a
little victory lap celebrating the increasing number of jobs.
But, as everyone knows, wages have remained stagnant in the
United States and a lot of American workers are suffering from
either unemployment or underemployment, working multiple part-
time jobs, trying to string a life together. I think it is
clear that we haven't recovered from the recovery. And, yet,
the stock market seems to be hitting highs every month, record
highs.
And I think it is not a contradiction that the stock market
keeps hitting highs and American workers keep suffering from
low wages and underemployment. I think there is an effort
underway to facilitate immigration, legal and illegal, into the
United States in order to suppress the wages of American
workers.
And I think there is a lot of talk about rising economic
inequality in America. I am concerned about that. And I think,
you know, dealing with illegal immigration is part of doing
something for American workers, protecting their jobs,
protecting their wages.
In Philadelphia, we have got fast-food workers and baggage
handlers at the airport demanding a raise to $15 an hour in
2015. Good luck with that. Because the President has already
announced he is going to add 5 million illegal immigrants to
the legal workforce in 2015, and every employer knows that.
So, you know, I don't think our American workers are going
to get the raise that they want and need. And I think we have
to look at the reason why, with rising numbers of jobs, wages
don't go up. If you believe in market theory, wages should be
going up. They are not. It has something to do with
immigration.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much.
Let me say to Dr. Rosenblum I appreciate your enthusiasm
for the success of this Administration, but the facts tell a
different story.
When you look at actual ICE interior removals from 2009,
the first year of the Obama administration, through 2014, they
have dropped from 237,941 to 102,224 last year. I think that is
a dramatic representation of what is really happening with
regard to enforcement of immigration laws.
And, Sheriff Babeu, I would like to ask you if you could
comment on what you are experiencing right there in the field
along the border in terms of what is happening with immigration
into this country.
Sheriff Babeu. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
I can tell you that the day after, when we had 1070, the
Supreme Court had a ruling that said local law enforcement was
not for--under the Supremacy Clause, to be involved in that
particular case on that ruling.
We had immigration----
Mr. Goodlatte. And the next day the Obama administration
removed Arizona from participating in the program altogether,
didn't they?
Sheriff Babeu. Correct. We were the one State that was
actually, I believe, punished for that.
And the situation, as I outlined a little bit, in terms of
the smuggling routes that are occupied largely by the Sinaloa
Cartel, Homeland Security has even said publicly 75 to 100 of
these lookout posts that have been identified. There is far
more than that. They are not all occupied at the same time. So
this is what we see, this robust effort that still is ongoing.
I have literally hundreds of press releases here. There
have been cases, 30 to 50 illegals that are running through
neighborhoods in the western part of my county. Largely, we are
a pass-through county. So they are oftentimes transported by
vehicles. And many times we see them make a 3- to 5-day march
that is very dangerous through very treacherous, high-
temperature desert.
We often find ourselves that are--responding to emergencies
because they are targeted for all kinds of crimes, anything
from robbery to----
Mr. Goodlatte. Let me interrupt you because my time is
running down.
But isn't a major component of this not just what is done
along the border, but having interior enforcement where,
instead of what is occurring today, which appears to be a
policy of catch-and-release, to actually have laws that make
sure that people who nowadays are--I was down on the border
last year and I saw them turning themselves in voluntarily----
Sheriff Babeu. Right.
Mr. Goodlatte [continuing]. And then claiming all kinds of
things that allow them to remain in the United States.
Is reforming those laws and allowing the ICE agents to do
their job a critical part of an enforcement? And is that
occurring with this Administration right now?
Sheriff Babeu. That is not, Mr. Chairman. As I pointed out,
the countless cases we see 5 times deported, 10 times, 12
times--in that one case, 17 times--I am proud to admit, and it
is confirmed by the Border Patrol that they have been deported.
So if there is no catch and release, how are they coming back?
And it stands to reason that that is not as many times as they
actually came into the country illegally.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
The gentlemen from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
Dr. Rosenblum, would you care to respond to the Chairman's
question that was posed to you? Do you recall it?
Mr. Rosenblum. Sure. Thank you, Congressman.
We recently analyzed ICE's administrative removal records
and were able to analyze their interior removals and their
border removals. And what the data we have looked at show is
that interior removals increased from 73,000 in 2008 to--I am
sorry, from 150,000 in 2008 to 188,000 in 2011. And then they
had declined to 131,000 in 2013.
But what you also see in the data is that criminal removals
from the interior have increased over this period. So, in 2008,
there were only 81,000 criminal removals from the interior
versus 114,000 in 2013. So we have seen a little bit of a
quantity versus quality tradeoff where the Administration
appears to be focusing, you know, as they have said in their
formal description of their policy, to be focusing on criminal
removals from the interior and focusing on border enforcement.
So we have seen the border removals numbers go up and the
interior criminal removals go up.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you so much.
Let me ask you about a comment that Sheriff Babeu made in
his written testimony--that ``the failure to secure the border
after the Reagan amnesty got us where we are today with 11
million or more illegals in our Country.''
I think you addressed this point in your written testimony.
Could you give us a response here before the Committee?
Mr. Rosenblum. Sure. Thank you. I mean, there is no
question that illegal immigration has increased since the 1986
IRCA. And one reason is that IRCA was a flawed bill strictly
from an enforcement perspective. Its biggest shortcoming is
that the employer sanctions provisions are mostly
unenforceable. So IRCA left in place the jobs magnet that
continues to attract most unauthorized immigrants.
And in fortifying the border, IRCA started a trend of
raising the costs of crossing the border, which has increased.
But at least for the first 10 or 20 years, what social
scientists who have studied the border have found is that it
increased the cost enough to discourage circularity so people
who arrived stopped going home, but it didn't increase the cost
enough to prevent people from coming. So IRCA and the border
enforcement in the 1980's and 1990's tended to trap
unauthorized immigrants within the U.S.
But the most important thing that IRCA failed to do was
address any of the drivers of illegal immigration or any of the
disparity between the supply and demand of visas. So IRCA
failed to provide visas to satisfy the demand for labor flows
that existed.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir.
Sheriff Babeu, I wanted to see if you could direct me to
the memo in which Secretary Johnson showed ICE would no longer
enforce the law against the 11 million people in the country or
that it would grant deferred action to 20 million people. Do
you have those documents?
Sheriff Babeu. Absolutely. Through the Chair--this is a
memo dated November 20. And it is from Secretary Jeh Johnson
to--he has 22 subagencies. And he outlines in great detail the
six-page memo. And I will point you to page number 4, section
C,that if they had been present in the United States
continuously since January 1st of 2014--and on that page, it is
outlined in great detail about prosecutorial discretion. And
you don't have to be a lawyer to figure out that that wasn't
intended for an entire class of people or to just arbitrarily
waive the law as has been done here.
It is for certain----
Mr. Conyers. I am going to have to--I see the lights on
here.
Sheriff Babeu. Yes, sir.
Mr. Conyers. Dr. Rosenblum, do you have any comment to the
response that we have from the sheriff?
Mr. Rosenblum. What I understand from the memo--I have
looked at that memo from 2014. That memo defines the
Department's enforcement priorities and also describes within
each of the different priority levels the criteria for making
an individual determination, looking at the totality of the
circumstances about, you know, whether or not ICE and other
enforcement agents are directed to consider discretion in a
case. But I don't read the memo to categorically describe a
whole class.
Mr. Conyers. Let me go to my last question.
In recent years, critics of the Administration have begun
to add removals and returns together in an attempt to argue
that the Administration is not enforcing our immigration laws
like it used to.
What do you think of that criticism?
Mr. Rosenblum. Well, Congress in 1996 created the removal
process. And it is designed as a tougher form of enforcement
that carries with it bars on admissibility and criminal
penalties for people who reenter.
What we have seen over the years is that the total number
of deportations, removals plus returns, maps very closely to
the total number of apprehensions. They are correlated at .94.
So it is almost the same number.
And the trend that we see in the last couple of decades,
and especially the last decade, is that within the total body
of deportations, the share of the removals has increased
sharply. It is now about three-quarters.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy [presiding]. I thank the gentleman from Michigan.
Before we go to the gentleman from Texas, the gentleman
from Virginia sought recognition.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, I think the memo that the Ranking
Member asks speaks for itself pretty much and I am sure he
would want it made a part of the record.
So, without objection, I hope we will admit that memo as
part of the record and then I think everyone can read it for
themselves.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Virginia.
The Chair now recognizes the past Chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, the gentlemen from Texas, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sheriff, let me direct my first comment and question to you
and that is thank you for what you are doing in your good work
in protecting the lives and property of the residents of the
county you represent. And I hope they appreciate that too.
You mentioned in your testimony that we are not even using
the facilities we have now to detain dangerous individuals. In
fact, there are I think 10,000 beds that are going unused right
now. And yet you combine that with this Administration's
decision to release thousands of dangerous illegal immigrants
who have been charged with such crimes as manslaughter and
armed robbery. I have no idea why the Administration wants to
do this to the American people.
But I would like to ask you what solutions you would
propose so that we can stop this kind of policy that does
destroy lives and property, all of which could be prevented.
Sheriff Babeu. First, Congressman Smith, through the Chair,
it is outrageous what has been allowed to happen. And if I had
a mass jailbreak in my county and let out hundreds, if not
thousands, of violent criminals, many of them, I would be
arrested. And this has to stop. We saw----
Mr. Smith of Texas. In effect, the Administration has
ordered the largest jailbreak in American history.
Sheriff Babeu. The largest jailbreak in American history
has occurred right under our noses. And nobody is talking about
it.
The information, I demanded this information, even spoke to
Senator McCain. He said, Sheriff, Sheriff, I promise you I am
going to get you those names.
Well, I am still waiting for the names of those criminals,
and we will never get it. We will never get these names. And
the reason why is because we will then connect 2,228 criminals
to new crimes that have been committed against our citizens all
across this country. And who should be held responsible and
answer to these victims except this Administration and those
people who have knowingly released and intended for this harm
to take place.
Here is one of these cases. This illegal that Ms. Vaughan
spoke about, Altamirano, who is 29, from Mexico, it wasn't just
robbery that he pled guilty to. He kidnapped a woman for over a
week and sexually assaulted her, according to the victim. We
are in America;you believe the victims.
This guy executed this 21-year-old young man who worked as
a store clerk in a QuikTrip convenience store and shot him,
murdered him over a back of cigarettes.
And ICE won't even answer to--and all we are hearing is
excuses in how this guy was released. And we are outraged in
our State. And this just underscores the fact of what is going
on, that these people aren't held accountable, serious, violent
offenders.
Mr. Smith of Texas. There is absolutely no excuse for this
Administration to perpetuate those policies that result in
American lives being lost or property damaged or injuries that
have occurred. I couldn't agree with you more on that.
Professor Ting, I just wanted to thank you for your
testimony. I don't have a question. But I want to point out
that Chairman Goodlatte, in his opening statement, emphasized
what you also said and that is that apprehensions along the
border no longer necessarily result in individuals being sent
home. Oftentimes it is a golden ticket to come into the country
and establish legal residence. And that is largely because of
people gaming the asylum laws or largely because of the
Administration not enforcing the asylum laws, again a travesty
that results in basically ignoring and undermining current
immigration law.
Ms. Vaughan, let me go to you for my next question. This is
quite amazing. Under this Administration, we have seen illegal
border crossings go up. We have seen deportations go down. We
have a million people in the country here illegally who have
been ordered removed who still are in this country. You wonder
how bad it has to get before this Administration decides to
enforce current immigration laws.
Now, you have done a lot of research on those individuals
who have been either charged with or convicted of serious
crimes and a lot of research on the recidivism rate. Would you
go into more detail about how many of these individuals were
released? How many have committed additional crimes? And we
might make the point that the recidivism rate is over a year or
two. Long term, a lot more will commit additional crimes, all
of which would have been avoidable had this Administration done
what it should have done and that is send a lot of these
individuals home.
But would you elaborate on some of your research in that
regard?
Ms. Vaughan. Sure. I would be happy to. What we know from
the 36,000 convicted criminal aliens who were released in 2013
is 16 percent of them were subsequently re-arrested by local
law enforcement agencies, 16 percent of them. And only a
portion of those were taken back into custody by ICE.
This Committee has also commissioned research based on
actual records that found a very high recidivism rate. I
believe it was something like 56,000 new crimes committed by
criminal aliens who were released instead of removed under the
Secure Communities Program.
What I am told by ICE officials and have been told on a
number of occasions what they believe from their internal data
is there is a recidivism rate of about 50 percent of criminal
aliens who are released by ICE or released----
Mr. Smith of Texas. Fifty percent? Half will commit
additional crimes against innocent Americans?
Ms. Vaughan. Right. And that is both criminal aliens
released by ICE and also those criminal aliens who are released
by local law enforcement agencies that want to obstruct
immigration enforcement through not honoring detainers--50
percent is too high a risk to the public.
Mr. Smith of Texas. All of which could be avoided.
Ms. Vaughan. Right.
Mr. Smith of Texas. Thank you all for your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman from Texas.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman and I thank the
Chairman. And as I started out in my remarks, I really do hope
that this can be a constructive process where we truly do look
to find solutions.
I would offer to say that not one of us--I will count
Republicans and Democrats--would hold to the tragic and
horrible killing of the constituent in your jurisdiction,
Sheriff, none of us. And we would want the individual
immediately brought to justice.
I take issue, however, to condemn public servants, ICE
officers, of whom I know that you have probably had deep and
abiding professional relationship with, as being at fault for
any of these charges that are being made here today.
I do want to say that not funding the Department of
Homeland Security for this year and beyond is certainly not the
answer.
We need to ensure that we are paying Border Patrol agents,
PSOs, ICE officers, and the array of individuals who are
responsible in many different ways of securing the border.
What I do want to raise a question in order to try to
understand a little better, you had an opportunity at an event
dealing with an election of a Governor in the State of Arizona
to announce that a bus or buses of unaccompanied children would
be showing up in Oracle, Arizona. And the public pronouncement,
which I would offer to say that the responsibilities of law
enforcement officers are to be protect and serve, no matter who
comes into the territory, as long as they are innocent,
provoked a despicable scene of individuals who were anti-
immigration and then, of course, those who were supporting it.
It so happens as it has been recorded--and I ask unanimous
consent to put an article, dated July 15, 2014, in the record
from the Republic.
I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Jackson Lee. It was reported that as these bus loads of
children came, it was determined that these children were
youngsters going to a YMCA Triangle Y Camp.
Is that the case, Sheriff?
Sheriff Babeu. Through the Chair, no, that is not the case.
A person who was running for Congress made a scene and believed
that that was the case. In reality, there was, in secrecy, 40
to 50 Central American juveniles who were, in fact, delivered
to the Sycamore Canyon Ranch.
Ms. Jackson Lee. But do you think it is appropriate, no
matter whether those kids came at this time--are you denying
this, that you did not say that there was not a scene with
these youngsters? Did you provide protection for these
youngsters going to the YMCA camp?
Sheriff Babeu. Absolutely. And through the Chair and
Congresswoman----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would you send us an article that shows
that you provided protection to those youngsters? Because it is
indicated that your expression provoked a scene for youngsters
who were, in fact, going to a YMCA camp.
If you have the ability to rebut that, I would appreciate
it if you would submit it into the record. I am going to go on
to another question.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to put into the
record ``The ACLU Obtains Judgment Against Arizona Sheriff on
Officer's use of the S.B. 1070, 'Show Me Your Papers' Law.''
I ask show unanimous consent to put this into the record.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Jackson Lee. This indicates that an individual by the
name of Ms. Cortes, who was a victim of domestic violence,
which this Committee takes very seriously, was stopped by some
of your officers and, rather than allowing her to show her
papers, was immediately put into detention, I guess along with
her children.
Do you have knowledge of that?
Sheriff Babeu. That is not true. She wasn't put in
detention with her children.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Then why would you obtain a judgment? Let
me say this--did you,was the judgment obtained against the----
Sheriff Babeu. Through the insurance carrier for $25,000 to
settle a frivolous lawsuit, they did, yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you for that and move on to
the next question.
Let me ask, Dr. Rosenblum, on this question of laws like
S.B. 1070 and juxtapose it against the fair Executive action
that the President has authority to do but the Executive
actions are prioritizing enforcement and deal with DACA family
members, as opposed to a law like S.B. 1070, which, in the
instance, you may not have heard me, it deals with an
individual who was stopped and papers were not asked for, and
they were detained. And they were a victim of domestic
violence.
Mr. Gowdy. You may answer the question.
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you. Certainly my understanding is
that one of the intentions of the President's Executive actions
announced in 2014 would be to focus enforcement more on
criminals and recent border crossers and less on families and
people who have children in the U.S.
And the intention of S.B. 1070, I think, is more focused on
identifying potentially deportable noncitizens, you know, by
authorizing State and local law enforcement to query them about
their documents.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Does it have a successful impact----
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair would now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sheriff, would you pronounce your name again?
Sheriff Babeu. Babeu.
Mr. Chabot. Babeu?
Mr. Babeu. Yes, sir.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. I will probably just call you
``sheriff.''
First of all, would you like any additional time to clear
up or clarify anything that my esteemed colleague on the other
side of the aisle may have brought up?
Sheriff Babeu. Yes, sir. Through the Chair, I thank you,
Congressman. This case with the suspect who was stopped for a
violation of traffic enforcement, there was actually, we had
custody 29 minutes, including the time to transport to our U.S.
Border Patrol.
Now, the call--Senate Bill 1070 says, required by the
Supreme Court, we shall--we don't have an option--law
enforcement shall, if we have a reasonable suspicion somebody
is in the country illegally, inquire and determine, and we
called ICE and Border Patrol. They said, Bring that person to
us. We did. And including less than a half an hour, that person
was held for 5 days by the Border Patrol, not by us. There was
no children, as the Congresswoman represented in her statement.
And that was, was that entire case.
The case, talk to Carl Shipman, the director, with the case
of close to 50 unaccompanied juveniles who were apprehended in
your State of Texas and were flown to my State of Arizona. I
have a problem with that.
And the fact that you had Jeh Johnson testify before this
Congress who said there would be transparency, that we would--
under oath, he said that he has directed and required all of
his administrators to call and coordinate with State, local and
county officials when they send any of these unaccompanied
juveniles to their jurisdiction.
That never happened. It was done in secrecy. When this was
learned and this information was put out, now it is somehow my
fault that the Administration has done this under secrecy? I
have a problem with that. And so that is what happened in
reality.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Let me go to another line of questioning here briefly,
Sheriff.
Could you discuss the morale relative to the men and woman
that serve under you when you have devoted your time to law
enforcement, protecting the public and enforcing the law, and
then you see the very people that you have picked up under
appropriate circumstances time and time again back out there,
especially when a fairly considerable number of those
apparently are criminals who 50 percent of the time are
committing more crimes against American citizens, what does
that do to the men and women under you and having to do that on
an ongoing basis?
Sheriff Babeu. Congressman, through the Chair, that this
appears to be an endless battle. And you rely on us to enforce
the law. You write the laws. We carry them out. We enforce
them. When it comes to immigration, it appears there is no law
because there are no consequences largely--as pointed out, what
has gone on in my county.
And so this acts like a neon flashing sign on the border
that if you get to the border, you are home free. And that is,
in effect, what has happened.
The morale, because we are professionals, is always
professional. We maintain a high level of morale just in the
fact that we continue the fight. And, in fact, if the Federal
Government won't do the job, we will gladly step up.
Yet what we ask for is for the Federal Government and for
this Congress to carry out and make sure the laws are enforced
and empower your Federal law enforcement officers to actually
be able to do their job that they are trained to do and sworn
to protect our country.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I have got a little over a
minute left. And I would like to divide this between the
professor and Ms. Vaughan here.
Both of you had mentioned about the effect that illegal
immigration and particularly this Administration's lack of
seriousness about dealing with it, but really it has happened
over previous Administrations as well, what effect that has had
on American jobs, on the fact that wages have been stagnant for
such a long time?
Even though, Professor, as you indicated, the stock market
has been going up, wages really haven't. My colleagues on the
other side like to talk about the middle class. Well, those are
the folks that are being hurt, I think, most by illegal
immigration and the competition there.
Could you each address--now I have got about 30 seconds, so
15 each.
Mr. Ting. I think it is a national scandal, this rising
inequality in America and people's willingness to ignore the
role of immigration in that phenomenon. You know, the
Administration says jobs are going up every month. They are
taking a victory lap on that. But wages are not going up.
Why aren't wages going up? Market theory says wages should
go up if demand for workers increases. And people are just
ignoring the role of immigration.
Indeed, the President bringing 5 million illegal immigrants
into the legal workforce in 2015, giving them work
authorization and saying, Go out and compete with American
workers for jobs. And it is actually illegal to discriminate
against these work-authorized aliens in favor of American
workers.
So, you know, I think we have to recognize there are
victims here, and the victims are American workers trying to
get by on part-time jobs and having to compete with increasing
numbers of work-authorized illegal immigrants to the United
States.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Ms. Vaughan, quickly.
Ms. Vaughan. There is not an economist in this country who
will tell you that we have a shortage of unskilled labor. And
this is what is causing the stagnant wages. And it is also that
people are--you can't just look at the unemployment rate. You
need to also look at the underemployment rate out there and the
fact that people are forced into jobs that they don't want.
Just 2 days ago, I spoke with a man who told me that he had
worked for 15 years in masonry in Rhode Island and can no
longer get a job. His boss had to close the company because
they have been completely displaced by companies that hire
illegal workers, and he had to get a job washing cars. That is
a job. He is not unemployed. But it is not what he was trained
for. It is not what he has skills in. And these are real
stories of real Americans who are being harmed by the
Administration's refusal to enforce the law.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Gowdy.
Professor Ting, you talked about income inequality and
correlated it to this immigration situation.
Don't you think income inequality has a lot more to do with
maybe the tax structure we have in this country, the lack of a
minimum wage, lack of public spending to create jobs on
infrastructure? Isn't that more important?
Mr. Ting. Well, I am all for tax reform. I also teach tax.
I am all for closing the carried interest loophole. I am all
for narrowing the gap between income from capital and income
from labor.
Mr. Cohen. You don't think hedge funds guys up in Manhattan
should pay the tiny taxes they do on what they do on--I am
being facetious. I agree with you.
Mr. Ting. Well, yeah, I think it is outrageous that Warren
Buffett pays a lower marginal tax rate than his secretary.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Sheriff Babeu, first of all, I want to thank you for your
service to our country, serving in Iraq and all. You have an
amazing story. And there are so many issues we could get into
that I find of interest.
In your testimony, you talk about drugs being brought
through your county and it is one of the major--is that mostly
marijuana?
Sheriff Babeu. Through the Chair, Congressman, largely
marijuana is a cash crop. But there is methamphetamine. The
largest importer into the United States is Mexico for meth.
Cocaine, heroin, black tar----
Mr. Cohen. But marijuana is the number one drug that comes
through there.
Sheriff Babeu. In terms of size and volume, yes.
Mr. Cohen. Do you think, in your experience, if possibly
this country had a different policy or laws concerning
marijuana, that we would have less likely cartels shipping
marijuana into our country if we had either decriminalized it
or something like that?
Sheriff Babeu. No. And every Arizona sheriff, the majority
of us are Democrats, have voted against even the medicinal
marijuana, nevermind the proposed recreational use of
marijuana. And we do not believe that by legalizing or allowing
some recreational use will somehow collapse the cartels. It is
about a criminal syndicate that is driven by money and power.
And they will do anything----
Mr. Cohen. But if they are growing marijuana legally in
Washington and Colorado, they don't need the cartels to give
them marijuana. So if you had it to where some way it could be,
that would take away their market, wouldn't it?
Sheriff Babeu. No. It is different. If you want to talk
about the taxation and the incentive there for the Government.
But in terms of the street value, it is far cheaper to buy
marijuana from Mexico. And it is very different, when you look
at the strains that the medicinal marijuana provides for
certain illnesses, from glaucoma to pain and other things, it
is all synthetic in many regards; it is strains and far more
powerful.
So the relative inexpense of marijuana that is coming in
and the cash crop, they even build in 10 to 20 percent loss of
apprehensions from law enforcement into there.
Mr. Cohen. You are against medical marijuana, like children
that need Charlotte's Web or they call it--I think, Rachels in
Israel--where they are combining this non----
Sheriff Babeu. Again, in Arizona, it is the law. So we
enforce the law. I don't have a problem with the fact that
there is medical marijuana in Arizona. And I have spoken out
publicly about this.
Mr. Cohen. Let me ask you this----
Sheriff Babeu. It is the abuse of it. Because we have seen
people drive vehicles, show up at work, and operate equipment,
and so forth. That is the concerns that we have had.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
You were on some radio show that is Political Cesspool,
which is appropriately named, I think, having read about it.
You regret having done that, do you not?
Sheriff Babeu. Through the Chair, that was probably 4 years
ago. We had no idea of their background and that they had made
statements that appeared bigoted or racist. I don't associate
with that. And we immediately disavowed any of their beliefs or
past statements. That has nothing to do with me.
Mr. Cohen. Good. Good. And you have become, I guess, more
careful about what shows you are on?
Sheriff Babeu. We have been on probably as many as you, if
not more. And so I have a staff member that vets everybody. And
somehow, at that point, that slipped through. And we
immediately ensured the public knew that, in fact, we reject
those people if--anybody, whoever they are--have those beliefs.
Mr. Cohen. I thank you for that. And I know people can make
mistakes. As a matter of fact, I think one of our colleagues,
who I respect greatly, went on that show and didn't know
either. So people can make mistakes. And I appreciate your
making clear that that was a mistake.
Because the fact is--they are out of my district
apparently--but some of the stuff they stand for is
reprehensible. And I thank you for your honesty.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this hearing
because it is one of those few hearing where people get what
they ask for. We came in, we heard our friends on the other
side of the aisle saying, we just want the facts, we just want
the facts.
And, Sheriff, thank you for giving them to them.
We have heard one newspaper article after another newspaper
article or story recited by our friends on the other side of
the aisle. But thank you for being the eyewitness who can come
here and refute them all. And I know a lot of times they didn't
give you an opportunity to respond to that. But we thank you
for doing that.
The one thing I will agree that I heard in the opening
comments is it is, indeed, unfortunate that the President would
indicate that he would be willing to shut down the Department
of Homeland Security unless the act that funds it allows him to
take actions many constitutional experts believe to be the most
flagrant attack on the Constitution we have seen in years, an
attack that will impact not just our time but the lifetime of
our children.
But I am also not fearful of the false choice our friends
on the other side of the aisle offer, that we must turn our
eyes, ignore the unconstitutional act of this President if we
want to fund the Department of Homeland Security.
The oath we took as Members of the Congress was not, as
much as we love it, to defend Arizona or California or
Virginia; it was to defend the Constitution of the United
States. And when this President or any President attacks that
Constitution, this Committee, this Congress has the same duty
under that oath to protect and defend against those attacks as
it does to protect and defend against the attacks of some
wrongdoers secretly entering across our border to attack that
same Constitution or the citizens it protects.
Now, professor Ting, I would like to ask you--the President
admitted in 2011 and numerous times thereafter that with
respect to the notion that I can just suspend deportations
through Executive order, that is just not the case because
there are laws on the books that Congress has passed.
He went on to say the executive branch's job is to enforce
and implement those jobs. There are enough laws on the books by
Congress that are very clear in terms of how we have to enforce
our immigration system, that for me to simply through Executive
order ignore those congressional mandates would not conform
with my appropriate role as President.
My question to you is this: Isn't that exactly what DHS has
been doing, suspending the deportation process and creating an
enforcement-free zone for millions of unlawful and criminal
aliens? And do you think the President is violating his duty
under the Constitution to faithfully execute those laws?
Mr. Ting. Yes. I think I have written on that subject and I
have said that I think the Executive action is unconstitutional
and a usurpation of congressional powers. It is legislation by
the executive.
And also, you know, Chairman Goodlatte has put into the
record many of the President's earlier statements about the
limitations on his authority, which he subsequently ignored,
which I think calls into question whether there are any other
limitations.
You know, he says his own Office of Legal Counsel opinion
says, Well, you can't extend this to parents of DACA
beneficiaries. Well, is that going to hold up? You know, what
is the next step? If this Executive order is sustained, you
know, what is the next step? And I think you may see Executive
orders reaching other people that the President has said, Well,
we can't extend it to them. Well, now that I think about it,
why not? And extend it further.
There is no limitation. And that feeds into the cost-
benefit analysis that people are thinking about, whether to
come to the United States illegally or not. You know, people
are saying, Well, you know, you just get yourself in there and
then you wait for the next piece of Executive action to come
along and provide you with work authorization.
I think it is feeding the process. If you want more illegal
immigration, you raise the benefits and lower the costs. If you
want----
Mr. Forbes. Ms. Vaughan, let me ask you what Mr. Ting has
said also--you heard how Dr. Rosenblum has talked about this
great enforcement that this Administration has done on our
immigration laws. Is he right on that?
Ms. Vaughan. No, he is not. If you look at the total body
of statistics--and the best ones to look at are ICE's own
internal metrics--you see that not only are interior
deportations down, total deportations down, including all three
agencies, but also even the number of criminal aliens being
removed from the interior every year has plummeted.
They keep the records for their own use internally. And
that is the best measure of what is happening.
And I think the most important metric is the size of the
illegal population residing in the United States, which stopped
declining after Congress gave resources to Federal agencies to
use on enforcement, we made progress on the size of the illegal
population. But that has stopped now.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you for letting us get these facts put on
the record.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Virginia.
And the Chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Professor Ting, you are a Republican, are you not?
Mr. Ting. I am a registered Republican, although I have
supported Democrats, including the President. It is public
record. I was kicked out of the Republican Party in Delaware as
a result of having taken that stance.
And I am sorry I didn't say in the tax question that I
think the high watermark of tax reform was in 1986 when the
Democrats and the Republicans agreed on setting the capital
gains and the ordinary income rate at 28 percent.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. You are at this point active in
Republican Party politics, are you not?
Mr. Ting. That is not true. I am not active in Republican
Party politics since I was basically pushed out of the Delaware
Republican Party. Indeed, I have relocated. I now live in a
different State. I live in Pennsylvania, not in Delaware
anymore.
Mr. Johnson. But certainly you are not Democratically
affiliated?
Mr. Ting. I am a registered Republican. But I think of
myself as pretty darned independent, as indicated by my support
of tax reform. But I also think the Republicans are right on
immigration. And, you know, really my question is, who in
Congress speaks for America workers?
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Chairman, I have a point of order. I don't
think it's ever been the practice of this Committee to be
asking witnesses what their political----
Mr. Johnson. Could I get my time stopped if----
Mr. Chabot. Yeah, I don't have any problem with that. I
mean, I didn't ask Mr. Rosenblum any questions, but I certainly
didn't ask him his political affiliation and----
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Ohio's point is well taken.
Although Professor Ting is more than defending himself. And he
may actually go back to his support for this President at some
point.
So, with that, I am sure Mr. Johnson is going to leave
politics and get to immigration at some point.
Mr. Johnson. I am but after I make sure I answer my pre-
questions. In other words, I am building up to something. And I
would appreciate giving me the discretion to do that without
further interruption.
Mr. Gowdy. You have the discretion to ask. And Professor
Ting can decide whether or not he wants to answer.
Mr. Johnson. And I have heard enough from Professor Ting at
this point. I would love to talk with you further.
I would ask the same question of Ms. Vaughan, you are a
Republican also, are you not?
Ms. Vaughan. I am a registered Republican, yes.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Sheriff Babeu, you too, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. I became the first Republican sheriff of my
county.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Okay.
Now, Sheriff Babeu, you know, you are a strict opponent of
immigration reform, comprehensive immigration reform, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. Through the Chair, comprehensive immigration
reform, as I understand it, you may be referring to----
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me ask you this question--you are
opposed to immigration of persons south of the border coming to
the U.S.?
Sheriff Babeu. No, that is absolutely not true. I support
legal immigration, not illegal immigration.
Mr. Johnson. Let me ask you this question--you realize that
we have been struggling with comprehensive immigration reform
for many years in this country, and it is politics that keeps
us from doing it, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. No. I think that----
Mr. Johnson. You don't think it is politics----
Sheriff Babeu. I think that it is enforcement of the law.
You may be dealing----
Mr. Johnson. We are talking about changing the law so that
we can have comprehensive immigration reform. But you are
opposed to us doing that, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. The process and I will----
Mr. Johnson. Are you opposed to us considering
comprehensive immigration----
Sheriff Babeu. In the order that you are doing it, yes. The
border needs to be secured first, and then you can address that
issue after.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. All right. And that is a Republican
position, a Republican Party position. And you are a
Republican, and I understand that.
Let me ask you this question--do you need automatic weapons
to help you with border control?
Sheriff Babeu. We have in Arizona--through the Chair----
Mr. Johnson. If you could say yes or no, and then you could
explain.
Sheriff Babeu [continuing]. Semi-automatic weapons.
Mr. Johnson. Do you need automatic weapons?
Sheriff Babeu. We don't have to have automatic weapons, no.
Mr. Johnson. Do you need mine-resistant ambush-protected
vehicles to help you patrol the border?
Sheriff Babeu. Not for the border, but for our SWAT team,
yes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Do you need silencers in order to
help you patrol the border?
Sheriff Babeu. For our SWAT team, that is a tactical move,
but it is not necessarily targeted for----
Mr. Johnson. Why does your SWAT team need ambush, mine-
resistant ambush protected vehicles?
Sheriff Babeu. Because, sir, through the Chair, our county
doesn't have the money to buy a SWAT vehicle.
Mr. Johnson. Why do you need it in order to enforce border
security? Why do you need a mine-resistant ambush----
Sheriff Babeu. We don't. And this is where----
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. No, sir--Sheriff, you may answer the question.
You may not ask a question and then not allow the witness
to answer it.
Mr. Johnson. I wanted a yes or no answer. He answered the
question. And I am ready to move on.
Mr. Gowdy. Sheriff, have you answered the question as
completely as you would like to?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I am ready to move on.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman is not recognized.
Sheriff, have you answered the question as completely as
you would like to?
Sheriff Babeu. And this is where us and----
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, regular order, please. Regular
order.
Sheriff Babeu. In law enforcement--we have 420,000
residents of my county. And we are the SWAT team.
Mr. Johnson. Point of information, Mr. Chairman.
Sheriff Babeu. All 13 law enforcement agencies. And for
high-risk warrants,barricade situations----
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman----
Sheriff Babeu [continuing]. Almost never have we used----
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman----
Sheriff Babeu [continuing]. An armored vehicle for
anything----
Mr. Johnson. Point of order, Mr. Chairman.
Sheriff Babeu [continuing]. Illegal immigration, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. Point of order, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Sheriff.
The gentleman is out of time. If you have another
question----
Mr. Johnson. I have a point of order that I would like to
state.
Mr. Gowdy. State your point of order.
Mr. Johnson. Is it within the rules of this Committee that
the Chairman can interrupt a legislator asking a question of a
witness----
Mr. Gowdy. If that legislator is not allowing the witness
to answer questions, you are daggone right he can, yes, sir.
The gentleman is out of time.
Mr. Johnson. I take exception to the Chairman--abuse of
authority as to----
Mr. Gowdy. The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Iowa, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses, as I heard earlier, for
their direct answers that we did receive and those anchored in
fact.
I wanted to point out first to Sheriff Babeu, I have been
to the top of those Lookout Mountains, those spotter locations.
I have done one-strut landings with a Blackhawk up on top. And
knowing that they have scattered down the mountain, it is kind
of hard to catch them. I am glad you caught some. And I would
like to see a lot more of that, by the way. And I would like to
see you have all the resources necessary. And I regret that
S.B. 1070 ended up in the court the way it did. I was there to
witness that.
I wanted to just put a statement out here and judge your
reaction. I was listening to Donald Trump in Iowa a week ago,
and he said this, ``We have to build a fence. And it has got to
be a beauty. And who can build better than me?''
Your reaction to that, Sheriff.
Sheriff Babeu. Well, you are speaking to a retired Army
officer, combat engineer. And I helped build this 14-foot
corrugated steel no-climb fence that was originally sponsored
by Congressman Hunter. In fact, a credit to President Clinton,
signed that bill and authorized a double barrier fence, not a
triple barrier.
We don't need, as Mr. Trump and others, an entire, we are
not building the great wall of Mexico. That there are tactical
areas that you interlock these manmade barricades or obstacles
and you interlock them with natural terrain features. We know
how to do that well. And so there are 700 miles of the 2,000
miles of border that would need this barrier.
Mr. King. Could we agree that we should just simply build
that fence until they stop going around the end?
Sheriff Babeu. Taking a line from Senator McCain, build the
dang fence.
Mr. King. Thank you, Sheriff.
Also I wanted to turn to Ms. Vaughan, and I am listening to
the number this keeps coming up, 11 million, 11 million, 11
million. When I came here 12 years ago, it was 12 million. Now
it is 11 million. What has happened to that million that
disappeared while there were millions pouring over the border?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, the numbers went down from 2007 until
about 2009. And we think that was a result of several things.
First of all, increased resources that Congress gave to ICE to
boost enforcement of laws.
Secondly, State and local governments passing laws within
their jurisdiction to support Federal immigration enforcement
efforts.
And also the economy was not great and the lure of jobs was
not as bright as it had been.
But the numbers stopped falling along about 2010 and have
remained stagnant since then, even as more and more----
Mr. King. Thank you. Also I wanted to point out a narrative
and go back to Sheriff Babeu, and that is that sometime last
summer, late July, I was standing on the banks of the Rio
Grande River at Roma, Texas. And there with a couple of Border
Patrol agents and two local city police--they were there most
of the time, came and went a little bit, having a conversation
with them--we watched as two coyotes inflated a raft on the
other side of the river, loaded a pregnant lady in it, ran her
across the river, pulled their raft up against the shoreline.
And they helped the lady out, handed her her two bags of her
possessions. The coyote that helped her out got back in the
raft. The two of them went back to Mexico. The level of
animation among the officers there was a little less than I
would see if they were writing a speeding ticket in Iowa.
Is that a typical scenario? And is it likely she applied
for asylum? That was July, so I presume the baby is born by
now, an American citizen. Is that a typical scenario?
Sheriff Babeu. Not in our county. We are not actually a
border county. But the three counties south of us, funnel shape
the traffic up through Pinal County. But we don't see a lot of,
in our county, pregnant illegals.
Mr. King. Aside from her condition, which is just the
observed condition, is it, is it your understanding that it is
typical when someone gets across the border, that they apply
then for asylum and that the only people that we really send
back are those that will accept the proposal of a voluntary
return on the spot or in a short hearing?
Sheriff Babeu. Yes.
Mr. King. And so we are the welcome mat. And the point of
securing the border if we are going to be there to be the
welcome mat is significantly diminished by the policies of this
Administration, would you agree?
Sheriff Babeu. Yes, sir.
Mr. King. Thank you. Then I will turn to Professor Ting.
And I am looking at a number here, 92,898,000 Americans--almost
93 million Americans--simply not to the workforce, a 30 percent
of the population, 29 point and change, not in the workforce.
And I am listening to the testimony here and, of course, I
have been thinking of this for a while--it seems to me that we
need a demographer to project to us what America looks like if
this continues.
But you have given it so much thoughtful consideration. I
would ask you if you could tell us what you think America looks
like if the Constitution and the rule of law usurped by the
executive branch and the door is open for an endless supply of
immigration, could you give me a picture of what America looks
like?
Mr. Ting. Well, I worry about that picture of the future.
You know, what is special about America is our Constitution and
our deliberative process of government, which includes the role
for the Congress, as well as the executive branch. And I think
that is being threatened by kind of imperial Executive orders.
If this Executive order stands, where is the limit?
I think we do need to think more about growth of
immigration. Both my parents were immigrants. I love
immigrants, right? We all should respect immigrants because we
are all descended from people that came here from somewhere
else. And we are told that includes Native Americans too.
But, you know, how much--that is the question. And it is a
hard question. Given the fact that we respect immigrants and
admire immigrants, how many are we going to take every year?
And we have to kind of strike the balance.
I also just want to say if we do nothing, we are stuck with
the most generous legal immigration system in the world, bar
none. We admit more legal immigrants with a clear path to full
citizenship every year than all the rest of the nations of the
world combined. That is if we do nothing. That is our legal
immigration system. And I have testified before Congress and
said it is a system that is worthy of a nation of immigrants.
So, you know, we welcome legal immigrants into the United
States. We are doing our part in America. We benefit from legal
immigration. But there has to be a limit. And we have to
enforce that limit. Otherwise, it is not really a limit.
Mr. Chabot [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlelady from California, the former speaker of the
California, Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot. Glad to see you back here.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. Ms. Bass is recognized. Thank you.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Thank you for being here today, Mr. Rosenblum. I wanted to
ask you a couple of questions. But also if you wanted to
respond to some of the questions that were asked previously,
you know, you could take the opportunity to do that.
But Professor Ting, where did Native Americans come from?
You said Native Americans were immigrants. I was just
wondering.
Mr. Ting. I don't know. You know, I read that the ancestors
of Native Americans migrated across the land bridge from Asia
to the Americas.
Ms. Bass. Okay. Thank you. I was just wondering. I would
actually never heard that.
Mr. Ting. I don't claim any expertise other than having
read that that is the case.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Rosenblum, I believe that you mentioned that most of
the people that are coming now who are seeking asylum are from
Central America.
And I wanted to know if you would talk about that. That is
an issue and a population that impacts my city and also my
district. A lot of Central Americans are there.
And my understanding is that many or most of them are
coming not only from what you said but what I see at home are
coming because of the specific conditions in El Salvador and
Honduras, where the crime rate is so bad.
I wanted to know, based on your analysis, if you thought
that DACA was actually a magnet for their immigration.
And also it is my understanding, I think another witness
has said that most of the unaccompanied children and families
who were apprehended have not been deported. And I was
wondering if you could explain your thoughts as to why that was
the case.
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you for those questions.
So let me first say something about the unaccompanied
children arriving from Central America. We have heard the
argument made that DACA is a magnet that is attracting those
children. But, in fact, I mean, there are two strong pieces of
evidence that that is not correct. One is that the surge of
Central Americans began in January of 2012, which was 6 months
before DACA was announced. So they couldn't have been coming
because of DACA because they came before DACA.
But the more important point is that--and this applies also
to the general discussion we have had about how Professor Ting
has argued that the President's lax enforcement has been a big
magnet that is encouraging people to come.
But what we have seen is that the numbers of Mexican
arrivals--and this goes to Ms. Vaughan's comments as well--the
numbers of Mexican arrivals continue to fall. They have fallen
every year for the last 14 years. And they are at a 40-year
low. So we have had an 86 percent drop of Mexican arrivals
since 2000, despite DACA and despite, you know, the other
Executive actions.
So what we see instead is that there are very specific
factors pushing immigration from Central America. And those are
the violence in large parts of El Salvador and Honduras and
Guatemala, to a lesser extent, the economic impact.
And another big factor is that the smuggling networks that
connect Central America to the United States have adapted their
behavior and provide sort of door-to-door service that didn't
used to exist.
But there is extensive research--and I have quite a few
citations in my written testimony--by the United Nations, by
several different humanitarian organizations that work with
those arriving children, who have conducted interviews and they
found that 50 percent to, up to two-thirds likely have valid
humanitarian claims under existing U.S. Law. So, you know,
those kids are a distinct phenomenon that raise all kinds of
important questions about how our laws handle a humanitarian
crisis like that.
And the most important question being that we don't have
judicial capacity to quickly process them, which is really what
the problem is. When they arrive, the reason that they are not
quickly adjudicated is that they have 2-year waits to go before
a judge. So that is really where the weakness is in our
enforcement system is the ability to quickly adjudicate those
cases.
But to lump them in as regular unauthorized immigrants
denies the reality that they are fleeing very specific
circumstances and arriving under very different conditions. So
we should look at them and understand what is really going on
there.
Ms. Bass. And that certainly has been the complaint in my
district actually is the backlog.
But I was wondering also if you could speak to the decline
in Mexican immigrants coming across the border.
The other big complaint in my district is the number of
deportations that have happened under President Obama. People
in--at least in LA--feel that his number of deportations have
been very, very high.
So is that the reason why? Because there is certainly a lot
of violence in Mexico as well.
Mr. Rosenblum. Well, we are certainly seeing increased
enforcement at the border and in the interior when you look at
the numbers. And there has been this discussion here on the
panel also that there is catch and release happening at the
border and a lot of voluntary returns.
But when you look at the Border Patrol data, that is just
not true. The Border Patrol historically did voluntary return
for over 95 percent of the people they apprehended. As recently
as 2005, it was 80 percent. And now it is under 10 percent. So
what they are doing is they are putting people on expedited
removal and reinstatement of removal and increasingly charging
them in criminal courts. So there is evidence that that has,
you know, had a real deterrent impact on the Mexican numbers.
But certainly we have seen that the overall removal numbers
have gone up. And I am sure that is what people in your
district are commenting on.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Chabot. The gentlelady's time has expired. Thank you.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Franks, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, let me start out by just quoting something
that I think is important. You know, we are talking about
immigration today. And some of the discussions center around
what some of us believe was the unconstitutional actions of the
President. But it is important to note that the President might
have many obligations, but one most paramount obligation is the
following sworn oath that he made: ``I do solemnly swear that I
will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United
States and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and
defend the Constitution of the United States.''
Article I, section 8, clause 4, of the Constitution
provides that Congress shall have power to ``establish a
uniform rule of naturalization.''
The Supreme Court has long found that this provision of the
Constitution grants Congress the plenary power over immigration
policy.
Yet, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the recent Executive
action by the President on illegal immigration is categorically
incompatible with the oath that he made when he laid his hands
on the Lincoln Bible 6 years ago.
And I obviously am concerned, like many of us, on the
immigration policy. But a greater concern here is the critical
nature that this Committee and this President has to maintain
our oath to the Constitution. And I believe that the
President's actions fundamentally abrogate his oath. And I
believe it is important for us to consider that. And I wanted
to put that on the record.
Now, Mr. Chairman, if I could turn to the panel.
Sheriff Babeu, let me just in total openness here tell the
rest of the folks here, you and I are good friends. And I have
a great deal of respect for you. And your credibility on this
issue is unimpeachable.
So I ask you, do you think that the new policies
implemented by the Obama administration serve as an adequate
deterrence or perhaps an invitation to those who seek to enter
our country illegally? And do you think these policies--what
kind of message do they send to criminal aliens as to the
consequences of their conduct?
Sheriff Babeu. Congressman Franks, through the Chair, one,
we all appreciate you. Even though you are not one of the
Congressman in our county, we love you just the same.
Clearly this acts as an incentive that if, not just the
fact that it is--we keep hearing 5 million. This document by
Jeh Johnson includes, whatever that number of illegals here
from January 1st of 2014, includes all of them. So this is
where that deferred action is far larger than this 5 million
figure that we simply keep hearing about. That will act as an
incentive.
The other thing we are seeing--everybody says these numbers
are down. Yes, in fact, they are.
And Janet Napolitano, when she was the Secretary, was at a
press conference in our State one time and the media came
around, Well, Sheriff, how do you refute that crime is down all
along the border? I said crime is down all cross America and
all the violent crime statistics.
And the fact that we forget that our economy, everybody has
talked about a recession. There are communities in my county
that had 21 percent plus unemployment.
And so imagine what is going to happen now that we had 1986
with Simpson-Mazzoli Act, and now with 11 million plus
illegals. There is a third wave that is coming if we don't
secure the border. So that should be the alarm that is sounded
now.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, sir. I appreciate your good work.
And, Professor Ting, if I could pass a question to you,
sir. The Committee has received reports that the Mexican drug
cartel members are abusing the credible fear process to bypass
regular immigration checks in order to get into the country.
And that has been confirmed in meetings with staff, that there
are internal documents making these claims.
And I wonder if you could expand on that and tell us why
you think that is happening and what the implications are.
Mr. Ting. Well, I think all you have to do is look at the
approval rate for the credible fear questions that are being
asked at the border to see that it is almost a green light for
people that want to make a credible fear claim at the border.
And then they get put in the line to await a hearing date
before an immigration judge where they can make their asylum
claim.
The lines are growing. The system is under attack just from
the sheer numbers of people coming across and making credible
fear claims. You know, people are qualifying for work
authorization because they are in line for so long. How are
they supposed to support themselves while they are waiting for
their hearing?
And, you know, I am going off track here, but the people
who are most adversely affected by all this illegal immigration
qualifying for work authorization are legal immigrants, the
people that just got here and who are legally entitled to work
here. And they are being forced to compete with illegal
immigrants, and so it is the less-educated, less-skilled
segment of our workforce that is most suffering from this
competition from illegal immigration.
And credible fear is just part of it. As I have testified,
it was never intended to be used the way that it is being used
now, as a means of entry for people that don't meet the
threshold for asylum, but they can get through the credible
fear test and get into the United States. I don't think that
was ever the intent of Congress when they enacted credible fear
and put it in the statute. And I am hopeful that someday you
will take it out.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Ting, I think credible fear claims are there so
that we don't send people back to violence, right? Credible
fear claims are available so people don't go back to a
situation where they could be killed. So I would disagree with
the suggestion that the credible fear claim be taken out of
statute, thereby making the decision that it is appropriate for
us to remove a possible step that can save someone's life.
But let me get to my comments that I wanted to make. I
spent some time this morning thinking about how it is that we
got here. And it seems to me that the debate over immigration
reform has regressed and it has done so rapidly. How did a
Congress that was on the cusp of fixing our broken immigration
system end up back at square one?
In 2013, the Senate included in its comprehensive
immigration reform bill portions of the McCaul border security
legislation which was deemed unworkable and unrealistic on its
own. Let's be honest, in 2015, the McCaul border security bill
on its own remains just as unworkable and unrealistic. And
instead of uniting behind comprehensive immigration reform,
we're once again dividing among party lines and splitting into
factions with separate agendas.
Democrats are more than willing to accept increased
spending of the border within the context of broader
immigration reform. We just believe that the status quo is
unworkable. We spend more money on border security than we do
on any other Federal law enforcement priority, and we still
have 11 million undocumented immigrants here. Instead of
treating them like criminals, Democrats believe reform must
invite them to come out of the shadows, pay a penalty, pay
their taxes, and maybe--just maybe--someday get the chance to
apply for citizenship.
We also share the commitment of our Republican colleagues
to reform our visa programs, respond to the needs of businesses
that rely on high-skilled technology workers, and low-skilled
guest workers. Likewise, Democrats and Republicans who share
the priorities of the faith community want an immigration
system that puts families first. So that is the issue I would
like to bring up today with our panel, how we treat families.
Our Nation has a long history of providing protection to
people fleeing violence, as I referred to earlier. People
fleeing religious persecution, political censorship, and
oppression. But today we treat most of those seeking asylum as
criminals. Upon arriving here, they are held in facilities that
are for civil detention in name only. The reality is that most
are just sections of private prisons where we keep hardened
criminals.
Indeed, an April 2013 report by the United States
Commission on International Religious Freedom determined that
nearly 84 percent of the 33,400 detention beds maintained by
ICE were actually prisons, not civil detention sites. Refugees
held in these jail-like detention facilities have their
movements, their privacy, and their personal freedom
restricted. And when we treat refugees as criminals, we don't
sound like the United States of America, the country that is
supposed to lead the world with its values for human rights,
for justice, and for fairness.
The purpose of detention is to ensure the people show up in
court. Today many of them are mothers with young children
fleeing extreme transnational gang violence in Central America.
We don't need to lock them up in prison or immediately deport
them. They have no reason to flee immigration court. Indeed,
returning families with young children to their home countries
without a review of their asylum claim could be a life or death
situation.
We ought to be reviewing their claims for asylum, making
efforts to resettle them, and make them feel at home in our
communities as quickly as possible. We should embrace far less
costly, and far more human and humane alternatives to
detention. Detention costs more than $2 billion a year. This is
a daily cost of $159 per day, per detainee. Alternatives to
detention--including release on bond, supervised released, and
community-based programs--cost between 70 cents and $17 per
person per day.
But Congress has imposed on law enforcement a quota on how
many people must be held in detention facilities every day.
Immigration and customs officials, like all officers of law,
should have the discretion to make their decisions based on
facts, not some quota imposed by politicians. Welcoming
refugees seeking safety and security in our country by placing
them in detention is inconsistent with our Nation's values for
respect and humanity. Our debate on immigration reform needs to
reflect our moral leadership.
And so I would ask, Dr. Rosenblum, that when you talk about
judicial capacity and a need to adjudicate cases, we are
spending so much money following the detention bed mandate.
What would it cost for us to fully address this shortfall to
make sure that cases could be quickly adjudicated, something
that I think everybody would agree is necessary?
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you. I wish that I could give you an
exact number, and I can get back to you with that. What I can
tell you is that since 9/11, while we have tripled our spending
on ICE and CBP on enforcement, we have only increased our
immigration judges by about 70 percent. So the reason that the
backlogs are getting longer and longer is that we have
systemically underfunded immigration judges, and we are putting
more and more people into the system, but there is not the
capacity for them to flow through it.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank the witnesses for being here.
I heard testimony earlier that about 50 percent of those
illegally here after being released without being deported
commit crimes against other Americans. I know as a judge, when
I was considering bail or bond, that was a primary
consideration, the likelihood of them returning and the public
safety. I can't imagine releasing somebody on a makeable job if
both sides agree the defendant had a 50 percent chance of re-
offending, committing a further crime if I let him go. That is
just unconscionable.
We talk about the children and the women and the people
across America and protection of families. My gosh, we are
releasing criminals to go after them? That is outrageous.
Well, and then also, I hear, Sheriff, you say 30 to 50
criminals per day are being released in your county alone by a
CIS. That is the very people the President has called bad
actors and yet his policies are responsible for letting them go
upon the families of America.
Well, let me just say, I am very concerned about the way
the money is being spent. And, by the way, for those that are
not familiar, we had a lot of crimes being committed in the
U.S. and in my State in the 1980's, so America reacted, Texas
reacted. We elected criminal judges, tough prosecutors, and we
are reaping the benefits of people who were law-enforcement-
minded going into the sheriffs jobs, prosecutors jobs, judges
jobs. And we will be able to ride that for a while before
people with bleeding hearts let the criminals go, and then
people eventually will have another wave while they react when
the crimes go up. I know that that is just a cycle, but right
now we are in a cycle of letting criminals go.
And the criminal law in America is something that concerns
me at the Federal level because of something called the
Antideficiency Act. I am not sure if the witnesses are familiar
with that, but the law is very clear: If Congress appropriates
money for one purpose, it is not to be used for another purpose
unless proper steps are utilized. And so I know that we have
heard from the news, there was a facility built over in Crystal
City for awarding these amnesty work permits.
Some of us are wondering where that money came from. You
know, we hear clamoring that they need more money, but where
did that money come from? Because I know Congress certainly was
not notified that they were shifting funds from one
appropriated purpose to Crystal City and to awarding these 5
million or so work permits that basically amount to amnesty.
Do any of the witnesses know where that money came from?
Ms. Vaughan. I think that is something that Congress should
be asking. Because USCIS, the agency that is responsible for
issuing these benefits, has not collected a single dime in fees
from any future applicants for the new deferred action work
permit program. So it certainly appears that they have perhaps
been hoarding money skimmed from the fees paid by legal
immigrants. USCIS is funded by fees paid by legal immigrants
and their sponsors for a service that they get. And these fees
are carefully----
Mr. Gohmert. Right. And that creates another problem
because we have seen reports that people--my office is
helping--that came here legally as immigrants we welcome,
trying to get a spouse in. They have paid higher fees to try to
expedite those, and it turns out this Administration is
illegally moving that money over to give priority to people
that came in illegally, thus putting people that are trying to
do the legal immigration process a terrible disservice by
putting them at the back of the line.
So I know, Ms. Vaughan, you are in the business of
investigating these, and I hope you will assist us.
Professor Ting, are you familiar with Antideficiency Act
and how it might be brought to bear on this situation?
Mr. Ting. I am not.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, I would encourage you as a law
professor, if you would, to look at that.
And also, just in finishing, Congress has the power even
after the Supreme Court decision in the Arizona case to ask for
help and appropriate money. Sheriff, would you have any problem
if we block granted money from CIS to local law enforcement to
get local law enforcement to help do the job that CIS is not
being allowed to do?
Sheriff Babeu. No problem whatsoever.
Mr. Gohmert. That is what I thought. Thank you very much.
Mr. Goodlatte. Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Rosenblum, thank you for coming and I will let
President Fos know that you are representing him very well
here.
Professor Ting, you in your suggestions, you said that
maybe we should remove asylum completely and go to the
withholding of removal and at the same time educate our Border
Patrol officers so that they can make that determination. I am
sure you know that asylum and withholding of removal have two
different legal standards. So withholding of removal is a more-
likely-than-not or 50-percent-plus-one standard, and asylum is
more likely than not, which the courts define as reasonable. So
they are probably in the 40 to 50 percent range.
If we go to what you are suggesting, withholding of
removal, then people who are in that very reasonable
possibility would be sent back to the danger that is very
reasonable that they would encounter. Is that what we are
trying to do? I mean, does your suggestion hinge on the
standard or the Border Patrol agent executing it or making the
evaluation?
Mr. Ting. Well, I am saying the reality on asylum has
changed. I think the asylum statute was a worthy and noble
effort on the part of the Congress back in 1980, when it was
added to our immigration law. But we got along without it
before 1980, and we fulfilled our commitment under the
Convention for the Protection of Refugees before 1980, and we
did it through withholding of removal. And I think we could do
it again.
I think there are many differences between the two
statutes. I think asylum offers more benefits. I think some of
those benefits could be added to withholding of removal, but I
certainly noted in my testimony that there is a different
burden of proof that attaches. I am concerned about asylum
fraud, which I think is widespread, and I have testified to a
Subcommittee of this Committee----
Mr. Richmond. If I can, I don't mean to interrupt you but I
have to. Let me ask you about, do you have any concern with the
new time and resources that would be dedicated by those agents
to evaluating the claim as opposed to patrolling the border?
Mr. Ting. I am very concerned about expenditure of
resources, and I have listened with attention to the concerns
of the Committee on the high expenditures that go into
immigration enforcement. But the easiest way to cut
expenditures would be just to repeal all immigration laws and
say everyone in the world could come to the United States. That
would cut expenditures on immigration enforcement. So if you
want to cut it to the bone, just repeal all the immigration
laws.
If you are going to enforce a limitation, someone has got
to do this. The worst of all possible worlds is to keep the
limitation on the books, keep spending the money but not
enforce the limits. That, to me, is the worst possible
possibility.
Mr. Richmond. Sheriff Babeu, let me ask you a question, and
I pulled up an article where you were speaking at a
neighborhood watch meeting--and this is not a gotcha moment--
where you said that many of the ICE detainees are held at
private facilities which are contracted to house criminal
illegals. ICE reportedly plans to reduce their available beds
from 34,000 to 25,700.
But what is important is what you characterized it as, and
here, my interpretation is you characterized this as the
largest prison break attributed to the Administration. But here
you call it the largest pardon, due to mass budget cuts, which
I would necessarily tend to agree with. So, as you characterize
it, is it the Administration, or is it just the pure
dysfunction in Washington not getting a comprehensive
immigration bill and some on spending? So which would it be, in
your opinion?
Sheriff Babeu. Through the Chair, Congressman, at that
time, when all that was going on was during the sequester.
Mr. Richmond. Right.
Sheriff Babeu. And so that was probably the first turn up
the volume of you want to feel pain--2,228 at that time----
Mr. Richmond. Correct.
Sheriff Babeu [continuing]. And it was reported that 5,000
to 10,000 were said to be scheduled for release, and it was
halted because it became public knowledge. So I would say it is
not just the dysfunction; it is everybody was a part at one
time. And it is not Congress' decision to release those people.
It certainly wasn't mine. It was this Administration's
decision----
Mr. Richmond. But we did in that sequester. That was
Congress who did sequester.
Let me ask you one final question.
Sheriff Babeu. Yes.
Mr. Richmond. If your dispatchers or you received a call,
and you have three officers on duty and the call said, I have
an active shooter, I have a bank robbery, and a hostage
situation--three different situations. I have a car accident,
and I have some other trivial--and shoplifting. If you had
three officers, where would you assign them in terms of triage
and the importance, and as the President setting up the
categories of deportation, didn't he do the same thing?
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentleman has expired, but
the witness will be permitted to answer the question.
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back.
Sheriff Babeu. Certainly, in local law enforcement county,
our priority one calls, which is a threat to somebody's life or
property secondary would be the active shooter and the armed
robbery, which we have had those--bank robberies--in our
county. But here is the point, the highest priority is these
now 24,000 that are in these authorized beds that we have all
agreed that whether they have committed multiple misdemeanors
or serious violent felony offenses and convictions, that these
people are the bad actors.
Those people must be returned to whatever country they come
from. And that is the problem that most in America are having
heartburn over, certainly us in law enforcement, because they
are being released. And we don't know where they are going and
what their names are. And I have asked for that information
numerous times under Freedom of Information. It has been denied
to me as a sheriff for 2 years.
If you ask, Congressman, even though you are from
Louisiana, who is in my jail and what charges they are, you
will get it that quick. And that is because I am compelled to
provide that information, yet here I am the sheriff, and they
won't give me this information in my own county.
Mr. Goodlatte. Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman.
Dr. Rosenblum, if you would, please, do you believe that we
should secure the borders before we start talking about any
immigration reform? Because I believe that whenever we are
talking about the borders aren't secured, we are just going to
have an onslaught of people. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Rosenblum. I believe that it will be much easier for
DHS to secure the borders more effectively and at a lower cost
if it is combined with visa reform.
Mr. Marino. Talking about individuals that may be here
legally but their visas have expired for some reason or
another.
Mr. Rosenblum. Visa over-stayers. I am not sure I
understand the question, sir.
Mr. Marino. Are you referring to visa over-stayers?
Mr. Rosenblum. My argument is that a big part of why we
have struggled so much to secure the border is that the demand
for immigration within the U.S., employers and families who
want to bring people here, and within extending regions, Mexico
and Central America, is much greater than what our laws
currently allow.
Mr. Marino. But you do agree that we need to secure the
borders?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Marino. All right. Good. That is a start.
And I don't like this term ``comprehensive.'' What does
comprehensive mean? This is so complicated that this cannot be
done in one fell swoop.
I am going to quote some figures. I see you have some
really--I have been reading this--not here, but also before you
got here--information concerning people that were sent back,
individuals, under what circumstances they were sent back. But
first of all, do you agree with me that--and I am sure you have
read this in the media--that the only part of DHS that we do
not want to fund is amnesty for illegals. Are you clearly aware
of that?
Mr. Rosenblum. That Congress has not funded amnesty for----
Mr. Marino. Yes.
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Marino. Okay. And you are clearly aware that it is the
up to the President if he wants to shut down the entire DHS
because he can't have his way on illegal immigrants, correct?
It is not a tough one, professor. You are a Ph.D., okay.
Mr. Rosenblum. I mean, Congress and the executive branch
negotiate over legislation, so it would sort of take two to
tango on that, I think, sir.
Mr. Marino. Oh, two to tango. But if you are in that
position--let me put you in that position--would you shut down
all of DHS because you don't get one small part?
Mr. Rosenblum. Um----
Mr. Marino. I think you have answered it.
Okay. Let me give you some stats that I got from
PolitiFact, on PunditFact, from Dobbs Report, from Washington
Times, from Breitbart, and actually, U.S. Customs had a report
that came out that I went back to and they were asking me,
where did you get that document. But in 2008, turnaways at the
border were about 36 percent of the overall figures that this
Administration factored in.
Now, it is my understanding, previous Administrations--and
I have done work on this--have not counted turnaways at the
border as sending people back. And that has increased to 64
percent in 2013. So it is very clear that the Administration is
fudging the figures by adding turnaways at the border. Do you
agree with that?
Mr. Rosenblum. The research that I have seen from the GAO,
the data on turnbacks and gotaways is in a GAO report that came
out in December 2012, and that report starts counting turnbacks
in 2006. So it was the previous Administration. But I agree
with you----
Mr. Marino. I am not disputing what previous
Administrations should have done and didn't do and may have as
far as figures are concerned. But you agree with me that these
figures that the Administration is putting out include
turnaways at the border--not people here, not in this country
that they are sending back.
Mr. Rosenblum. You are talking about their deportation
numbers?
Mr. Marino. Yes.
Mr. Rosenblum. So I believe that every Administration
counts people who are put into removal at ports of entry as
removals. What has changed under this Administration is----
Mr. Marino. But I am talking about once they set foot on
U.S. soil. And it is clearly----
Mr. Rosenblum. They are apprehended on U.S. soil and then
deported.
Mr. Marino. Yeah. But this Administration is using people
when they get to the border, when they get to that guard and
they are sending them back, they don't get a chance to get into
the United States, those figures are factored in there.
Mr. Rosenblum. When people are apprehended at the border
and put into expedited removal, for example, those were
definitely counted removals. That was previously true and still
true.
Mr. Marino. Okay, good.
Mr. Rosenblum. I agree with you on----
Mr. Marino. So you agree with me on several matters here,
and we need reform.
Do you agree with me on this? My colleagues on the other
side of the aisle for 2 years, they had the White House, they
had the Senate, and they had the House; they did nothing on
comprehensive immigration reform. And I am going to be the
first to stand up and say neither did any other previous
Administration. And it is at a point now where it is desperate
from a multitude of areas, and you and I would agree on some
and not the others.
How about the workforce? Can you address some issues on the
workforce, pursuant to--right now there are between 800,000 and
1 million people that are not looking for work. Those figures
aren't even in the unemployment numbers. And the reason why the
unemployment numbers, in part, are coming down, is because
those people stopped looking for work. You agree with me on
that?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Marino. And I will yield back, then.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Jeffries,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for their presence here today.
Sheriff Babeu, are you familiar with a publication call the
Arizona Daily Star?
Sheriff Babeu. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries. Is that a credible news organization?
Sheriff Babeu. I don't decide who is credible and who is
not. I know that most of the news--I don't know if they print
in paper or are online, but I have seen them numerous times as
being credible.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Thank you.
Now, 5 years ago, you appeared on a radio program entitled
Political Cesspool, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. Yes. That was addressed by, I believe, Mr.
Johnson earlier.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. I just want to make sure the record is
clear. Now, that program was hosted by James Edwards and Eddie
Miller, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. I am not sure who it was hosted by.
Mr. Jeffries. You don't recall who it was hosted by?
Sheriff Babeu. I don't. There was a show that I believe it
was Ms. Jackson Lee who raised the issue earlier.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now, the Political Cesspool program has
been recognized by both the Southern Poverty Law Center and the
Anti-Defamation League as a form for hosting White
supremacists, anti-Semites, and other hate mongering, correct?
Sheriff Babeu. From my understanding that once we became
aware of any of their past comments, we disavowed who they are,
what they stand for. They didn't say any of that on the show.
We were talking about immigration, as we do quite often outside
the State, via telephone. So there is no relationship. This was
one contact that we immediately disavowed any association with
or any of their espoused views or reported espoused views.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you for that response. And I appreciate
the fact that--I do believe in good faith--you have disavowed
the views that were brought to your attention, according to
your testimony after appearing on the program. But I just want
to make sure that the record is clear.
And, Mr. Chairperson, I ask unanimous consent that we enter
into the record an article from the Arizona Daily Star, dated
July 20, 2010.
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, it will be made a part of
the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. And that article, Sheriff, states that
James Edwards, who hosted the interview, along the Eddy Miller,
said that Miller spoke with you and his spokesman, your
spokesperson, multiple times before the interview.
And then it goes on to quote Mr. Edwards and says: ``For
Sheriff Babeu to change his mind and now regret coming on our
show for whatever reason is his right. For him to act as though
he had no idea of our ideology is a lie,'' Edwards said in a
written statement on the show's Web site. That is Mr. Edwards'
representation of what took place in advance of your appearance
on the show.
If I could turn to Professor Ting, every President since
Eisenhower has taken Executive action to provide some form of
immigration relief, correct?
Mr. Ting. Other presidents have taken
Executive action in immigration, but I believe all of those
cases are distinguishable from the Executive action that
President Obama has taken on a variety of reasons, not least of
which is a the sheer number involved.
Mr. Jeffries. To be precise, it has happened 39 times since
the 1950's, correct?
Mr. Ting. I am not sure of the exact number. I am aware
that there are precedents that are cited by President Obama's
Office of Legal Counsel in their report. I have read their
report. I think all their examples are distinguishable.
Mr. Jeffries. Are you aware that President Reagan and
President Bush did it in connection with the family fairness
policy after the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act was
passed by Congress?
Mr. Ting. I have specifically addressed the family fairness
example in my written testimony, and I explain in my written
testimony why that is distinguishable from what President Obama
is trying to do.
Mr. Jeffries. Right. Now, Congress has never given the
President the resources necessary to deport all 11 million
undocumented immigrants, correct?
Mr. Ting. There is never enough resources for any agency in
this government that I am aware of.
Mr. Jeffries. That is just a yes or no question.
Okay. So I take it that the answer is no.
In fact, $8.5 billion is allocated in this particular
appropriations bill that we will be considering. In order to
deport all 11 million undocumented immigrants, it would take
$285 billion. And so my question to you is if Congress has not
given the President the capacity to deport all 11 million
undocumented immigrants, doesn't the Administration have the
inherent authority to decide that it is going to prioritize
deportations of felons over deportations of families?
Mr. Ting. Congressman, with respect, I think this notion
that the only alternative is to deport 11 million illegal
aliens is a straw man that is put out there. I mean, what is at
issue and what I think that Congress needs to debate is whether
the policies of this Administration encourage further illegal
immigration into the United States or not. That is what is at
stake.
I will concede, you will never get the amount of illegal
immigration down to zero. That will never happen. You will
never get the number of illegal immigrants down to zero. But
you have to set a policy that affects the cost-benefit analysis
of people wanting to come to the United States illegally as to
whether you tip them toward not coming and violating our law
and overwhelming our system, or whether you tip them in favor.
Yeah, let's get the heck in there and see what benefits come
our way. That is what is at stake. It is not a question of,
well, either deport 11 million people or don't. That, I agree
with you, is never going to happen.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Time of the gentleman has expired.
I want to--since a document was made a part of the record
that casts aspersion on the character of the sheriff--I want to
give Sheriff Babeu an opportunity to respond if he chooses to.
Sheriff Babeu. Yes, Mr. Chairman, and Congressman, I meet
and probably take as many photos with individuals as you do or
other members of this panel. It never means that if I talk to
somebody that I all the sudden assume their positions or their
beliefs or their entire history. Even though I am in law
enforcement, I didn't do a criminal history on you prior to
talking with you. And it certainly doesn't mean that I
subscribe to your beliefs or political views.
Mr. Goodlatte. Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Jordan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the Chairman.
Professor Ting, I want to go to, 22 times the President
said he couldn't do what he turned around and did. Two of those
were while he was candidate Obama. The other 20 were while he
was President Obama. And I want to just take one of those
statements and kind of walk through it. In fact, the two that
he made while he was candidate may have had an impact on your
decision to vote for him. I think you indicated to one of the
Members on the other side of the aisle that you voted for
President Obama, where he was talking about adhering to the
Constitution, recognizing the separation of powers and the
proper role of each branch of government.
But I want to just focus on one of these statements and
kind of walk you through it and show where you agree with
President Obama: There are those who have argued passionately
that we should simply provide those who are here illegally with
legal status or at least ignore the laws on the books and put
an end to deportation until we have better laws. I believe such
an indiscriminate approach would be both unwise and unfair.
You would agree with that, wouldn't you, Professor, to
ignore the laws and end deportation would be unwise and unfair?
Mr. Ting. I am aware of the 22 examples that have oft been
cited, and I think the President was right at the time that he
said those things, and I think he is wrong to have overridden
his better judgment in the past.
Mr. Jordan. He made this statement in July of 2010. And so
I guess my simple question is, it is unfair and unwise to not
follow the law; you would agree?
Mr. Ting. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. It goes on further. It would suggest to those
thinking about coming here illegally that there would be no
repercussions for such a decision and this could lead to a
surge in more illegal immigration. If we don't follow the law,
if we don't deport, if we don't do what the law says, you, in
fact, could have a surge in illegal immigration, correct?
Mr. Ting. Absolutely. And I think----
Mr. Jordan. And that is exactly what we have seen; is that
correct?
Mr. Ting. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Jordan. All right. He finishes with this: Ultimately,
our Nation, like all nations--oh--and it would also ignore the
millions of people around the world who are waiting in line to
come here legally.
You agree too that if we don't follow the law and end
deportation, it hurts those who are doing it the right way and
could hinder and prolong their ability to follow the law and
become a legal citizen of this great country. Would you agree
with that, professor?
Mr. Ting. I absolutely agree, and we should not forget that
there are qualified legal immigrants that have been waiting in
line in excess of 20 years for their chance to immigrate to
this country legally. So when we are dealing with how we should
handle illegal immigrants, we should not forget----
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Mr. Ting [continuing]. Those people standing in line trying
to do it the right way.
Mr. Jordan. No kidding. No kidding.
Okay. And then: Ultimately, our Nation, like all nations,
has the right and obligation to control its borders, set laws
for residency and citizenship. And no matter how decent they
are, no matter those who broke the law should be held
accountable.
You would agree that the rule of law is important and those
who broke the law should be held accountable, wouldn't you,
Professor?
Mr. Ting. Yes, of course.
Mr. Jordan. And you would agree that a sovereign nation has
a right to control its border and actually set those laws?
Mr. Ting. Absolutely.
Mr. Jordan. And that people break them, they should be held
accountable.
So here is the question: We have a bill that comes due or a
funding bill that expires in 24 days, and in that legislation,
we have said and we have done exactly what the President said
back when you probably decided you were going to vote for him,
back in July of 2010. We got a bill that is coming due, and it
is real simple. We say in that bill we are going to fund and
take care of Department of Homeland Security, but we are not
going to allow the people's money, the American taxpayer money,
to be used to violate everything the President said in that
statement and to allow people to ignore the law and stay here
and actually have benefits conferred on them.
Would you agree with that legislation we passed out of the
House, Professor?
Mr. Ting. Yes. I think, frankly, Congressman, if you didn't
do that, a lot of Americans would wonder why you didn't do
that--why you didn't fund all the parts of DHS except for the
part that you object to. That is what should be done, and then
you should enter into negotiations with the President as to----
Mr. Jordan. In his 22 statements where the President cited
separation of powers, Constitution, the role of the various
branches of government, the one power that the legislative
branch has is the power to control the purse, the power of
spending the people's--the taxing and spending authority,
correct?
Mr. Ting. Absolutely.
Mr. Jordan. And we should stand firm, particularly in the
matter of this substance--where it is about the rule of law, it
is about the Constitution, it is about the sovereign right of a
nation to control its border, and it is about treating legal
immigrants in a fair and compassionate way--we should stand
firm on the legislation we passed. Would you agree, Professor?
Mr. Ting. I do.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy [presiding]. Thank the gentleman from Ohio.
They have called votes, but I am going to try to get in the
gentleman in from Rhode Island, if he is amenable to that.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Cicilline from Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
barely a month ago when this Congress began, the majority
pledged to put aside petty and purely political disagreements,
and we promised to Congress that we would work constructively
together on behalf of the American people, and yet today we
find ourselves litigating the same tired and defeating
arguments from years passed.
The Obama administration has made securing our borders a
top-line priority, spending its limited enforcement resources
on deporting felons, not families. But even as my esteemed
colleagues across the aisle argue that this Administration is
not serious about enforcement, they are refusing to fund the
Department of Homeland Security for a second time in the last
15 months.
Until my friends on the other side of the aisle start to
treat immigration reform as something more than a political
talking point, we are going to be unable to achieve
substantive, lasting progress on this issue.
And this hearing began with the premise that the lack of
enforcement is the challenge. And I want to thank Dr. Rosenblum
for sharing the facts, which no objective observer could
conclude that that statement is true; in fact, that this is
sort of unprecedented enforcement on virtually every measure. I
want to make two quick points and ask one question.
Sheriff Babeu, you said, referring to this memorandum of
Secretary Johnson, I think you have made the claim that it
directed the Department of Homeland Security not to take action
on any of the 11 million people in the United States and would
result in 20 million additional people being allowed to remain
here. You pointed to page 4(c). Just to be clear, this
memorandum says emphatically, Our enforcement and removal
policy should continue to prioritize threats to national
security, public safety, and border security.
And what you refer to in 4(c) is actually one of the
priorities for deportation and removal. So the note--there is
no claim in here whatsoever that supports the claim you made.
And I ask that this article, ``Statistics Don't Support
Pinal Sheriff Babeu's Statement on Trafficking,'' which is from
the Arizona Republic, February 3, 2015, which goes through and
has a series of analyses done on the claims that you make and
finds that, in fact, they are not supported by evidence, I
would ask unanimous consent that be made part of this record.
Second, I would just want to follow up on the gentlelady's
question from Texas in which you gave an alternate explanation
about your involvement in a controversy involving a school bus
filled with children. And I am quoting now from the Arizona--in
fact, from The Republic, an editorial in which they say, and I
quote, Hoping to orchestrate Arizona's own version of the
raucous anti-immigrant protest at Murrieta, California, that
you instead orchestrated a gauntlet of terror for 40 or 60 kids
en route to a day of ping pong and basketball at YMCA Triangle
Y Camp. But wait, Babeu's manipulative grandstanding is worse
than you may think. As dozens of protesters rolled up onto the
scene on the Mt. Lemmon highway, Babeu had the astonishing
temerity to declare he was there to serve as ``peacemaker.''
Think of the pyromaniac who tortures his own house, then throws
himself onto the mercy of the court as a homeless waif.
According to one protester organizer, Babeu told her, ``The
only way to stop this was for our community and the area to
organize.''
This is an editorial entitled `` `Sheriff Showboat' Babeu
Has Disgraced the Office.'' I ask that that be made part of the
record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

__________
Mr. Cicilline. And now I turn finally to Professor Ting,
who says that immigration is bad for American workers and jobs.
The American Enterprise Institute found that temporary foreign
workers, both skilled and unskilled, actually boost U.S.
employment. The same analysis found that millions of
unauthorized workers and the priorities of family reunification
would help, that there was no evidence, excuse me, that
foreign-born workers would hurt the employment rate of U.S.
workers. And, in fact, two reports, one by the Congressional
Budget Office, found that the gross domestic product would grow
by 5.4 percent, $1.4 trillion, and wages would be increased by
.5 percent for the entire labor force by 2033. In addition to
that, there is a report from the President's Council of
Economic Advisers that concludes that both--that average wages
for all workers will increase as a result of the Executive
action. I ask unanimous consent that both of those reports be
included in the record.
And I would ask you, Dr. Rosenblum, is Professor Ting right
that comprehensive immigration reform is bad for workers,
American workers, and bad for American wages?
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you. Well, we have had a lot of
discussion about the economics of immigration. There are no
economists on this panel. But when you read the economics
literature, the academic economics literature, there is a
pretty broad consensus that immigration boosts overall GDP,
that it raises wages for the average U.S. worker. It raises
wages most for middle-class and high-wage workers.
And I agree with Professor Ting that the one group that may
compete a little bit with new immigrants are previous
immigrants. But on that, economists are pretty broadly in
agreement that immigration is good for the U.S. economy across
a number of different indicators.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy [presiding]. All right. The gentleman yields
back. We have a vote series, and we will----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would like to enter a number of
documents into the record, please. I would like to ask
unanimous consent to enter these documents.
Mr. Gowdy. As expeditiously as you can so we don't miss
votes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
I would like to enter into the record data from the Customs
and Border Protection indicating that apprehensions of
unaccompanied children have gone down 38 percent in 2015 from
the same time last year; and for family units, gone down in
2015, fiscal year 2015, from 2014, 12 percent. I ask unanimous
consent to submit that document into the record.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would additionally like to submit into
the record documentation from the Executive Office of
Immigration Review indicating that in the time period of July
18, 2014, and December 23, unaccompanied children had a 14
percent absence rate, meaning----
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, thank you.
And then a document that indicates that adults had an
absence rate of 23 percent, showing that they do appear at
immigration hearings.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And lastly, the EOI, the data from
Executive Office of Immigration Reviews, the agency that
conducts immigration hearings, that the data that they are
collecting has started in the point of July 18, 2014.
Mr. Goowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection, the documents will be
admitted into the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

__________

__________

__________
Mr. Gowdy. To our witnesses, we apologize for the vote
series. We are coming back, and we are coming back as quickly
as we can right after the vote series.
With that, we will temporarily be in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gowdy [presiding]. The Committee is back in order.
And the Chair would recognize the gentleman from Texas,
former United States Attorney, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a former Federal prosecutor who has exercised
prosecutorial discretion in charging hundreds of Federal
immigration cases, I have enjoyed hearing the panel's diverse
thoughts on the adequacy and enforcement of our Nation's
immigration laws.
Dr. Rosenblum, I--Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back my
time.
Mr. Gowdy. The Chair will take your time and then yield my
time to you if you want to ask questions in my slot. So we will
do that.
And I would say this.
Professor Rosenblum, I was thinking on the way over to
votes that the gentleman from Georgia asked everyone on the
panel his or her political ideation except you. And I am not
going to ask you your political ideation for this reason:It is
of no consequence.
When you work, as the sheriff does, for a blindfolded woman
holding a set of scales, politics doesn't matter. I am very
disappointed that any of my colleagues would have asked. They
have the right to do it. I am not going to ask you about that.
What I am going to ask you--and I am sure you do. I am sure
you share with me an appreciation for members of law
enforcement at all levels, but particularly State and local,
who find themselves running toward danger so we don't have to
and they have to deal with bad actors so we don't have to and
they have to carry guns and wear bulletproof vests so we don't
have to.
And I guess, if the sheriff--if you all were to have a
moment after this hearing, I suppose that our sheriff today
would tell you the same thing that my sheriffs back home,
Sheriff Wright and Sheriff Loftis, would tell you, that one of
the hardest parts of being a local law enforcement is when you
have to sit down with the family members of crime victims.
If the victim lives, then you have that conversation with
the victim herself or himself. If the victim doesn't and you
find yourself talking to family members, invariably, the
question always comes back to why was that person out. If they
were out on bond when they committed the crime, they want to
know why was the person out. If the person should have been
deported and was not, they want to know why was the person
here.
So how would you help Sheriff Babeu or my sheriffs explain
to crime victims when the fact pattern is the person wasn't
supposed to be here anyway, committed a crime while they were
here, served their sentence and, rather than being deported,
were put back out into the public to commit another offense?
How would you explain that to crime victims?
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would not enjoy having those conversations. I am sure you
are right, that that is a terrible position to be in.
You know, on this whole question of convicted criminals
being released, I find that--I haven't studied those data like
Ms. Vaughan has, but I think we all can agree that a plain
reading of both the 2010 enforcement priorities and the 2014
enforcement priorities says that people who have been convicted
of serious crimes are the executive branch's top enforcement
priorities. So----
Mr. Gowdy. Do you consider domestic violence to be a
serious crime?
Mr. Rosenblum. I believe that domestic violence crime would
be in the top-priority category in both the 2010 and 2014.
Certainly in 2010 it was. I mean, I see your counsel shaking
her head. I may be wrong about 2014. It may be in the second
category in 2014.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, what I found surprising was the
comprehensive Senate immigration plan that so many of my
colleagues on the other side fell in love with. You can
actually be convicted of domestic violence and still remain on
the path to citizenship. I find that almost impossible to
believe.
Let me ask you this about law enforcement: Who investigates
most homicide cases in the United States?
Mr. Rosenblum. I am sure that is State and local police.
Mr. Gowdy. Who investigates most robbery cases?
Mr. Rosenblum. I am sure as well.
Mr. Gowdy. Who investigates most domestic violence cases?
Mr. Rosenblum. State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. Who investigates most adult sexual assault
cases?
Mr. Rosenblum. I am sure that is also State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. Who investigates most child sexual assault
cases?
Mr. Rosenblum. State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. Who patrols the interstate, even though it is
inherently interstate, and, therefore, impacts interstate
commerce? Who patrols that?
Mr. Rosenblum. That would also be State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. Who went door to door after the Boston bombing
along with the Bureau and the ATF?
Mr. Rosenblum. State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. Who provides security to the very same
colleagues who don't want and don't trust local law enforcement
to enforce our immigration laws? Who provides security for them
when they are back in their district having their town halls
and their public events?
Mr. Rosenblum. State and locals.
Mr. Gowdy. So if you trust them to do all of that, why
can't you trust them to do immigration cases?
Mr. Rosenblum. I think that that is an issue that is
Congress' to decide.
Mr. Gowdy. I am asking you.
Would you support the SAFE Act, which allows State and
local law enforcement to assist Federal law enforcement in
enforcing our immigration laws?
You are their witness. I assume they brought you for a
reason.
Mr. Rosenblum. I would say that, while I agree with you
that State and locals play a role, obviously, in all of those
law enforcement functions, that there are certain unique things
about immigration policy----
Mr. Gowdy. Such as?
Mr. Rosenblum. Such as that it is a transnational issue
that has both domestic and international implications.
Mr. Gowdy. Counterfeiting does, too.
Mr. Rosenblum. And so, with an example like counterfeiting,
the Federal Government sets the parameters for cooperation
between the Feds and the locals. And so what Congress has
done----
Mr. Gowdy. So you would support State and local working
with the Feds and immigration?
Mr. Rosenblum. Well, what Congress has done is to create
the 287(g) mechanism where the Feds----
Mr. Gowdy. All we are trying to do is canonize that in the
SAFE Act.
So you would support that?
Mr. Rosenblum. I will confess that I am not sure exactly
how the SAFE Act would differ from 287(g). 287(g) creates a
mechanism where the Federal Government stipulates certain ways
in which States and locals are allowed to cooperate.
So that seems to me to be something that DHS has, for the
most part, chosen not to take advantage of because they judge
that it doesn't serve their interests in how they want to
manage immigration enforcement.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I am almost out of time and then I am
going to either go to the gentleman from Texas or Florida or
Idaho.
One thing that has vexed me in the time that I have been in
Congress--and perhaps you can help me--is this notion of
sanctuary cities where you trust localities to not enforce
Federal law, but, yet, you don't trust that same locality to
actually enforce Federal law.
Can you help me reconcile how you can support the existence
of sanctuary cities but, at the same time, not support those
very same local law enforcement officers participating in
enforcement?
Mr. Rosenblum. I think the way I would answer that is that
certain States and localities, counties and cities have
determined that their cooperation with DHS doesn't serve their
constituents' interest because it creates a wedge between----
Mr. Gowdy. What do they do with the supremacy clause?
Mr. Rosenblum. They have chosen to limit the way they
interact and to not honor those voluntary detainer requests
because they----
Mr. Gowdy. That sounds like nullification to me. And I am
from a State with a little experience in that.
Mr. Rosenblum. That is true.
So this is not an area where I have legal expertise. But I
would say that, you know, the great majority of localities have
cooperated with ICE detainer requests.
Mr. Gowdy. I get that.
But some have not and they are heralded as sanctuary
cities, like that is some title to be aspired to. And I don't
know what your next Law Review article's going to be, but I
would love it if somebody could explain to me why you trust
local actors to decide not to enforce Federal law, but you
don't trust those same local actors to actually enforce Federal
law.
Mr. Rosenblum. Well, there is other jurisdictions that are
enforcing by that definition.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for yielding.
Dr. Rosenblum, earlier today I heard your testimony
essentially with respect to the Obama administration's
assertion that it is prosecuting felons, not families. You
supported that and essentially said that the statistics bear
out that there seems to be a focus on quality over quantity.
Did I hear that accurately?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Again, as a former Federal prosecutor,
I certainly agree with prioritizing and focusing on the worst
of the worst.
But would you agree with me that we can't do that and
forsake the rest of the prosecutions with respect to the
illegal population?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So in the hundreds of cases that I
have had the chance to prosecute in this area, I have had the
opportunity to work with Immigration and Customs Enforcement on
all of them. So I was struck by something that was said by
President Obama's former head of ICE last June, John Sandweg.
Do you know Mr. Sandweg?
Mr. Rosenblum. I know of him.
Mr. Ratcliffe. All right. Well, what he said was--in an
interview last June was--and I am quoting--"If you are a run-
of-the-mill immigrant here illegally, your odds of getting
deported are close to zero.''
Would you agree with that statement?
Mr. Rosenblum. The odds are very low for people who are in
the U.S. and have not been convicted of a crime and have not
previously been removed.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. And do you think that that is a proper
approach by this Administration?
Mr. Rosenblum. I think that it is a policy decision that
the Administration has made to prioritize the border,
criminals, reinstatements of removal, and ICE fugitives.
I think that, as a matter of setting priorities, those are
longstanding priorities. There is a long legislative history of
Congress also identifying those goals.
Certainly I think probably most people on the panel would
say, if we are going to pick the first four categories we
should go after, those would all be on the list. So perhaps
what we disagree about is how hard they should work also on
people who fall outside of those categories.
But I agree with the idea of prioritizing criminals,
border-crossers, reinstatements, and fugitives. I think that is
noncontroversial.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Well, I would agree with that.
But you agree with me that having close to zero percent
chance of being deported if you are in this country illegally
is not the standard that we should aspire to.
Mr. Rosenblum. I think that a close-to-zero chance is
certainly less of a deterrent than a larger chance.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman from Texas.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Idaho, Mr.
Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Ting, somebody earlier asked you about the
difference between the Family Fairness Act and the current
actions of this President, but they didn't give you an
opportunity to really explain that.
Mr. Ting. Yes. I noticed that, too.
Mr. Labrador. Could you explain for us exactly how they are
different. Because I agree with you that they are two different
actions. And in one, in my opinion, the President was working
with Congress.
Mr. Ting. Absolutely.
Mr. Labrador. And in this instance, the President is
working against the wishes of Congress, which is actually
against the wishes of the American people.
Mr. Ting. Yes. I have some interest in Family Fairness
because I was working in the George H.W. Bush administration.
So I remember it well.
And there was a feeling on the part of many people that
some of the issues that needed to be addressed were not
addressed by the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986,
and particularly some sort of relief had to be provided for the
spouses and minor children of the newly amnestied illegal--
formerly illegal immigrants.
And President Bush was engaged in active negotiations with
the Congress trying to get that done,and he did announce Family
Fairness as an interim measure. But he did so within months
after that, the Immigration Act of 1990 was agreed to and
became law.
Mr. Labrador. And he did it with the consent and the
cooperation of Congress. Is that not what happened?
Mr. Ting. Absolutely. And I cited in my written testimony
that, you know, the Supreme Court has said in the steel seizure
case, Youngstown Sheet & Tube, that the President is at the
peak of his authority when he acts with the explicit or
implicit support of Congress and he is at the very nadir of his
authority when he acts in defiance of Congress, as President
Truman did when he seized the steel mills.
Mr. Labrador. And Obama's actions are in defiance of what
Congress was expressly stated. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Ting. Yes. I think that that is unquestionably clear.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. Dr. Rosenblum, you seem to agree that
the President has prosecutorial discretion and you seem to be
okay with his actions. Is that correct?
Mr. Rosenblum. I mean, I am not an attorney. But certainly
there are smart lawyers who have made that case.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. Do you think it would be okay for a
U.S. Attorney, for example, to decide that he or she is not
going to prosecute marijuana laws in their district?
Mr. Rosenblum. Again, I mean, I am a little reluctant to
really wade into this because it is a little outside my area of
expertise.
But what I understand is that these are policy decisions
that are made, you know, more by the executive branch than by
an ICE officer or a U.S. Attorney.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. Professor Ting, I actually think the
President exceeded his authority. But let's assume for a second
that he did everything within his authority.
Would a U.S. Attorney be qualified to make a decision about
prosecuting marijuana laws in his or her district? Do you think
they have that prosecutorial discretion?
Mr. Ting. I think it would be a breach of someone's
authority to set out whole categories of laws that they are not
going to enforce.
One can imagine people that disagree with the Clean Air
laws saying ``I am not going to enforce those laws.''
Mr. Labrador. Or the tax laws.
Mr. Ting. Or the tax laws.
``I believe in a 10 percent flat tax, and if people are
defying the tax laws, as long as they pay 10 percent, I am
going to say exercise prosecutorial discretion.''
Mr. Labrador. But let's assume for a second--you and I
agree that the President exceeded his authority--there is no
question that there is prosecutorial discretion, but that he
abused his discretion.
What would you think the American people would say if this
President decided not to enforce marijuana laws and then, in
fact, gave people licenses to purchase marijuana illegally?
Mr. Ting. Yes. That is the difference.
You know, people were asking the sheriff, ``Well, if you
have a serious crime underway and you had a traffic accident,
how do you allocate your resources?"
Well, okay. You deal with the serious crime, but you don't
say, ``From here on forward, we are not going to deal with
traffic accidents anymore"--right?--"That is no longer"----
Mr. Labrador. Not only that, but you are going to tell
people that you are going to give them a license to have
traffic accidents, to actually violate the law.
Mr. Ting. We are going to give benefits to people that
commit traffic accidents.
Mr. Labrador. Exactly.
And then, if you commit one of those violations, we are
actually going to give you more benefits to encourage further
violations of the law.
Isn't that the difference that we are talking about?
Mr. Ting. I think that is the apt analogy to what is
happening.
Mr. Labrador. All right. Thank you very much.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Idaho.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. DeSantis.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Ting, we have had disputes--you mentioned the
steel seizure case, Andrew Jackson, Lincoln, about the scope of
presidential authority.
Is there any example in U.S. History that you are aware of
where a president took an action that he had previously
repeatedly and definitively said he did not have the
constitutional authority to do?
Mr. Ting. There may be. But I am not aware of it.
Mr. DeSantis. I am not aware of it either.
Now, you pointed out immigration laws are meant to protect
the jobs and wages of American workers.
The President--the media doesn't like to report this--he is
not just deferring deportation, he is affirmatively conferring
5 million work permits on people who are in the country
illegally.
That will have an upward pressure or a downward pressure on
the wages of American workers, in your opinion?
Mr. Ting. I think it is clearly going to have a downward
pressure.
Mr. DeSantis. And here is what really gets me. Illegal
immigrants are exempt from Obamacare's employer mandate. So it
is not just that there will be that downward pressure. An
employer would have about a $3,000 hiring preference over an
illegal immigrant because they can go above 50 or even just
providing the normal Obamacare benefit.
So that is going to exacerbate that downward pressure; will
it not?
Mr. Ting. Absolutely. Once these illegal aliens, these 5
million, get their work authorization, it becomes illegal to
discriminate against them in hiring.
But, as you point out, there are actually affirmative
reasons why you would want to discriminate against the American
citizen, who is subject to the Affordable Care Act
responsibilities, whereas this group of individuals would be
exempt.
So we are setting up a situation where the American worker
is affirmatively disadvantaged.
Mr. DeSantis. Ms. Vaughan, when the President did the mini-
amnesty in 2012, DACA, he had previously said he couldn't do
that. Then he did it.
That had a negative effect on legal immigrants, isn't that
correct, that their wait times increased? U.S. citizens were
trying to bring over a foreign spouse, had to wait longer.
Their families were separated because the President was
diverting resources away from legal immigrants to the illegals.
Correct?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes. That is right. That has been shown in the
processing time.
Mr. DeSantis. And isn't it the case that the plan for
this--now,we are in a fight to stop this--but the President's
plan here is to use the fees that legal immigrants pay for
their applications and he is going to divert those fees to
administer his executive amnesty program. Correct?
Ms. Vaughan. That would have to be the case because of the
way the fees are set and what they are charging for the
deferred action benefit, the work permit.
They are not charging enough to cover what it actually
costs. So they have two choices, either take fees that are paid
by legal immigrants or cut corners on how the processing is
done and refrain from hiring, for example, fraud investigators
and other----
Mr. DeSantis. And I guess they will do both there.
But if there was a negative impact on legal immigrants with
a much smaller DACA program, you start talking about 5 million,
that is going to have a significant impact on the ability of
American citizens and legal immigrants to access the
immigration system.
Isn't that the obvious deduction?
Ms. Vaughan. That is the inevitable outcome.
Mr. DeSantis. The criminal convictions--I mean, we have
36,000 illegal immigrants who were convicted of crimes in
fiscal year 2013. And those are not just ticky-tack crimes.
Isn't it true that that includes homicide convictions?
Ms. Vaughan. There were 169 homicide convictions.
Mr. DeSantis. Sexual assaults, including child molestation?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes.
Mr. DeSantis. Kidnapping?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes.
Mr. DeSantis. Aggravated assault.
So these are people who clearly represent a danger to
society. DHS releases them into the community. And guess what
we know already.
Right now, of those 36,000, 1,000 have already been
convicted of new crimes. And those crimes include rape, child
molestation, assault with a deadly weapon. So these are
Americans citizens who have been harmed because their
Government has failed them.
And isn't it true, with Jeh Johnson's enforcement criteria
and the tiers, they have actually relegated some sexual
offenses to Tier 2? They say that those are significant
misdemeanors. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes.
Mr. DeSantis. So if they are already releasing people
convicted of homicide, the fact that they put you in Tier 2, I
think you can almost bet your bottom dollar those people are
going to be released.
And that is a problem because you may have an offense, a
sexual offense against a child, let's say, that qualifies,
under their view, as a significant misdemeanor. But there may
be reasons why that charge had to be brought. Maybe you have a
child victim. You don't want to put that victim and the family
through a criminal trial.
So you may be willing to plead somebody to, say, a year,
make them register as a sex offender, because that is just the
path that would be best for the child. That does not make the
offender any less dangerous. And so DHS is saying, ``Well, if
you get a good plea bargain, we are going to put you back in.''
And we know that these people are likely to re-offend.
So this is a huge scandal. We are going to be doing this on
the Oversight Committee and really digging deep because--I
don't care--Republican, Democrat, this is just completely and
utterly unacceptable.
And I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
This concludes today's hearing.
But I want to thank you on behalf of all of us for your
expertise, your collegiality toward one another and with the
panel, your cordiality toward one another and with the panel.
And so we want to say thank you.
I don't know if it is the standard witness fee that I think
Members of Congress who today. So you are giving us your
expertise, and we are grateful to you for that.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional questions for the witnesses or additional
materials for the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:51 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

__________
