- STATE OF CLASS ACTIONS TEN YEARS AFTER THE ENACTMENT OF THE CLASS ACTION FAIRNESS ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATE OF CLASS ACTIONS TEN YEARS AFTER
THE ENACTMENT OF
THE CLASS ACTION FAIRNESS ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION
AND CIVIL JUSTICE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 27, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-530 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2015
___________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUUL LABRADOR, Idaho                HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Chairman

RON DeSANTIS, Florida, Vice-Chairman

STEVE KING, Iowa                     STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JERROLD NADLER, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida

Paul B. Taylor, Chief Counsel

James J. Park, Minority Counsel

(II)

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 27, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Trent Franks, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, and Chairman, Subcommittee on the
Constitution and Civil Justice.................................     1
The Honorable Steve Cohen, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the
Constitution and Civil Justice.................................     2
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary     5
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................     6

WITNESSES

Andrew J. Pincus, Partner, Mayer Brown, U.S. Chamber Institute
for Legal Reform
Oral Testimony.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
John Parker Sweeney, President, DRI--The Voice of the Defense Bar
Oral Testimony.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28
Patricia W. Moore, Professor of Law, St. Thomas University School
of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    46
Prepared Statement.............................................    48
Jessica Miller, Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Oral Testimony.................................................    65
Prepared Statement.............................................    67

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Steve Cohen, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Tennessee, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice.............    96

STATE OF CLASS ACTIONS TEN YEARS AFTER THE ENACTMENT OF THE CLASS
ACTION FAIRNESS ACT

----------

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 2015

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on the Constitution
and Civil Justice

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:07 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Trent Franks
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Franks, Goodlatte, DeSantis, King,
Gohmert, Cohen, Conyers, and Nadler.
Staff present: (Majority) Zachary Somers, Counsel; Tricia
White, Clerk; (Minority) James J. Park, Minority Counsel; and
Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Franks. Good morning. The Subcommittee on the
Constitution and Civil Justice will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Committee at any time.
10 years ago last week, Congress passed, and President
George W. Bush signed into law, the Class Action Fairness Act,
or CAFA as it commonly known. The bill was authorized by
Chairman Goodlatte in the House and Chairman Grassley in the
Senate, and received strong bipartisan support in both
chambers. As it has been 10 years since CAFA was enacted, it
seems like it is time for this Subcommittee to examine the
current state of class action litigation in the Federal courts.
The class action is a mechanism designed to allow injured
parties to join together with others who have suffered the same
harm when their claims are not large enough to make pursuing
them individually cost efficient. If used properly, class
actions are a valuable tool in our system of justice, but they
are only beneficial when the redress of actual injuries
suffered by class members is the priority of the litigation.
In recent years, however, class actions have been used with
increased frequency in ways that do not promote the interests
they were intended to serve. CAFA was designed as a balanced
approach to address some of the most egregious problems in
class action litigation. Its goals were to promote fairness,
ensure that interstate class actions are tried in Federal
court, and establish new protections for consumers against
abusive class action settlements.
In many ways, the Act has been highly successful at
achieving its goals. However, despite CAFA's successes, many
legal commentators have raised concerns about new class action
abuses that CAFA was not intended to address. One of the
problems that has emerged with increased frequency is CAFA's
enactment no injury class actions. In these cases, attorneys
seek damages on behalf of a class of plaintiffs who have not
suffered any actual harm. Rather, plaintiffs in these cases
seek compensation for potential injuries that may never occur.
These class actions are being filed despite the fact that
it is a bedrock principle of both Federal and state law that a
civil suit may not proceed if there is no injury. By allowing
no injury class actions to proceed, judges are turning this
bedrock principle on its head simply because a case is brought
as a class action instead of by an individual plaintiff. As the
Supreme Court has observed, class actions will always ``present
opportunities for abuse.'' This likelihood for abuse is at its
greatest in actions in which the class of plaintiff does not
need to show that they are actually harmed.
If no injury class actions are not bad enough, in the wake,
CAFA attorneys have invented another class action device as
well, a class action in which no plaintiff exists. These no
plaintiff class actions are made possible through the use of cy
pres settlements. In these cases, an uninjured third party with
no connection to the litigation, usually a non-profit
organization, is awarded money as part of a settlement because
it would be too difficult or costly to identify the alleged
victims. These settlements present a whole host of problems,
not the least of which is that they almost certainly violate
the Constitution's Article 3 case or controversy requirement.
With the advent of no injury and no plaintiff class
actions, it is not surprising that a recent empirical study
conducted by our first witness, Andy Pincus, determined that
``class actions do not provide class members with anything
close to the benefits claimed by their proponents, although
they can and do enrich attorneys.''
It is also not surprising that a recent independent public
opinion poll sponsored by DRI found that 78 percent of
Americans believe that plaintiffs should only be able to join a
class action if they can show that they were actually harmed,
and 85 percent of Americans believe that class action lawyers
should be required to obtain permission from individuals before
enrolling them as plaintiffs.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony, and I hope that
through this hearing we can begin to examine what improvements
are needed to ensure that the Federal class action system is
functioning in a manner that is fair and efficient for
plaintiffs and defendants.
And with that, I would recognize the Ranking Member for his
opening statement.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Class actions do
benefit society by providing plaintiffs access to court. In
cases where a defendant may have caused small injuries to a
large number of persons, class actions have offered an
important way for injured people to obtain remedies they might
otherwise not be able to get. I see it all the time in my
personal life. I open up an envelope, and there is a class
action based on something that has happened with a stock I have
owned. And while I know the attorney is going to make a goodly
amount of money, I am going to get something and knew about it,
and never would have gotten anything otherwise. So class
actions do a lot of good for a lot of people.
Class actions are a way to stop large-scale wrongdoing by a
defendant. By doing so, they can protect our health, promote
safe products, fight discrimination, ensure fair wages, punish
fraud, and stockholders get benefits. Unfortunately, the Class
Action Fairness Act of 2005 made it harder and more expensive
for plaintiffs to pursue class actions.
Most controversially, the Act made it easier to remove
class actions from State court to Federal court where class
actions and litigation generally may be more difficult for
plaintiffs to pursue. This is true even when the plaintiffs are
all from one State that does business in that State, and the
claim arises under State law. Still, it gives an opportunity to
move it out of State courts.
The Act may have denied many people the benefits of class
actions over the last decade. This is a shame. The Center for
Justice and Democracy at New York Law School published a report
in October 2014 entitled ``First Class Relief: How Class
Actions Benefit Those Who Are Injured, Defrauded, and
Violated.'' This report details numerous class actions that
have helped to remedy wrongs committed against consumers,
employees, students, borrowers, service members, small
businesses.
I ask unanimous consent at this point, Mr. Chairman, to
offer this report for the record.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note: The information referred to is not reprinted in this hearing
record but is on file with the Subcommittee, and can be accessed at:
http://centerjd.org/content/first-class-relief-how-class-actions-
benefit-those-who-are-injured-defrauded-and-violated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Franks. Without objection.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. There are simply too many
examples of the good that class actions have done for people to
discuss in detail here. A few examples: Morgan v. Richmond
School of Health and Technology, a for-profit school settled
with 4,000 primarily African-American and low income students,
who the school targeted for reverse redlining by using
deceptive practices to enroll them for what the school knew was
an inadequate education, saddling students with large debts,
but without improved opportunities for employment. The students
never would have had a thought about bringing an action
themselves. Could not have, would not have got relief.
In Re Dynamic Random Access Memory anti-trust litigation
where defendant manufacturers of dynamic random access memory
chips used in computers and videogame consoles settled for $242
million with a class of 19,000 plaintiff companies that
purchased those chips, with recoveries for class members
ranging from $1,000 to $1 million.
Carter v. Wells Fargo Advisors, where Wells Fargo settled a
gender discrimination class action brought by 1,200 female
financial advisors who alleged discrimination in pay,
promotion, and other employment decisions for $32 million, or
about $18,000 for each class member, and injunctive relief
against future discrimination.
Sure, there are interests who would not have wanted that to
go forth. There are interests that would not want us to have
access to class actions because they want to continue to
discriminate against women, take advantage of African-Americans
and young students, and rip them off, and pay them less. It
needs to stop. The only way to do that is class actions.
That is the best, often the only mechanism that can deliver
those good results. Individual cases may be too costly to
pursue and not worth the compensation available to the
individual victim. But in the aggregate, these cases involve
large-scale wrongdoing that should be stopped, and the
attorneys that bring the cases are private attorneys general
that are doing the work that government otherwise could be
doing if the resources were there to work in a collective
fashion, where the laws were such that this was illegal. Well,
it would already be illegal, but easier to pursue.
The majority witnesses will say today that class actions do
not benefit class members and are not worth the costs they
impose on corporate defendants. They will assert that class
actions primarily benefit plaintiffs' lawyers. Well, that is
not true, and the plaintiff lawyers deserve the pay they get
because they are acting in the public interest and do benefit
the public. In making these assertions, they rely on no
objective data. Instead we will hear about a deeply flawed
study conducted by the Mayer Brown law firm, otherwise a firm
that I think well of for they employ Toby Moffett, a great
American. But the study that they use critics have noted has
cherry picked data and mischaracterization of cases to support
its conclusions.
Today, the American Association for Justice and the
National Association of Consumer Advocates released a report
called ``Class Actions are a Cornerstone of Our Civil Justice
System: A Review of Class Actions Filed in 2009.'' This report
contains a detailed case-by-case rebuttal of the Mayer Brown
study that the majority witnesses today rely on in support of
their assertions, attacking class actions and plaintiffs'
lawyers. And I ask unanimous consent that it be made a part of
the record. Mr. Chairman?**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Note: The information referred to is not reprinted in this
hearing record but is on file with the Subcommittee, and can be
accessed at:

http://www.consumeradvocates.org/sites/default/files/
Class%20Action%20Report%202-27-15.pdf.
Mr. Franks. Without objection.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. The NACA and AAJ report shows that,
in fact, class members did benefit in the cases cited in the
Mayer Brown study. These people included Bernie Madoff's
victims, employees who lost retirement funds due to misconduct
by retirement fund members, and disabled tenants in public
housing.
I also take issue with the assertion that class actions
simply benefit plaintiffs' lawyers. All the benefits of class
actions outlined would not be possible but for the hard work
and dedication of the lawyers who are willing to fight such
actions on behalf of victims. They ought to be commended for
their work, not attacked.
Finally, I note that the Rules Advisory Committee of the
Judicial Conference of the United States is currently
considering amendments to Rule 23, which governs class actions.
Given that Federal judges deal routinely with class actions,
the consequences of CAFA, we should leave it to their expertise
to determine what changes need to be made. It is amazing that
we worry about the attorneys and what they make when they bring
class actions on behalf of who have been wronged when the
courts have found it wrong, but we do not worry about the
tremendous salaries that are paid to the executives of the
companies that are doing the unlawful work. That is one of the
greatest flaws in our system today in America, the disparity in
wealth and what the corporate CEOs are making and taking home
and getting in benefits.
I will yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Franks. And I thank the gentleman, and I would now
yield to the distinguished Chairman of the Committee, Mr.
Goodlatte, from Virginia.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 10
years ago, I introduced and helped usher the Class Action
Fairness Act through Congress and to the President's desk where
it was signed into law. This legislation corrected a serious
flaw in our Federal jurisdictional statutes that forbid Federal
courts form hearing most interstate class actions.
While the reforms contained in the Class Action Fairness
Act have been integral in improving the civil justice system in
the United States, abusive class action practices still exist
today. I hope that through this hearing, the Committee can
begin to examine some of the current problems in Federal class
action litigation, and look for ways to improve the system to
ensure that class action lawsuits are benefitting the victims
they are intended to compensate.
The class action device is a necessary and important part
of our legal system. It promotes efficiency by allowing
plaintiffs with similar claims to adjudicate their cases in one
proceeding, and it promotes fairness by allowing claims to be
heard in cases in which there are small harms to a large number
of people that would otherwise go unaddressed because the cost
of an individual plaintiff to sue would far exceed the
benefits.
In the 1960's and 70's, class actions that sought
injunctive relief were used to accomplish landmark civil rights
reform, such as integrating public school systems, improving
conditions in our prison systems, and challenging
discriminatory housing and public accommodation laws. Today's
class action litigation, however, has in large part shifted far
away from these important civil rights suits, and is now
dominated by class actions brought by enterprising plaintiffs'
attorneys seeking money damages on behalf of consumers.
The rules that govern class action litigation have not kept
up with this shift. In fact, other than the Class Action
Fairness Act, no other major reforms to the laws governing
Federal class actions have been adopted since 1966. Judging by
some of the problems that have arisen since Class Action
Fairness Act was enacted 10 years ago, additional reform is
likely needed.
I am concerned that in the years since the Class Action
Fairness Act was enacted, there has been a proliferation of
class actions filed by entrepreneurial attorneys on behalf of
whole classes of plaintiffs that have not suffered any actual
injury. These class actions are often comprised of class
members that do not even know that they have been harmed, do
not care about the minor injuries that the lawsuit is based on,
and generally have no interest in pursuing litigation.
These co-called no injury class actions appear to violate
Article 3 of the Constitution, which requires a plaintiff
suffer an actual and concrete injury in order to have standing
to sue in Federal court. This principle does not change simply
because a case is brought as a class action instead of by an
individual. Alarmingly, however, many Federal courts have
departed from this constitutional requirement and certified
class actions in which the class members have not suffered any
actual harm.
No injury class actions appear to be to no one's benefit
except the lawyers who are able to generate large fees
litigating and settling these no injury cases. In fact, no
injury class actions can actually harm the very class members
on whose behalf they are purportedly brought. This harm occurs
when individuals who have actually been injured are forced to
sacrifice valid claims in order to preserve the lesser claims
that everyone in the class can assert, or when consumers who
are currently uninjured forgo real claims on future injuries in
order to pursue more minor no injury claims. In short, no
injury class actions can lead to substantial under compensation
for consumers who have suffered actual harm.
I am also concerned that we may be witnessing a significant
increase in class action settlements that produce little or no
benefit to the members of the class. We tried to address this
trend in the Class Action Fairness Act by putting significant
restrictions on coupon settlements. But in the wake post-CAFA
innovations, we may need to consider more reform to restrict
parasitic settlements that benefit no one other than the
attorney who brought the class action.
Given that class action lawsuit involve more money and
touch more Americans than virtually any other litigation
pending in our legal system, it is important that we have a
Federal class action system that benefits those who have been
truly injured and is fair to both plaintiffs and defendants. I
look forward to the witnesses' testimony and any suggestions
they may have for improving the laws governing class actions in
Federal court.
And I thank the Chairman, and yield back.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman, and I would now yield to
the Ranking Member of the Committee, Mr. Conyers from Michigan.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the
Committee, I may be the only one on this Subcommittee that was
here when the Class Action Fairness Act was sped through the
Congress in 2005, and here we are again.
When Congress considered the measure 10 years ago, I warned
that it would simply benefit corporate wrongdoers to the
detriment of large numbers of people who suffer great harm.
This is because the Act makes it relatively easy for corporate
defendants to have their cases removed from State courts to the
Federal courts, a venue where they believe they have greater
advantages. And unfortunately, my concerns have proven to be
correct over 10 years since the Act's passage.
Although proponents of this legislation claimed in 2005
that the Act was necessary to curb forum shopping by
plaintiffs, in reality this law has proved to be the ultimate
tool for forum shopping by defendants. There are several
reasons why the changes effected by the Class Action Fairness
Act are so problematic.
To begin with, the Act offends federalism by undermining
State laws in State courts. You see, State law often is the
source of many critical consumer and environmental protections
through common law, tort, and statutory provisions. In turn,
class actions are vital to enforcing these rights as they allow
aggregation of small claims that otherwise might not warrant
individual litigation. Nevertheless, the Class Action Fairness
Act makes virtually every class action removable to Federal
court, thereby divesting State courts of the ability to
interpret and develop State law.
In addition, by making it easier to remove class actions to
Federal court, the Act makes class certification more difficult
and expensive. Back in 2005, I correctly predicted that Federal
courts would be less likely to certify class actions. This has
become a reality because of a series of adverse Federal
precedents that make it more difficult to establish the class
action certification requirements under Rule 23 of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.
For instance, in 2011, the Supreme Court substantially
narrowed the scope of Rule 23's commonality requirement in the
Walmart Stores case. This case denied class certification in an
employment discrimination class action suit seeking to
vindicate the rights of as many as one and a half million
female workers. The Court in a 5 to 4 decision, along
ideological lines on the basic issue presented in the case,
namely whether the purported class satisfied Rule 23's
requirement that there be questions of law or fact common to
the class of female employees.
The Court's conservative justices found it did not, giving
what many critics say is a very narrow reading of Rule 23's
commonality requirement. This narrow reading severely
constrains the ability of plaintiffs to band together in large
class actions, even when as in Dukes, the plaintiffs alleged
the same type of injury, which in that case was gender-based
employment discrimination. This decision has effectively made
the Federal courts an even more favorable forum for defendants
in consumer, anti-trust, environmental, and employment
discrimination cases.
Finally, the Act increases the work load of an already
overburdened Federal court system. In 2005, we were concerned
about the effect that the Act would have on Federal courts
considering the number of judicial vacancies, which at the time
was 5 percent of the Federal judicial positions. Well, as you
might suspect, the number has climbed to 7 percent as of last
October. And I also note that there are only 1,500 Federal
judges as compared to 30,000 State judges.
Growing caseloads force Federal judges to have even less
time for case management and supervision, thereby resulting in
delayed justice in class actions and other Federal cases, and
creates the risk that judges will dismiss cases or encourage
less than optimal settlements to clear their dockets.
So I conclude with the observation that this Act, Class
Action Fairness, has made it increasingly difficult for
consumers, employees, small businesses, to vindicate their
rights and to seek remedies for harmful acts of corporate
wrongdoers. It was bad policy then, and remains so today.
And I thank the Chairman for allowing some extra time.
Mr. Franks. And I thank the gentleman. And without
objection, other Members' opening statements will be made part
of the record.
So now, I will introduce our witnesses. Our first witness
is Andrew Pincus, a partner at Mayer Brown, who focuses his
practice on briefing and arguing cases in the Supreme Court and
other appellate courts, as well as on developing legal
arguments in trial courts. He has argued 24 cases in the
Supreme Court and filed briefs in more than 150 cases in that
Court.
Mr. Pincus served as General Counsel to the U.S. Department
of Commerce from 1997 to 2000, and as an assistant to the
Solicitor General in the Justice Department from 1984 to 1988.
Thank you for being here, sir.
Our second witness is John Parker Sweeney, president of DRI
- the Voice of the Defense Bar. With 22,000 members, DRI is the
Nation's largest professional association of civil defense
attorneys. In addition, Mr. Sweeney is a partner at a law firm
here in Washington. He has over 30 years of complex litigation
experience, including defending major class actions and serving
as national counsel in class action and mass tort cases across
the country. Welcome, sir.
Our third witness is Patricia Moore, a professor of law at
St. Thomas University School of Law where she teaches civil
procedure, evidence, pre-trial litigation, and complex
litigation. She has published over a dozen law review articles,
including several articles on class action litigation.
Prior to entering academia, Professor Moore was a civil
litigation partner at a national firm where she was the first
woman to rise through the ranks and become partner in the
firm's litigation department. Welcome.
Our final witness is Jessica Miller, a partner at Skadden
Arps, who has brought experience in the defense of class
actions and other complex civil litigation with a focus on
product liability matters and multidistrict litigation
proceedings. She has litigated in numerous Federal and State
trial courts, and also has extensive appellate experience. In
addition, Ms. Miller has been involved in several major Federal
legislative efforts, and has written extensively on class
action and tort reform issues.
Each of the witness' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety, and I would ask each witness
to summarize his or her testimony in 5 minutes or less. And to
help to help you stay within that time, there is a timing light
in front of you. The light will switch from green to yellow
indicating that you have 1 minute to conclude your testimony,
and, of course, when the light turns red, it indicates that the
witness' 5 minutes have expired.
So now, before I recognize the witnesses, it is the
tradition of this Subcommittee that they be sworn, so if you
will please stand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony that you are about
to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Mr. Franks. You may be seated. Let the record reflect that
the witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
I would now recognize our first witness, Mr. Pincus. And,
Mr. Pincus, if you will turn that microphone on before you.
Yes, sir.

TESTIMONY OF ANDREW J. PINCUS, PARTNER, MAYER BROWN, U.S.
CHAMBER INSTITUTE FOR LEGAL REFORM

Mr. Pincus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Franks,
Ranking Member Cohen, and Members of the Subcommittee, it is an
honor to appear before you on behalf of the Chamber of Commerce
and its Institute of Legal Reform. And, Congressman Cohen,
thank you for your very kind comments about my friend, Toby
Moffett. We are very proud to have him at Mayer Brown.
In 1966, nearly 50 years ago, the Federal Courts Rules
Committee authorized new class action procedures with little
historical precedent, in particular, the catch-all damages
class action permitted by Rule 23(b)(3). As several Members of
the Subcommittee have noted, the Committee acted with the
laudable goals of making it easier for plaintiffs with small
claims to obtain access to justice, and enabling the courts to
manage disputes involving large numbers of claimants.
Serious questions have been raised about how well that
innovation is working, particularly how it is interacting with
other significant changes in the litigation system over the
past 5 decades. That debate has largely been a war of
anecdotes. People on the plaintiff side point to class actions
that achieved great results. People on the defense side point
to class actions that did not. It is not a very satisfying
discussion.
As several Members of the Subcommittee noted, my law firm
tried to answer the question in a more systematic way by
undertaking an empirical analysis of a neutrally-selected
sample of punitive employee and consumer class action lawsuits.
And just a word about the methodology because I know some
people have criticized it. What we did was basically, since
there is no database of all the class actions filed in the
Federal courts, was to look in the reporters that report for
the legal community about class actions, and take the ones that
were mentioned as being filed in 2009. So we did not cherry
pick the sample. It was whatever was reported in those
publications, and then we tried to follow through on what
happened.
And I am certainly looking forward to reading and
responding to the report that Congressman Cohen mentioned. I am
sorry that it was not released a few days earlier so I could
have responded to it here today, but we will definitely
respond.
But let me talk a little about the results that we found.
Not one of the class actions ended in a final judgment on the
merits. Every one that was resolved was either dismissed or
settled, and the vast majority of resolved cases produced no
benefits for members of the class. One-third of those that were
resolved were dismissed voluntarily by the plaintiffs, so no
benefit to the class. Just under another third were dismissed
by the courts on the merits. Again, no benefits. So the
remaining one-third were all settled on a class basis. What
happened in those settlements?
As several Members of the Subcommittee have noted, a lot of
those settlements these days provide for a significant share of
the money to go to lawyers, and often a significant share of
the settlement dollars to go to third parties through the cy
pres process, not to the members of the class.
With respect to the funds that the agreements allocate to
members of the class, it is very hard to figure out whether any
members of the class actually receive them because information
regarding the actual distribution of the money as opposed to
the settlement that says X million dollars or X tens of
millions of dollars for the class. How much do members of the
class actually pick up is often not public, almost always not
public.
In our study, we tried to find data to the extent we could,
and we could for six cases. One of them, as someone has
mentioned, was a Madoff case, which obviously involved very,
very large prospective recoveries to the members of the class.
The others delivered funds to only miniscule percentages of the
class--.00006 percent, .33 percent, 1.5 percent, 9.66 percent,
and 12 percent.
These results are not unusual. A senior consultant at a
claims administrator, the settlement administrators that
perform the distribution processes, says that ``In consumer
class actions, the claims rate''--in other words, the rate of
members of the punitive class that get money--``is almost
always less than 1 percent, and the median claims rate is .023
percent.'' So 1 out of 4,350 class members actually recovers.
Does this mean that every class action is unjustified? No.
Does it mean that there are significant problems in our class
action system? I think yes, and I think what it means is the
incentive structure that we have in class actions today does
not work for plaintiffs lawyers, for judges, and for defense
counsel.
And I see that my time is up, and I will be happy to
elaborate on that and answer any other questions that the
Subcommittee has. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pincus follows:]***
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
***Note: The supplemental material submitted with this witness
statement is not printed in this hearing record but is on file with the
Subcommittee. The complete statement can be accessed at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU10/20150227/103030/HHRG-114-JU10-Wstate-
PincusA-20150227.pdf.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Pincus.
And I will now recognize our second witness, Mr. Sweeney.
And I hope you turn on your microphone, sir.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN PARKER SWEENEY, PRESIDENT,
DRI--THE VOICE OF THE DEFENSE BAR

Mr. Sweeney. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. Is that microphone on, Mr. Sweeney?
Mr. Sweeney. Yes, it is.
Mr. Franks. Okay. Maybe pull it a little closer.
Mr. Sweeney. First, I want to thank the Subcommittee for
inviting DRI to appear here today. With 22,000 members, DRI is
the largest association of lawyers defending American
businesses in court. Over the past 4 years, DRI has submitted
two dozen briefs to the United States Supreme Court providing
our views in class action cases for their benefit. DRI also
conducts the Nation's only annual national opinion poll devoted
exclusively to the civil justice system.
I would like to express our appreciation today for the time
and skill that went into the enactment of the Class Action
Fairness Act of 2005. This legislation brought increased
fairness, consistency, and efficiency to the civil justice
system. As with most important legislation, however, experience
with the Act reveals opportunities to make the Act more
effective and address threats to its purposes.
Although we discuss other issues in my full statement, I
would like to concentrate my opening remarks this morning on
the issue of no injury class actions. Our clients want to do
the right thing by their customers, and they want and try to
play by the rules. These no injury class actions unfairly
burden them as they unfairly burden our judicial system.
The Supreme Court has held that Article 3 standing requires
a plaintiff to have suffered an injury in fact. This is a
bedrock prerequisite for access to the courts. Yet American
businesses face many actions brought by plaintiffs who have
admitted they have not been harmed, and propose a class of
equally unharmed individuals.
In these no injury class actions, plaintiffs ask the courts
to ignore the requirement of injury-in-fact, often by seeking
to recover some fixed amount or range of statutory damages
without any showing of injury on the part of them or the
members of the class they purport to represent.
Examples include claims brought under the Consumer Fraud or
Deceptive Practices Act of various States. In a typical case,
the plaintiff contends the defendant committed widespread
technical violations of some statute, admits that he and the
class he seeks to represent sustain no actual harm as a result
of violations, or if some are harmed, most are not, and then
seeks to have the court award aggregate damages based on some
formulaic calculation or range of statutory penalties unrelated
to any actual injury-in-fact.
These cases fail to meet Article 3 standing requirements,
both for the class representatives themselves and for the
absent class members. They also raise broad policy concerns
about using the civil justice system to punish defendants for
technical statutory violations. And punishment it is because if
class members are by definition unharmed, there is nothing
compensatory about the process.
Permitting aggregated actions by unharmed individuals
places enormous pressure on defendants to settle claims that
would be valueless if tried on an individual basis, and
needlessly divert limited judicial resources. These settlements
raise the same concern the 109th Congress had with coupon
settlements that Class Action Fairness Act was passed to
address.
Congress also passed the Rules Enabling Act to prevent the
use of procedural rules to abridge or enlarge substantive
rights. Permitting class actions under Rule 23 on behalf of
unharmed absent class members who lack Article 3 standing flies
in the face of this important congressional mandate.
Because some courts permit such aggregation of no injury
claims while others do not, the current environment is
unpredictable for our members and our clients. More
importantly, permitting litigation by and on behalf of unharmed
parties impairs the ability of the civil justice system to
process deserving claims for actual harm.
As an organization devoted to improving the civil justice
system, we believe a hard look at addressing the problem no
injury actions is warranted. We are not alone in that belief.
For the past 3 years, we have conducted our national opinion
poll. We have asked class action questions on each of our
polls. In 2013, 68 percent said they would require plaintiffs
to show actual harm to join a class action. In 2014, we asked
if respondents would support a law requiring a person to show
they were actually harmed by a company's products, service, or
policies. 78 percent would support such a law. Large majorities
support this reform across 12 demographic categories,
Republicans and Democratic, and liberals and conservatives
alike.
Mr. Chairman, the American public thinks it makes no sense
to pay damages to people who have suffered no harm. They
support reform. It is just common sense to them as it is to us.
Thank you. I look forward to answering the Subcommittee's
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sweeney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Sweeney.
And I would now recognize our third witness, Ms. Moore. Ms.
Moore, please turn on your microphone and pull it close.

TESTIMONY OF PATRICIA W. MOORE, PROFESSOR OF LAW,
ST. THOMAS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW

Ms. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cohen,
and Members of the Committee and the Subcommittee. It is my
privilege to testify before you here today.
The majority witnesses largely ignore the types of class
actions which harm class members much more than by a small
amount of money. Employment discrimination, wage and hour
litigation, civil rights cases, anti-trust cases, securities
cases--there is hardly a nod to these critically important
types of class actions that vindicate the rights of workers,
small business, members of minority groups, and institutional
investors who are watching out for people's retirement funds.
The majority witnesses misplace their focus on compensation
in consumer class actions. For small value claims, compensation
is not the most important societal goal. The key question for
society is whether the defendant has been required to
internalize the cost of breaking the law by cheating a whole
bunch of consumers out of a small amount of money each. Without
the payment of money as a result of a class action, the company
has no deterrent to ignoring the law.
It has been a decade since CAFA was enacted into law, and
the consensus of litigants on both sides and academics is that
CAFA has been extremely successful in bringing actions based on
State law into Federal court. The majority witnesses admit
this. Even more importantly than their victory on CAFA,
defendants have won major victories on class actions in the
Supreme Court. One allows corporations to make consumers,
simply by clicking on a mouse, give up their right to go to
court and give up their constitutional right to appear before a
jury. Another case makes it very hard for employees to band
together to fight unlawful discrimination against them on the
basis of race or gender.
The evidence that the majority witnesses rely on here
primarily is the Mayer Brown study and a DRI survey. However,
the methodological flaws in these so-called empirical studies
could be picked out by a college student in a beginning
statistics class.
The Mayer Brown study was conducted by a biased party with
a financial stake in the outcome of the study. The study sample
was not randomly selected, nor was the study comprehensive.
Mayer Brown cherry picked 188 cases, which is about 6 percent
of all class actions filed in Federal court every year. The DRI
survey is just that, an opinion survey. It in no way attempts
to empirically measure class actions. Many of the questions
that they asked people were totally misleading and assumed
false premises in the way they were stated.
The majority witnesses have talked a lot about this concept
of class members having no injury. Even a cursory review of
cases that I have seen would call into question the premise
that class members are receiving compensation for no injury.
For example, the poster child for this so-called no injury
class is the BP litigation, in which BP recently attempted to
gain cert in the Supreme Court so that they could overturn the
Deep Water Horizon settlement by telling the Supreme Court that
the class included people along the Gulf Coast who had suffered
no injury. This was not true because the very settlement
agreement that BP itself had agreed to and negotiated defined
the class to include only those people who had suffered an
injury.
Besides sometimes mischaracterizing what actually happens
in these cases, the majority witnesses are really arguing that
they do not like the remedies that are granted by the
substantive law itself. If a Federal or a State statute says
you are entitled to statutory damages if a company breaks the
law, the legislature itself has said we think it is an
important public policy that this law be obeyed.
And for Members of Congress who are very concerned about
States' rights, the majority witnesses are trying to overturn
what the State law has defined as an injury. If the State
legislature has said that something is an injury under State
law, then it is an injury even if the Chamber thinks it is no
big deal or that it is a technical violation.
One of CAFA's purposes was to ensure that important cases
based on State law should be in Federal court. So amending CAFA
may affect important rights created by the States.
Thank you very much for your attention. I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Moore follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Franks. Thank you, and thank you all for your
testimony. We will now proceed under the----
Forgive me, Ms. Miller. I now recognize Ms. Miller for 5
minutes, and please turn on your microphone.

TESTIMONY OF JESSICA MILLER, PARTNER, SKADDEN,
ARPS, SLATE, MEAGHER & FLOM LLP

Ms. Miller. Good morning, Chairman----
Mr. Franks. Would you pull that microphone close to you and
make sure that----
Ms. Miller. Can you not hear me? Is that better?
Mr. Franks. Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Miller. Good morning, Chairman Franks, Ranking Member
Cohen, and Members of the Subcommittee. If I had walked into
this hearing today just off the street and listened to the
opening statements of the Chairman, the Ranking Member, and the
Committee Members, I am pretty sure that my sympathies would
naturally have been with those of you who were talking about
racial discrimination, civil rights, private attorneys general.
Those are all things that are really important to me.
But I practice in the class action area every day, and I
have done so for 20 years, and that is not what it is about.
That is not the reality of what is happening in class actions
today. The reality is shakedowns by plaintiffs' lawyers who are
bringing class actions not against companies that are cheating
consumers. They are bringing class actions on behalf of people
who have products that work. And I think the most obvious
example of that are these roofing class actions and these
washing machine class actions, which are being brought against
every single manufacturer. So it is not like there is a bad guy
out there. Everybody in America who has a front load washing
machine has been a plaintiff in a class action.
And I think that is so important to think about because if
you go to somewhere like Europe, all they have got is front
load washing machines. There is no great conspiracy by the
washing machine industry to trick Americans into buying, you
know, energy efficient front load washers.
And I think another good example are these roofing class
actions, right? You have got roofs. They are sitting out there.
It is snowing. It is hailing. You know, things happen to roofs.
And what happens with a no injury or over broad class action is
that plaintiffs' lawyers find one person whose roof had a
problem. Well, yes, roofs have problems. And then suddenly you
have got a nationwide class action on behalf of every single
person who has ever had a roof in America because one person
had a problem with a roof.
And so, that is where you get these over broad and no
injury class actions we are talking about today. We are not
talking civil rights here. We are talking about people whose
roofs are functioning fine, who do not have any desire to be
part of a class action, and all of a sudden we have some
Federal courts are certifying these cases. And then you have
these settlements, and what happens? A bunch of people who
never had a problem with their roof suddenly get a couple of
dollars in the mail that they did not want. Half of them do not
even, you know, cash the checks.
I think the most poignant example of what is wrong with our
class action system is the Pella class action in the 7th
Circuit. So, this was a class action that involved allegedly
rotting windows, and the defendant tried to avoid class
certification by telling the court there are lots of people
whose windows did not rot. There are lots of people whose
windows were installed improperly. There were a lot of
different experiences that people had with these windows. But
the court said we are going to certify this class action even
though you guys are saying it is over broad.
And so, then what happened? So the class action settled,
and that is not a surprise because if you are a defendant, even
if you make a great product, one person's product is going to
fail. Someone's windows are going to rot. Somebody is going to
have forgotten to close the windows, or to repaint the windows,
or something. Something is going to happen. There is going to
be one person in America whose windows rot no matter how good
American corporations are, right? And if that person is before
the wrong jury, all of a sudden this defendant could have
millions of dollars of liability or hundreds of millions of
dollars. So Pella settled the case.
And then what happened? Well, only one-half of 1 percent of
class members expressed any interest in the settlement. One-
half of 1 percent showed up to get their money. And this was
not one of those class actions where they only offered you a
couple of bucks. This was actually a class action with some
real money for those who were motivated or cared about it. But
nobody was interested.
So then, the court said, oh, we have a problem here. This
settlement is no good because all the money went to the lawyers
and no money went to the consumers. But what everybody is
missing is that no money went to consumers because consumers
were happy with their windows.
So that is what we are talking about when we say no injury
class actions. We are not talking about, you know, any sort of
corporate conspiracy to harm America. We are talking about
basically people recruiting somebody, sending out emails. Has
anybody had a problem with your roofing shingles, because I can
get you some money. And then we can leverage that into money
for everyone in America who has roofing shingles, whether they
are good, bad, or have not had any problems. And that is what
we feel Congress needs to address. That is not promoting
justice in this country. There is no benefit to these types of
class actions.
And I think the solution that would help address this
problem is legislation that would say we can only have class
actions proceeding to Federal court if all the class members
have suffered the same type of injury as the named plaintiff.
And the reason I say is think about my roofing case. Think
about my washing machine case. If the named plaintiff claims to
have mold, or if the named plaintiff claims to have a problem,
there may, in fact, have been a manufacturing defect with one
person's shingles.
But you do not want to have a system where that person
cannot bring in money for millions of other people who have not
had a problem. And if you have legislation that says everybody
has got to suffer the same type of injury, then it is not
eradicating class actions. It is eradicating meritless class
actions.
Thanks, and I look forward to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Franks. And thank you, Ms. Miller, and thank you all
for your testimony. And we will now proceed under the 5-minute
rule with questions, and I will begin by recognizing myself for
5 minutes. And, Mr. Pincus, if it is all right, I will start
with you, sir.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I have some serious
concerns with these no injury class actions. And these
lawsuits, as you are aware, the class of plaintiffs has not
personally experienced any actual injury. These class actions
seems to pose a host of constitutional problems under Article 3
and the due process clause. So if you could briefly describe
some of the constitutional problems with no injury class
actions.
Mr. Pincus. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start out
by talking about a different category of no injury class
actions than the ones that Ms. Miller was talking about that I
do talk about in my testimony, which is this increasing
phenomenon of cases where Congress has provided for statutory
damages, it is true, often for regulatory violations. And so, a
claim is brought for a claimed violation of what often is a
very complicated regulatory scheme. And even the named
plaintiff cannot show that he or she has suffered any actual
injury.
For example, if it is a claim about a credit report, the
plaintiff cannot say someone has relied on this false credit
report, and it somehow has injured my ability to get a loan, or
injured my reputation, or in some other way. There is no actual
damage in the traditional sense that this person can say here
is how I was hurt. The person says, I do not have to show I was
actually hurt because it has provided for statutory damages,
and everyone is in the class is entitled to the $100 or $1,000
of statutory damages.
So what does that mean? First of all, it means that the
courts are, if this theory were accepted, hearing claims that
do not satisfy the fundamental Article 3 requirement of an
actual injury in order to access the Federal courts. But it
also means in practical terms the ability in the economy we
have today for one uninjured person to assert a claim on behalf
of a million or millions of similarly uninjured people, and
claim that each one is entitled to $1,000. So pretty quickly
you have got a claim for a billion dollars where nobody
suffered any actual injury, and where, if that claim is
accepted, the other class action criteria are sort of easy to
meet because you do not have to show reliance by anybody who
caused the injury. You do not have to show causation in terms
of the fact that the statutory violation actually injured the
particular people in the class. And you do not have to quantify
the amount of the actual injury.
So combining these two developments--statutory damages, the
no injury claim, and class actions--puts together a very
powerful weapon to file a class action and get a very large
settlement when, in fact, nobody may be injured. And I think
one of the fundamental problems with these no injury cases is
of the type that Ms. Miller was talking about. When you combine
a big class with people who may have been injured and people
who have not been injured, that pot of money is going to be
allocated amongst everybody. So what happens to the consumers
in that punitive class? The people who are really injured are
going to get less because the people who are not injured are
sharing in the pot. And that does not seem an appropriate
result for anybody.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, sir. Ms. Miller, I was fascinated by
your legislative suggestion, and, you know, and kind of staying
on this subject, would you elaborate a little bit more on what
kind of legislation could address these types of lawsuits? And
also if you could express whether or not you think placing any
restrictions on these lawsuit would eliminate the deterrent
effect, which I think is ostensibly the most powerful argument
that no injury class actions provide.
Ms. Miller. Sure. Rule 23(b)(3), which is currently the
rule that governs whether a class can be certified, has a
requirement in it of typicality, right? Rule 23 has a
requirement of typicality. The named plaintiff is supposed to
be typical of the class members.
And for many years, the types of class actions we are
talking about today would not have been certified by most
Federal courts because courts said the named plaintiff needs to
be typical of everyone else. And if I have a rotting roof, I am
not typical of all the people who do not have a rotting roof.
For some reason, a number of courts have just moved away from
that, and have sort of watered down the typicality requirement
of Rule 23, such that you can now have a class action where the
named plaintiff is not at all typical of everyone else.
And so, the sort of legislation I am talking about, which
would say that all the class members have to suffer the same
type of injury as the named plaintiff, it is really not
anything dramatically different from what really is in Rule 23
and should be the law right now. It would basically just be
legislating that when Rule 23 says typicality, that typicality
requirement is actually is a legitimate valid thing that courts
need to be considering.
So to the extent that there was discussion today about
gender discrimination suits, this would not affect that sort of
suit, right, because if you have a suit where everybody was
discriminated against, that is not what this is talking about.
This is talking about where the named plaintiff suffered one
type of injury, and that is not representative of what was
suffered by the absent class members or, in 99 percent of the
cases, not suffered by the absent class members.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you very much. And I would now
yield to the Ranking Member for his questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ms. Miller, your testimony
was quite good, and I think Uncle Frank would be happy to have
heard it and proud of you. Lautenberg that is, one of my
heroes. But is there not good that comes out of class actions
on gender and race issues, some areas like that, consumer
issues?
Ms. Miller. I think that one of the problems is that there
has developed this notion that a class action is a means of
effectuating societal good, and that a class action has certain
public policy benefits. And I think when Rule 23 was developed,
it really was a procedural tool. And a class action can have
some good, but it is only going to have some good if the
requirements of Rule 23 are satisfied and everybody suffered
the same injury.
Mr. Cohen. All right. I understand.
Ms. Miller. Right. So if you have----
Mr. Cohen. But when everybody suffers the injury, all the
women, all the African-Americans, is there not good that comes
from those class actions?
Ms. Miller. I think there can be good that comes from class
actions.
Mr. Cohen. Maybe a situation where there is not good that
comes when women or African-Americans are part of a class
action and a court rules that they were harmed.
Ms. Miller. Right. I want to make a couple of points. First
of all, remember that we are talking about CAFA. And what CAFA
did was CAFA brought class actions into Federal court that
would never have been in Federal court. It was not the gender
discrimination and the race discrimination, which are brought
under Federal law. Those cases were already in Federal court.
So really what CAFA brought into Federal court were class
actions based on consumer protection statutes, so this really
is a consumer protection issue.
There absolutely can be good that comes from class actions
regardless of the topic, but there can only be good if the
rules are satisfied, because if you have a named plaintiff who
does not represent everybody else, then the class action just
becomes a tool of blackmail. And regardless of what you are
trying to promote, regardless of what social norms you are
trying to promote, it has to be done fairly.
Mr. Cohen. Ms. Moore----
Ms. Miller. And I am obviously not----
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Miller. Ms. Moore,
what do you think of Ms. Miller's remedy that she suggests that
we should only have people that have the same injury in a class
action?
Ms. Moore. Well, I think it is important to remember that
whatever legislation might be passed would not only affect some
washing machine case, but it would also affect employment
discrimination cases. In fact, one of the reasons the Supreme
Court struck down the certification of the Walmart v. Dukes
class was because it argued that you could not say that all of
these women had been discriminated against. That was not the
premise of that suit at all as believed by the Supreme Court.
And so, if you start saying, well, you are going to have to
show us you were discriminated against, or you are going to
have to show us there is something wrong with your washing
machine before you can even walk into the door, that is
contrary to our entire system of justice, which says, you know,
two people have two sides of a story. And our traditional way
of deciding that was to have a jury or another trier of fact
decide it. So this is a way to move these merits decisions
closer and closer to the beginning of the case.
Mr. Cohen. So you are saying that her proposed remedy
sounds good, but does not fit a lot of cases maybe?
Ms. Moore. I think that in the first place, I do not agree
that class actions are being certified that have people in them
that have literally had no injury. And even if we believe that
and we try to have legislation that would just deal with that
issue, it is bound to spill over into other class actions, like
discrimination class actions, which, by the way, are very, very
hard to maintain in Federal court today.
Mr. Cohen. Mr. Sweeney and Mr. Pincus, do you have any
suggested remedies to the problems with CAFA and certification
that would not affect employment discrimination, or gender, or
race issues, how to distinguish those?
Mr. Pincus. Well, I think one of the problems that CAFA did
not get at is there are some fundamental incentive problems in
the system today. I think it is important to recognize that,
you know, the fact that there is a problem does not mean
plaintiffs' lawyers are bad, or defense lawyers are bad, or
courts are necessarily doing the wrong thing. Everyone is
responding to the incentives that they now have, and those
incentives for plaintiffs' lawyers and the class members are
often not appropriately lined, as many, many commentators have
recognized.
The rational defendant, there is a reason why in my study
and in almost every other study class actions that survive a
motion to dismiss are settled, because everybody at that point
has an interest in settlement. The plaintiff's lawyer, often
settlement maximizes the hourly rate of return in terms of his
investment in the case. The defendant is looking to avoid costs
of litigation, and if the settlement cost is not going to be
much more or less than the cost of the litigation, why not
settle? And the judge says, I have a lot of work to do, I am
happy to get this case off my docket.
The protection there is supposed to be judges looking at
settlements, but I think what we have learned is judges really
need an adversary process. And when both parties before the
court are saying this is a great settlement, it is awfully
hard, even for a judge who wants to get behind that, to have
the information to do it. Only in the last couple of years
where we have had objectors coming into court and pointing out
problems in settlements have there begun to be, mostly at the
appellate level, settlements that are looked at and set aside.
But there is one additional problem in the current system.
A judge cannot say I do not like this settlement because the
defendant should not settle. I think this case is bogus. That
is not an option for a judge today, but that is often a problem
in a lot of these cases. In fact, there are some cases, albeit
in New York State court, in which a judge just turned down a
settlement in a case involving a challenge to a merger because
the judge said I think this settlement is unfair to the
corporation's shareholders. They are being asked to pay money
to these plaintiffs who do not have a good claim. I am going to
force the defendant to litigate the case because that is the
only option I have.
So we have a system that does not quite have the tools or
the incentive alignment to produce the kind of results we want.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Sweeney. Mr. Chairman, if I may respond?
Mr. Franks. Briefly, Mr. Sweeney.
Mr. Sweeney. I started my career----
Mr. Franks. Sir, would you turn that microphone on?
Mr. Sweeney. I started my career at the United States
Securities and Exchange Commission in the post-Watergate era. I
know something about the power of the civil injunction to
require American business to comply with the law. I also know
something about the power of the class action where consumers
have been injured to correct injustice.
But in 30 years in private practice representing American
business, I have not seen many of those class actions in
practice. And what I see are class actions that squander
transactional costs and do not provide a significant benefit to
consumers. And what we need is a law which says if you are not
injured, you do not need to be in the class action.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, sir. And I would now recognize the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
all of our witnesses. And, Ms. Miller, I especially appreciate
your giving the examples of the washing machines and the
roofers. And I would say in response to Ms. Moore's point that
we want to use our civil justice system to allow people to get
into court, and claim injuries, and have that decided by the
process. But that is not what happens with class action
lawsuits where somebody is brought into court without having
even consented to doing that.
In a traditional case, the plaintiff makes a decision in
consultation with their attorney whether or not they want to go
into court and seek relief for a harm they have had. But in a
class action, that is not what happens. Someone else makes that
decision. In fact, those same people make the decision in
conjunction with the defendants and with the consent of the
court to settle the case without ever consulting that
plaintiff. So if there is no injury on the part of an
individual, I think we need to look at making sure that that
happens.
So, Ms. Miller, I wonder if you would comment on this.
Would placing restrictions on no injury class actions eliminate
the deterrent effect of no injury cases and allow corporations
to violate the law with impunity?
Ms. Miller. I do not think it would. I think, if I may, and
I am not sure I am answering your question exactly. But I think
one thing that has sort of been lost here today is a very
fundamental concept in U.S. justice, and that is due process.
And we were talking earlier about how both sides, there are two
sides to every story. The problem with the class action of the
type that we are describing today is that the other side of the
story never gets told to the jury because the jury only sees
that named plaintiff. The jury does not see everybody else.
And so, there is no due process, and there is no fairness
to a trial where you have one person sitting before the jury,
millions of people that the jury never sees and never hears
from, who all never had a problem with the product. So there is
no fairness in that process.
In terms of deterrence, I understand that there is concern,
oh, if we do not have class actions, we will not be deterring
companies from acting improperly. But if a company acted
improperly, if a company made bad roofing shingles, then
everybody would have problems. Lots of people would have
problems. If a company made bad shingles, right, then you would
be able to bring a class action under this proposed legislation
because the named plaintiff's experiences would be typical of
those of the absent class members.
What we are talking about here are products that do not
have any widespread problems, services that are not causing
lots of people problems. So I am not really sure what you deter
by having a class action where most of the class members----
Mr. Goodlatte. Got it. Let me turn to Mr. Pincus and ask if
he wants to comment on that same question about placing
restrictions on no injury class actions. Would that eliminate
the deterrent effect of no injury cases and allow corporations
to violate the law with impunity? And then I have a follow-up
question for you as well, Mr. Pincus, and that is, what cost do
class actions that give more benefits to the plaintiffs'
attorneys than to the actual class members impose on society as
a whole? So give us your cost benefit analysis here.
Mr. Pincus. Well, Mr. Chairman, to take your first question
first, I think if there is no injury, first of all, it is hard
to see what we are deterring. There is sort of a statutory
violation in the air that seems a much more appropriate role
for law enforcement or a government enforcement agency if it is
a significant enough problem, rather than----
Mr. Goodlatte. And law enforcement can also be a civil
regulatory agency as well.
Mr. Pincus. Yes, civil regulatory if it is bad, but if it
was bad you would think there would be some injury, some other
government agency. But it seems very odd to give sort of a
roving deputization to, you know, what is in the real world,
cases that are put together by plaintiffs' lawyers to sort of
say, gee, there is no injury here, but I think it is a bad
thing. I am going to bring this lawsuit, trigger all of these
costs.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. Now, shift to my second question
because I am running out of time.
Mr. Pincus. So with respect to your second question, it is
sort of relates to the first. I think one of the problems in
the current system, the incentive alignment that I was talking
about, is either in the bringing of the case or the negotiation
of the settlement, the class action lawyer and the class have
somewhat different interests because they are both going to be
paid out of the same pot. And we do not really have a very good
system for supervising how that works. And as a result, we have
these settlements, as I talked about in my testimony, where a
disproportionate amount of money goes to the lawyers.
Mr. Goodlatte. I am going to go back to Ms. Miller for one
more question. In either of the two examples you gave or other
examples, can you speak to this issue of the disproportionate
benefit of attorneys' fees to what benefitted the plaintiffs in
particular cases?
Ms. Miller. Well, I think that pretty much happens in every
class action. As I noted in the appellate class action, only
one-half of 1 percent of class members participated in the
settlement, and that is pretty typical.
Mr. Goodlatte. What did the attorneys get in that case?
Ms. Miller. Several million, hundreds of millions, I
believe.
Mr. Goodlatte. Lots of money relative to very little gain
for all the people who are brought into court.
Ms. Miller. And, you know, some people say, oh, it was an
unfair settlement because the consumers got so little and the
lawyers got so much. But really I have a hard time saying that
because the consumers really had no injury. They did not want
the money, so it is not like the consumers were harmed in this.
It is just really a shakedown.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Franks. And I thank the gentleman, and I now recognize
Mr. Conyers for 5 minutes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor Moore, Mr.
Pincus cites a study conducted by his firm that suggests that
class actions do not really benefit class members, only class
counsel. Do you have a comment about that?
Ms. Moore. Yes, Congressman. As I mentioned in my opening
remarks, it would take me far more than 5 minutes to describe
the methodological flaws of this study. They candidly admit
that it is not a random sample. When you do a study and you try
to argue from the sample that you find that this is true of the
whole population that is out there, you must have a sample that
is statistically random and valid, and this is nothing of the
kind.
We know even though we have very little data on the number
of class actions that are filed, we know that more than 3,000,
probably 4,000 class actions per year are filed in Federal
court. They say, well, we went to these reporters, BNA and
Mealey's, and found, you know, some cases that were there that
they thought were important to put on there. And so, we thought
they were important to include, too, and then, you know, they
ignore everything else.
I can tell you that the percentage of consumer class
actions that they found in their 188 cases is way larger than
what real statistical studies show is the percentage of
consumer class actions.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you. Let me----
Mr. Pincus. Can I respond, Congressman?
Mr. Conyers. Just a moment. I have got a couple of
questions and only 5 minutes. You know, there is a claim that
the courts are certifying class actions when there is allegedly
no injury, and, therefore, these courts have violated our
Article 3 standing requirement. Do you want to elaborate on
that a little bit?
Ms. Moore. Sure. There are so many restrictions on the
filing, the maintenance of class actions and the settlement of
class actions. In fact, the whole reason that--well, one of the
reasons that the proponents of CAFA wanted to be in Federal
court was that they said that Federal judges were much tougher
on class certification that State court judges. And, you know,
we dispute whether that might have been the case, but that is
certainly what they believed.
In fact, Mayer Brown's study actually, you know, to the
extent you look at what it found, it actually shows how hard it
is for class actions to succeed. And so, there are so many road
blocks in the way of the successful pursuit of a class action.
There are cases out there all over the place that turn down
class actions in Federal court because they do not meet
ascertainability requirements.
And so, this goes back to my point about the lack of data.
You know, you pick one case out out of 4,000 and say, oh, here
is this terrible case. We need a broader understanding of what
is out there.
Mr. Conyers. I am sympathetic to that. But why is it
problematic, Professor, that there are no publicly-available
court data on class actions, and how does it relate to the
claims made by some of the majority witnesses?
Ms. Moore. Okay. If we had even access to the data that the
administrative office of the courts has, we could go in and we
could run a list of all the cases that have been filed this
year that say that they are class actions. We could then take a
random sample of that whole universe and go, you know, look at
200 cases randomly selected, and go look at those. That would
give us a much more valid basis for saying here is a good
sample of what is going on. We can infer from that to the
larger population.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. And I thank the gentleman, and now recognize
the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses, and I appreciate your testimony here. First, I
wanted to comment, as I picked up the opening statements along
the way, I think I merged two of them together. But the phrase
came out in my mind as I listened, ``entrepreneurial attorneys
pursuing parasitic settlements.'' I think that summarizes what
we are talking about here.
But I wanted to turn to Mr. Pincus first and ask, in this
discussion, are you also considering when government is
involved as a defendant?
Mr. Pincus. The cases that we looked did not look at
government defendant cases. These were private cases.
Mr. King. Yes. So you have not considered them? Do you have
any experience with that?
Mr. Pincus. I have some, and, you know, I think to some
extent, you know, some cases against the government are really
parallels of private actions, but some are often brought to
vindicate other kinds of rights, privacy rights and things that
are sort of unique to the government context and may present a
different situation.
Also, it is important to note that in most cases against
the government, damages are not available, right, because the
government has sovereign immunity. So they are cases for
injunctive relief for the most part, not entirely, obviously
not in the employment context. But that changes the incentives
that surround the cases to a pretty significant degree.
Mr. King. I am going to go with parallel cases and leave
that component at that. But I want to turn to Mr. Sweeney, and
I think you made the strongest statements about standing in
your testimony, and that is a bedrock prerequisite for access
to the court, and yet we are having a discussion here whereby
any logical observation of damage, there would not be standing
in the entire class.
What is the rationale that the judges are using when they
grant standing to a class where no one in the class has been
injured?
Mr. Sweeney. Usually what happens at the certification
stage is the court punts the question down the road without
demanding of the proponents of the class, the class counsel,
proof of harm to all the members of the punitive class. They go
ahead and they certify a class. That leaves the American
business in a horrible situation.
Very, very, very few class certification rulings are
permitted interlocutory appeal in our circuit courts under Rule
23(f). When that was originally passed in 1998, about a little
more than a third of all interlocutory appeals were permitted.
It is down to less than a quarter now. So in every case that I
have tried to get a certification ruling heard on interlocutory
appeal, it has been turned down, which means there is no
accountability, unless the corporation takes the claim to
verdict.
What happens then? When you have a verdict that is
potentially against a large class of unharmed individuals, the
amount in question can be astronomic, and that presents two
huge problems for American business. One, can they even afford
an appeal bond? 10 percent of a billion dollars is going to
bankrupt most companies. They cannot afford to appeal that
adverse ruling.
And even if they can appeal it, if they are a publicly-held
company, an astronomic verdict like that has a huge depressive
effect on their stock value. So is there any wonder that they
settle these claims, claims which are not meritorious, prior to
a verdict like that?
Mr. King. Well, do you, Mr. Sweeney, have any experience
with a class where the list is sealed by the courts, or a
negotiated settlement that seals that list of class members?
Mr. Sweeney. Well, I do not know about sealing lists per
se, but most settlements are confidential.
Mr. King. Yes.
Mr. Sweeney. And one of the reasons why it is so difficult
to garner any data in this area is precisely because of that,
and for good reason. What company which has been extorted into
paying settlement money where they did not think they did
anything wrong is going to want that to be on the public
record?
Mr. King. Okay. I am running out of time, Mr. Sweeney, so I
would like to turn to, and I thank you. I would like to turn to
Ms. Miller. And, you know, we see cases here often where there
is a plaintiff or a class of plaintiffs, and more likely, a
plaintiff, that has a legitimate claim, but they have great
difficulty achieving standing. And so, is it your opinion that
if we saw those cases and Congress decided to write standing
into legislation, do we have the constitutional authority to
define ``standing'' in our legislation so that the courts would
react to that and grant the standing?
Ms. Miller. Well, I think the answer to that question is
yes because I think what we are talking about is completely
consistent with Article 3 standing notions. And if I could have
1 second, I just want to clarify an answer I gave earlier, that
Pella settlement would have given $11 million to the attorneys.
Mr. King. Thank you. And if I could just do a general quick
question.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman----
Mr. King. Does anybody disagree with the response of Ms.
Miller on the standing and Congress' authority to draft and
write standing into legislation?
[Nonverbal response.]
Mr. King. I see nobody said no. Then I am going to take
that as Ms. Miller's response stands, and I thank you all, and
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman, and we are going to try
to get these last two in before votes, so I am going to ask
everyone to stick close to the 5 minutes. And with that, I
recognize Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Let me start by asking Ms. Moore, I
have been sitting here listening puzzled because what I have
been hearing from the three witnesses against class actions is
that the courts ignore Article 3 and ignore standing
requirements, and allow people with no injury at all to be
plaintiffs in lawsuits. I hear from Mr. Sweeney when he is
asked how do they get away with that, he says, well, they
punted down the case, then they get a verdict. But he did not
explain how they get a verdict without considering that
question first. He then goes into interlocutory appeals.
Ms. Moore, is it the case that a court will never rule on
the question of injury? And if that is not the case, why are we
talking about no injury plaintiffs? Do courts not enforce the
case in the controversy stand of Article 3?
Ms. Moore. Well, of course. I do not think anyone is
arguing with the abstract proposition that if you have suffered
no injury, you should not get compensation. But that is not
what is happening here, and we are hearing about hypothetical
cases.
Mr. Nadler. We are hearing about hypothetical cases where
allegedly people suffered no injury get compensation. Is that
real?
Ms. Moore. No.
Mr. Nadler. It is nonsense. It does not happen.
Ms. Moore. There are so many restrictions on cases. There
is so much case law has developed as to what is standing, and
who should get compensation, and what a makes a class cohesive
enough to certify. That, you know, this discussion is
proceeding as if there is no case law out there that guides and
restricts the things that are being talked about.
Mr. Nadler. So in other words, this is just as much
nonsense when we hear from the Chamber Institute for Legal
Reform. It is just as much nonsense as it was when they assured
this Committee 10 years ago that if we pass the then pending,
which we did Bankruptcy Act, every American would get a $400
reduction in interest rates from his bank. That turned out to
be not true, and this is equally nonsense?
Ms. Moore. Well, that is not my area of expertise,
Congressman, but I take your point.
Mr. Nadler. This is also nonsense. Now, let me ask you a
second question. I do not think even Mr. Sweeney, Mr. Pincus,
and Ms. Miller would maintain that there are not people who
are, in fact, injured. But I do take it from the gravamen of
their testimony, they would like to eliminate class actions all
together. No?
[Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Nadler. No, okay. I am glad to hear that because I do
not understand how we would, A, get compensation to people who
are truly injured, and B, how we would hold the General Motors
of the world who think it is okay to hide the fatal defects in
automobiles as more people get killed if we did not have class
action suits to bring that out. Mr. Moore, how would we?
Ms. Moore. I do not think there is a good way of deterring
that kind of abuse.
Mr. Nadler. Let me ask you a last question. Well, maybe a
last question. Has the CAFA, the law that we are talking about
now in 10 years, how has that harmed legitimate plaintiffs and
the public safety?
Ms. Moore. That is a very hard question to answer because,
of course, the theory is that Federal judges and State judges
are both trying to do the right thing. To the extent that
Federal judges and Federal court procedural rules are more
tough on plaintiffs than are State court rules, then plaintiffs
have been harmed.
Mr. Nadler. And by ``more tough,'' you mean harder to
certify a class.
Ms. Moore. Not just for class actions. There is a whole
panoply of procedural rules that favor defendants, and over the
last 20, 30 years have gradually more and more favored
defendants over plaintiffs in Federal court, and that is one of
the reasons they want to be in Federal court. It goes well
beyond class actions.
Mr. Nadler. And finally, given what you just said, what are
the implications for the ongoing development of state law if
State courts are routinely deprived of the opportunity to
address certain areas, and the Federal courts are asked almost
exclusively to say what the state courts would say about
interpretation of state law, and are barred, I think, from
ongoing development of common law on State grounds?
Ms. Moore. I think it shows perhaps a disrespect for State
law and for State judges to say, well, you know, they have made
up this law for statutory damages, and we do not really think
that that is very important. So we want to have some
legislation that we do not have to follow that.
Mr. Nadler. And lastly on that point, what would you say
about the contention that we cannot trust State judges, or we
have to bring it into the Federal courts, they do a better job,
from people who generally support States' rights?
Ms. Moore. I think that there is no empirical evidence that
State court judges are not tough on class actions.
Mr. Nadler. And this is certainly an anti-States' rights--
--
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nadler. Would you answer that last question, please?
This is certainly an anti-states' rights----
Mr. Franks. The gentleman time has expired. I will now
recognize Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Nadler. Would you answer the question, please? You did
not cut anybody else off like this.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired. I told you I
would hold everybody to 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Yes, only for the last two.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nadler. She could have finished answering that question
by now.
Mr. Franks. She finished the last question. Mr. Gohmert?
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, and I appreciate you being here.
And we do have a vote that is about to expire, and so I
appreciate your patience this morning. I may come at this issue
from a little different perspective than most having been a
judge that was asked by my State to take over what was called
the lawsuit from hell that had existed for 11 years, been
through five or six judges that had been reamed by PR firms
that went after them that were hired. And most people blamed
the plaintiffs, and they certainly included thousands of
plaintiffs perhaps that did not have similar injuries, Ms.
Miller.
But what I also found was the defendants had a distinct
pecuniary interest in delaying the outcome of the litigation as
much or more than the plaintiffs because they were working
hourly. And within 6 months, I dismissed, I think, 200 or 300
defendants. And one of the lawyers was waiting for me for some
of the defendants when I went into the clerk's office after the
hearing, and he said, Judge, I have been sitting here talking
to some other folks. We do not know what we are going to do. I
put two kids through college and law school on this case. I do
not know what I am going to do.
But what I found was that if you have a judge that properly
does his or her homework, finds that on the Daubert issue you
do not have to have months of hearings on someone's
qualifications as an expert, that unless the law has changed
since I ruled on this and set a scheduling order, you do not
have to take live testimony at trial. You put a discovery order
in place, scheduling order, and you are not deviating, and you
better get all of the questions asked that you need asked to
prove expertise or to show a lack of it.
And you do not have to have months' long hearings over
expertise. You just say we are taking no live testimony. Same
on venue issues, other things. There are no requirements, at
least they did not use to exist, that there be live testimony.
And so, there are ways to get around that. So I think there are
things that judges could do in a more activist role to police
themselves that is not being done. And by the way, that whole
litigation was disposed of basically in 2 years.
But, Ms. Miller, I am intrigued by your suggestion that we
limit litigants to having the same injury. And I am wondering,
like, for example, say you have got a products issue of an
accelerator sticking, and perhaps some plaintiffs had that same
problem, but they only had property damage and were not
actually injured, no medical records, nothing to show in the
way of dollars, pain and suffering. But then you have others
who were killed or had dramatic injuries.
If we use the injury rule, then you might say, well, gee,
these have property damage, these have personal injury, so the
property damage does not count when actually they were injured
by the same thing. I am wondering if perhaps it might be more
appropriate to look at having the same proximate cause or
having the same specific issue out of the lawsuit from hell
that I took over outside my district. You know, there were some
very legitimate cases, but there were some that should never
have been brought. So I am wondering, what brought you to
exclude the possibility of us limiting to specific proximate
cause or specific items that did the injury.
Ms. Miller. Well, I think if you have somebody, using your
example. You talked about somebody who was killed, so there are
a couple of things I would note. First of all, if you have a
serious personal injury like that, everybody says, oh, we need
class actions because people with small injuries, you know,
cannot recover. If you have somebody who is killed or has a
serious physical injury, as you know from watching late night
TV, that person's family will be barraged by thousands of
lawyers who want to represent a person who's been injured.
So class actions are not typically used in a situation
where somebody has suffered a severe injury like those. Those
suits would proceed alone. The problem with----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, some of them have been sucked up into
class actions sometimes kicking and screaming, but that has
been an issue.
Ms. Miller. So most Federal courts would not include
personal injury cases with non-personal injury cases.
Mr. Gohmert. It has been years ago, but some have been.
Ms. Miller. Right.
Mr. Gohmert. Could I just ask----
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gohmert [continuing]. Every witness to provide your
thoughts on the issue of limited----
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired. We are over
time.
Mr. Gohmert. I am asking unanimous consent that we allow
the witnesses to respond to that answer after the hearing.
Mr. Franks. Without objection for the record.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you.
Mr. Franks. And I now recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. DeSantis.
Mr. DeSantis. Mr. Pincus, are no injury class actions
consistent with Article 3 of the Constitution, which requires a
discreet case or controversy?
Mr. Pincus. No, Congressman, they are clearly not.
Mr. DeSantis. So how are courts getting around that
standing requirement?
Mr. Pincus. Well, what some courts say if the named
plaintiffs have standing, that that is enough. And so, they
will certify cases, for example, nationwide classes where the
plaintiffs have zero chance of recovering under the law of some
States. They may have under others, the classes nationwide, and
it all sort of gets smooshed together. Sometimes this happens
in the settlement context. Sometimes it happens in the
litigation context.
The other way that this happens it that some courts say
that statutory damages can be a substitute for actual injury
instead of merely substitute for quantifying actual injury.
Mr. DeSantis. Ms. Miller, do you see a conflict between
Article 3 of the Constitution and no injury class actions?
Ms. Miller. I believe there is a conflict between Article 3
and no injury class actions, as well as over broad class
actions. Both class actions present a problem because in the
over broad class actions, the absent class members have no
standing. And in those cases, that just never gets litigated in
reality because what happens is the case settles, or the court
says, well, you know, everybody over paid for this washing
machine by like 50 cents because of this problem, so we are
going to say everybody has standing.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. Well, I have some time left, but we
are going to vote. I really appreciate the Chairman moving this
along so I could just get in that question. I think it is an
important issue.
Mr. Franks. Well, I thank the gentleman very much.
Mr. DeSantis. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman very much, and I thank
the witnesses, and I thank the Members here. This will conclude
today's hearing, and thanks to all of our witnesses for
attending.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses or
additional materials for the record.
And, again, I thank the witnesses, and the Members, and the
audience, and this hearing is adjourned.
Mr. Sweeney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Miller. Thank you, Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 10:40 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Steve Cohen, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Tennessee, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on the Constitution and Civil Justice

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
