- SANCTUARY CITIES: A THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SANCTUARY CITIES:
A THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
IMMIGRATION AND BORDER SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 23, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-632 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-000

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa                       Georgia
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 JUDY CHU, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     TED DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           SUZAN DelBENE, Washington
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                SCOTT PETERS, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
MIMI WALTERS, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVE TROTT, Michigan
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security

TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Chairman

RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho, Vice-Chairman

LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
DAVE TROTT, Michigan

George Fishman, Chief Counsel

Tom Jawetz, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

JULY 23, 2015

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Trey Gowdy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of South Carolina, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Immigration and Border Security................................     1
The Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Immigration and Border Security................................     4
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary    28

WITNESSES

Jim Steinle, father of Kathryn Steinle, Pleasanton, CA
Oral Testimony.................................................    37
Prepared Statement.............................................    39
The Honorable Scott Jones, Sheriff, Sacramento County, CA
Oral Testimony.................................................    42
Prepared Statement.............................................    44
Jessica M. Vaughan, Director of Policy Studies, Center for
Immigration Studies, Washington, DC
Oral Testimony.................................................    50
Prepared Statement.............................................    52
Richard Biehl, Chief of Police, Dayton Police Department, Dayton,
OH
Oral Testimony.................................................    59
Prepared Statement.............................................    62

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................     6
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................    31
Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security................    72
Additional Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Sec92

deg.OFFICIAL HEARING RECORD
Unprinted Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security. See ``Rep. Lofgren
Submissions for the Record'' at:

http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103781.

SANCTUARY CITIES:
A THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 23, 2015

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Trey Gowdy
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gowdy, Goodlatte, Smith, King,
Labrador, Buck, Ratcliffe, Trott, Lofgren, Jackson Lee, and
Gutierrez.
Staff present: (Majority) George Fishman, Chief Counsel;
Andrea Loving, Deputy Counsel; Graham Owens, Clerk; and
(Minority) Rosalind Jackson, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Gowdy. We will now begin by welcoming everyone to this
morning's hearing on ``Sanctuary Cities: a Threat To Public
Safety.'' And I will recognize myself for an opening statement.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today,
and I want to express, Mr. Steinle, to you my profound sympathy
to you and to Kate's mother, to her brother, and all of your
family, and those who cherished her, for the tragic loss of
your beautiful daughter.
The preeminent function of government is to provide for the
safety and security of the law-abiding public. It is among the
chief reasons we consent to be governed and bound by a
collection of laws. We want those that we love to be protected,
so we abide by the law in the hopes that others will feel
similarly bound.
What makes this Nation different is our respect for and
adherence to the law because the law is the greatest unifying
force in our culture, and it is the great equalizing force in
our culture. In fact, we think so highly of the law that we
make aspiring citizens take an oath that contains six separate
references to the law.
This system of laws failed Kate Steinle as it has failed
others like her, and this is more than an academic discussion
about prosecutorial discretion. It is more than political
pandering to certain voting constituencies. It is more than the
supremacy clause or the commandeering clause. It is quite
literally life and death.
And this is the real world where everyone is not a DREAMer,
and everyone is not a valedictorian. There are criminals
motivated by malice and a conscious disregard for the lives of
others, and there are cities more interested in providing a
sanctuary for those criminals than they are providing a
sanctuary for their own law-abiding citizens.
I have been on this Committee, Mr. Chairman, for almost 5
years now, and I have listened closely to the debate over
immigration. You do not hear many witnesses called by our
colleagues on the other side to talk about law enforcement or
background checks or enforcement mechanisms. You do hear
certain phrases repeated with catatonic frequency as if rote
repetition will somehow make it true.
You hear phrases like ``functional control over the board''
uttered by witnesses who are uniquely well-positioned to know
better. You hear citizenship for 11 million undocumented
aspiring Americans as if 11 million of any category could pass
a background check. You hear arguments against empowering State
and local law enforcement to assist Federal authorities, and
those are the most illogical arguments of all.
We trust State and local law enforcement to investigate all
manner of crime from murder, to sexual assault, to kidnapping,
to narcotics trafficking, but God forbid they help us enforce
immigration laws. State and local law enforcement are good
enough to provide protection for Members of Congress in this
city and when they are back home, but somehow, some way, all
that changes when it comes to the issue of immigration. They
are no longer smart enough to enforce Federal immigration law.
And even though some do not trust State and local law
enforcement to enforce Federal law, they are more than happy to
allow State and local officials to openly ignore that same
Federal immigration law, which brings us to that benign-
sounding phrase, ``sanctuary cities.'' The definition of
``sanctuary'' is a place of refuge or safety. It almost sounds
utopian, a place of refuge, a place of safety.
Refuge for whom? Safety for whom? For a young woman walking
on a pier with her father, or for a career recidivist like Juan
Francisco Lopez-Sanchez, who had a quarter century's worth of
lawlessness dating all the way back to 1991. He committed
local, State, and Federal crimes in at least 5 separate States.
He was deported 5 times, and each time had so little regard for
the law that he reentered that border that we are supposed to
have functional control over.
His procedural history is every bit as disturbing. In May
of 2011, this defendant was convicted and sentenced to 46
months imprisonment for illegal reentry again. At the
conclusion of that sentence, he was released from the Bureau of
Prisons to a known sanctuary jurisdiction for the ostensible
prosecution of an old drug case. And, of course, San Francisco
did not prosecute that old drug case. They dismissed it, which
surprises exactly no one.
And then they released this defendant. They did not return
him to the Bureau of Prisons or to Federal probation. They did
not honor the detainer placed on him by ICE. They released
someone they knew was not legally in this country and that had
a criminal history dating back to the early 1990's.
And we are given a litany of excuses for policies like
this. We are told that we need policies like the one in San
Francisco so people will cooperate with law enforcement. And I
want you to consider how utterly illogical that is. We are
releasing known criminals back into society so society will
help us catch known criminals. And, of course, some of our
friends on the other side say all of this is necessary so folks
will, to use the President's word, ``come forward'' or ``get on
the books,'' or ``get right with the law.''
I want you to ask yourself, what in this defendant's
background leads you to believe that he would ever come forward
or get on the books or get right with the law? He was already
on the books. Better than that, he was in jail, and he was
there because he had not complied with a single damn thing we
had asked him to do.
So are we supposed to catch him again after San Francisco
releases him? Do we wait on another victim? Is that the
strategy behind sanctuary cities; release them and then wait
until they victimize someone else? Is that what we mean by
coming forward?
The President and others constantly talk about
comprehensive immigration reform, but they are very light on
the details when it comes to enforcement and background checks.
They just fundamentally fail to understand that border
security, both borders by the way--both of them--and internal
security are fundamental conditions precedent to fixing our
broken immigration system.
Mr. Steinle, about a year ago there was a precious little
girl waiting on the steps of the Capitol for me after votes,
and I knew what was coming, so I could not walk past her. I
knew or suspected that she would repeat those phrases that so-
called advocates teach children to repeat to Members of
Congress. But I had to stop as any father of a daughter would,
and I stopped and the little girl said, I want to pray for you,
one of the stuff that the advocates tell the children to say.
She just said, I want to pray for you.
So I picked her up, and in a mixture of Spanish and English
she told God that she was not here legally, but she wanted to
stay. And everyone that I know would want to help that little
girl. But everyone also should have wanted to help your little
girl, Mr. Steinle. She was not 5, but she is still your
daughter, and this country should have protected her.
And I hope you are given answers. I hope the politicians in
San Francisco will explain to you why they thought it was more
important to provide a sanctuary to Juan Francisco Lopez-
Sanchez than they did to provide a sanctuary for your daughter.
And I hope this Administration will tell you why a Bureau of
Prisons released a five-time illegal entrant to a known
sanctuary city for a piddling damn drug charge that wound up
being dismissed. And I hope San Francisco will tell you why
they released a convicted felon rather than honor the detainer
in place, or just simply return him to ICE. You deserve those
answers, and you deserve to know that your daughter's sacrifice
had meaning and purpose, and that her death will serve to save
the lives of other people.
When Trayvon Martin was shot and even before our criminal
justice system had acted, the President said that could have
been his son. For those of us that have daughters, which
includes the President, your daughter could have been our
daughter.
I used to have a quote on the wall of my old office at the
courthouse, and it was given to me by a victim advocate. It is
from a Greek philosopher named Solon. I will paraphrase it, but
this is pretty close. He was asked what city was the best one
to live in, and he answered that city where those who are not
injured by crime. Take up the cause of those who are as if it
had been them.
That is the kind of country we should want, too, one where
we do not have to lose our daughters, to feel the pain that you
feel. And we should not have to lose daughters to know that no
one else should have to feel like you feel this morning.
With that, I would recognize the Ranking Member.
Ms. Lofgren. First, I would like to welcome all of the
witnesses to the hearing today, but I especially want to
welcome members of the Steinle family and to extend my
heartfelt condolences to you. As a parent, I can only imagine
what you are going through, and any time an innocent person is
lost to violence, I think it is important that we all stop and
consider what steps could we take, what policies and processes,
procedures, and rules, and laws could be altered so that we
would have a safer community, so that that tragedy would not
occur.
And so, it is important the process that we are going
through at this time. A hearing like this offers Members and
the public an opportunity to learn more about the issue, and I
hope that we can work together collaboratively to address some
of the problems we were sent here to Washington to solve.
Now, I am eager to hear what each witness has to say. I
must note that last night Chairman Goodlatte and I testified
before the Rules Committee on H.R. 3009, a bill that has
already been decided is the answer apparently to this. And I
would note that if 3009 had been enacted into law, it would not
have had any impact on these circumstances that resulted in the
death of your daughter. In addition to that, major law
enforcement associations, like the Fraternal Order of Police,
the Major Counties Sheriffs Association, and others are telling
us that that bill would actually make us less safe, and they
all oppose that bill.
I do think that the testimony of the police chief of
Dayton, Ohio I hope will be instructive because I have not
heard a single person who suggests that it was wise,
appropriate, or even legal for the sheriff in San Francisco to
have released the individual who is charged with killing your
daughter. Having said that, there are police agencies around
the United States who believe that it makes our communities
less safe to inquire as to the immigration status in every
case. For example, the domestic violence organizations have
contacted us to say that if there is a call for a domestic
violence situation and the individuals who are calling know
that they and everyone in their household will be interrogated
as to their status, a family where there is mixed status will
not call for domestic violence. So we have to be mindful of
those issues, the entirety of the situation that we face.
I would ask unanimous consent to put into the record a
bipartisan letter that was sent to appropriators just 4 months
ago signed by 162 Members of Congress talking about the
importance of the Byrne JAG and COPS grants for policing in
this country.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Lofgren. And noting that it is those very grants that
would be removed by the legislation that is before the Congress
later today. And I would also ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record letters in opposition to H.R. 3009 by the Major
Counties Sheriffs' Association; the Fraternal Order of Police;
the Law Enforcement Immigration Task Force; the League of
Cities and the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Lofgren. With that, I would just say that I will listen
with great interest to all of our witnesses, but especially to
Mr. Steinle, and hopefully I will have a chance to meet you
after this hearing and your family as well. As you know,
Congresswoman Pelosi and I sent a letter to the Attorney
General and the Department of Homeland Security just a few days
ago to explore how could it be that you would send a person who
should have been deported to a jurisdiction for a warrant that
was 20 years old that clearly there was not going to be a
prosecution.
And oddly enough, I mean, this individual was deported in
1994, in 1997, in 1998, in 2003. And in none of those instances
did this ancient warrant prevent him from being deported. I
mean, he was also convicted repeatedly of felony reentry after
removal, and served 16 years in Federal prison for that crime,
and he just kept trying to get in. And I want to give credit to
our Border Patrol because every time he tried to come back in,
they caught him, which is exactly what they should do, and he
was prosecuted.
So we need to examine all of this and knowing that none of
it can bring your beautiful daughter back, but hopefully we
will be able to improve the situation as really a tribute to
your loss.
And with that, I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentlelady from California. The
Chair would now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee,
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing and for the work that you have dedicated
to this issue for the last 2 years.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
I think you all have compelling testimony, but I especially
want to thank Mr. Steinle, who I just had the opportunity to
meet. I told him that the fact that he would come here 3 weeks
after the tragic death of his daughter to me shows courage and
determination to make sure that other lives are saved as a
result of this. So you have my deepest sympathy, but also my
deepest appreciation and admiration for coming here today. I
also told Mr. Steinle that my son lives in San Francisco. I
have been on that very pier with my son and my daughter, and we
want to make sure that everybody is safe.
Last week, this Committee held a Department of Homeland
Security oversight hearing with Secretary Johnson as the sole
witness. Many Members focused their questions on sanctuary
cities, Immigration and Customs Enforcement detainers, and
criminal aliens. So we have heard much of what the
Administration has to say about these issues. But today we will
hear perspectives on sanctuary policies that are distinctly
different than what Secretary Johnson had to offer, and I look
forward to that testimony.
I am honored to have the family of Kate Steinle here and
Mr. Steinle testifying. And, of course, their perspective on
this issue is one that we wish they never had to contemplate.
And the same is true for the countless other victims of
criminal aliens that this Committee has heard from the past
several years, people like Jamiel and Anita Shaw, whose son was
murdered by a criminal alien gang member who has been released
from jail by Los Angeles law enforcement pursuant to Los
Angeles sanctuary policy. And people like Sabine Durden, whose
son, Dominic, was killed in a car accident by an illegal
immigrant who had two prior DUI convictions. Ms. Durden is here
with us this morning, and I thank you very much for being here
today as well.
These tragedies were preventable. This Administration must
reverse its wholesale and unprecedented shutdown of immigration
enforcement. Because the result of that shutdown is that
millions of unlawful and criminal aliens are not considered
high enough priorities for deportation, they are left in
American communities. In fact, in the last year, the number of
administrative arrests of criminal aliens has fallen by a
third, and the Department continues to release thousands of
such aliens onto our streets. ICE admitted to releasing 30,558
aliens with criminal convictions in 2014.
Last week we publicized ICE data showing the recidivist
activity of those criminal aliens ICE released in 2014. Already
1,423 have been convicted of new crimes like vehicular
homicide, domestic violence, sexual assault, DUI, burglary, and
assault, among many others. And no doubt, even more have been
arrested for, and charged with, additional crimes.
Secretary Johnson's solution, the Priorities Enforcement
Program, is a failure. Even the Secretary admitted last week
that five of ICE's Priority A, meaning the worst offending
jurisdictions, have refused to participate in PEP. And while 33
of the 49 Priority A jurisdictions have apparently agreed to
participate, it remains to be seen how fully they will
participate. The Administration has admitted that when it says
a jurisdiction has agreed to participate, that could encompass
compliance with only a very small part of PEP.
There is a clear answer to this problem: compliance with
ICE detainers must be mandatory. Jurisdictions that violate
that policy must suffer consequences. And, most importantly,
Congress must no longer allow the President the ability to
simply turn off the immigration enforcement switch.
This Committee has passed a bill that addresses all three
of those priorities, H.R. 1148, the ``Michael Davis, Jr. and
Danny Oliver in Honor of State and Local Law Enforcement Act''
introduced by Chairman Gowdy. While I look forward to
consideration of H.R. 1148 on the floor later today, the House
will vote on legislation to address one part of the solution to
sanctuary cities. That bill is a good first step, and I will
support it. I also appreciate the Majority Leader's commitment
to me that we will take additional action to ensure compliance
with our immigration laws in the future.
Today I look forward to hearing the witnesses' thoughts on
how to prevent sanctuary policies and the overwhelming number
of crimes committed pursuant to these policies. And I also want
to acknowledge that Mrs. Wilkerson, I think, is here this
morning as well. She testified before the Senate hearing on
Tuesday.
So I want to make it clear to everyone that this Committee
is committed to addressing this problem in a comprehensive way,
and we have taken the first step by bringing the bill to the
floor today. But that should not be the end; that should be the
beginning of our efforts to make sure that American citizens
are safe in their cities around the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Virginia yields back. The
gentlelady from California is recognized briefly for a
unanimous consent.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I should have asked
earlier for unanimous consent to enter Ranking Member Conyers'
statement into the record. And I would also ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record 137 statements, including from
the Archbishop of San Francisco, Church World Services, the
Methodists, and 134 other organizations on this subject.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note: The material referred to is not printed in this hearing
record but is on file with the Subcommittee. Also, see ``Rep. Lofgren
Submissions for the Record'' at:

http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103781.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. We welcome our very distinguished panel of
witnesses today. I would ask you to all rise so I can
administer an oath.
Do you swear the testimony you are about to give shall be
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help
you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Mr. Gowdy. May the record reflect all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
I will introduce you en banc and then recognize you
individually for your opening statement.
From left to right, Mr. Jim Steinle of Pleasanton,
California is the father of Kate Steinle who was murdered on
July the 1, 2015 by a recidivist criminal alien who had been
released from the San Francisco Sheriff's Department.
Sheriff Scott Jones started with Sacramento County
Sheriff's Department in 1989 as a security officer at their
brand new main jail. As a deputy he worked in corrections
patrol, legal affairs. He was promoted through the ranks to
sergeant, lieutenant, and finally captain. As sheriff, he
instituted an annual strategic planning process that
prioritizes projects and continues to drive the department
forward.
He holds a bachelor's degree in criminal justice from CSU
Sacramento and a juris doctor degree from Lincoln Law School.
Ms. Jessica Vaughan currently serves as the director of
policy studies for the Center for Immigration Studies. She has
been with the Center since 1992 where she has experience in
immigration policy and operations topics such as visa programs,
immigration benefits, and immigration law enforcement. And, in
addition, she is an instructor for senior law enforcement,
training seminars at Northwestern University Center for Public
Safety in Illinois.
She has a master's degree from Georgetown and a bachelors
in international studies at Washington College in Maryland.
Finally, Chief Richard Biehl joined the Dayton Police
Department as Director in Chief on January 28, 2008. He has
more than 35 years of experience in law enforcement. He served
on the Cincinnati Police Department from 1980 to 2004 in
positions including officer, sergeant, lieutenant, captain, and
ultimately assistant police chief.
Welcome to all of you. Mr. Steinle, you are recognized for
your opening remarks.

TESTIMONY OF JIM STEINLE, FATHER OF KATHRYN STEINLE,
PLEASANTON, CA

Mr. Steinle. Thank you. First of all, I would like to thank
the Members of this Committee for the honor to speak to you
about our daughter, Kate. All children are special in their own
way. Kate was special in the way she connected with people. We
called it the ``Kate effect.''
Kate was beautiful, she was kind, she was loving and deep
in faith. Kate had a special soul, a kind heart, the most
contagious laugh, and a smile that would light up a room. Kate
loved to travel and spend time with her friends, and, most of
all, spend time with her family. In fact, the day she was
killed we were walking arm in arm on Pier 14 in San Francisco
enjoying a wonderful day together. Suddenly a shot rang out,
Kate fell, looked at me and said, ``Help me, Dad.'' Those were
the last words I will ever hear from my daughter.
The day Kate died, she changed her Facebook cover photo to
a saying that said, ``Whatever is good for your soul, do
that.'' This quote truly describes her spirit. After graduating
from Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, she went to work for a title
company and saved her money so she could travel the world. She
traveled to Spain, Thailand, Amsterdam, Dubai, South Africa,
just to name a few. She even made her way to the slums of
Mumbai, India to reach out to her friend's mother's nanny. She
spent time there with the woman's family and came home a
changed person.
Everywhere Kate went throughout the world she shined the
light of a good citizen of the United States of America.
Unfortunately, due to disjointed laws and basic incompetence on
many levels, the U.S. has suffered a self-inflicted wound in
the murder of our daughter by the hand of a person that should
never have been on the streets of this country.
I say this because the alleged murder is an undocumented
immigrant who has been convicted of seven felonies in the U.S.
and already deported five times. Yet in March of this year, he
was released from jail to stay here freely because of legal
loopholes.
It is unbelievable to see so many innocent Americans have
been killed by undocumented immigrant felons in recent years.
In fact, we recently came across a statistic that says between
2010 and 2014, 121 criminal aliens who had an active
deportation case at the time of release were subsequently
charged with homicide-related offenses. Think about that: 121
times over 4 years an illegal immigrant, a violent illegal
immigrant, with prior criminal convictions that later went on
to be charged with murder when they should have been deported.
That is one every 12 days.
Our family realizes the complexities of immigration laws.
However, we feel strongly that some legislation should be
discussed, enacted, or changed to take these undocumented
immigrant felons off our streets for good. We would be proud to
see Kate's name associated with some of this new legislation.
We feel that if Kate's law saves one daughter, one son, a
father or mother, Kate's death will not be in vain.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Steinle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Steinle.
Sheriff Jones?

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE SCOTT JONES, SHERIFF, SACRAMENTO
COUNTY, CA

Sheriff Jones. Chairman Gowdy and Members, thank for you
the invitation to speak with you this morning. I am Scott Jones
and I am the Sheriff of Sacramento County, one of the largest
sheriffs departments in the country. And in Sacramento County,
like the rest of California and many communities, we have a
very diverse population, including a large population of
undocumented immigrants. They are a vital, important, and
valued part of our community.
Unfortunately, there is also a percentage of that community
that chooses to victimize others as a way of life in sometimes
heinous ways. Unfortunately, unlike their American
counterparts, I cannot protect my community from these
offenders.
Secure Communities went a good way in the right direction
by allowing fingerprints to be processed by ICE. Now, keep in
mind we do not have access to their database, so we do not know
status. But they did a good job of notifying their local ICE
offices of the folks that they wanted to take custody of.
Because they cannot be in every jail 24 hours a day, they
served the jails with a detainer that says hold this person for
a brief time until we get down to the jail and take custody of
this person that we have already identified should not be
released. It worked well, and few people fell through the
cracks.
Even under the new watered down version of Secure
Communities, the Priority Enforcement Program, it is dependent
on detainers to be functional. I can tell you that the detainer
system has failed, and consequently and necessarily then the
Priority Enforcement Program is also failing.
Even notwithstanding the fact that the Federal Government
allows and encourages States to pass their own immigration
laws, though they have no legal authority to do so--it is a
plenary and exclusive function of the Federal Government--they
are allowed to so without consequence or challenge because it
is much easier for that to happen. So we consequently have 50
different immigration policies that are constantly evolving.
The recent TRUST Act in California severely limited the
types of crimes for which we can honor detainers. But then came
a lowly magistrate judge in Clackamas County, Oregon who held
that in Clackamas County only that detainers were unlawful. I
and other sheriffs came back and talked with ICE administrators
and begged, pleaded with them to stand with us so we could
stand with our ICE partners to keep our communities safe and
honor detainers at least for the ones that our State laws
allowed because they already said they would not contravene
that. They said, no, that it would not happen during this
Administration.
And in a leadership vacuum, someone will fill that space,
and that someone was the ACLU who seized on the opportunity to
send a letter to every sheriff in this country telling them
that if they honored any ICE detainers, not just the ones that
were allowed by State law, but any ICE detainers, they would be
sued. Again, we pleaded with ICE to no avail. So now, over 200
jurisdictions in this country do not honor ICE detainers.
People are simply released without any scrutiny from ICE at
all.
California has become a de facto sanctuary State, and in
short order this entire country will be a de facto sanctuary
country. But that is not the same as sanctuary cities that pass
laws that overtly and conspicuously violate Federal law. They,
too, are allowed to do so. I have it on good authority that the
San Francisco Sheriff's Office has not contacted ICE for any
reason in over 3 years despite being served with many detainers
during that time period. It is deplorable and reprehensible.
And you will find no shortage of police chiefs willing to come
here and testify that this type of legislation named after in
part Danny Oliver, the deputy of mine that got killed last
October 24th by someone removed 4 times, that it is going to be
bad for our communities, that it is going to erode trust in our
immigrant communities, that we should not be enforcing
immigration law. It should be a function of the Federal
Government. And I cannot argue with any of that. I agree with
every little sentiment that is expressed.
I do not care. I do not have any desire to enforce
immigration law, but that presupposes that there are people
that are concerned with enforcing immigration law, and that is
not happening. And notice I mentioned police chiefs willing to
come here and testify. I defy you to find a sheriff that will
come here and testify that some of this legislation is not a
good idea, because while we are both singularly concerned with
building trust in our communities, only the sheriffs, because
of their roles in corrections in this country, are concerned
with the dire consequence of releasing someone they know who
should not be released, that they know ICE already wants and
that society should be protected from, and not to be able to
hold them for even 1 minute while ICE can come down to the jail
and take custody of them.
Sheriffs are accountable to the people. They are elected.
We have our own political voice. There is a reason, a very
conspicuous reason. Even though our large role in corrections
in this country that there is no sheriff representation on the
President's 21st Century Task Force on Policing. And that is
it.
Even without national immigration reform, there can be
solutions. There can be legislative or stroke of pen changes by
policy that will make this part better, to make detainers
lawful and mandatory on local detention facilities so we can
cooperate with our ICE partners despite what the policymakers
in Washington have.
I hope you have had an opportunity to review the
information that I have presented prior to this hearing. It
lists some of those suggestions. I remain deeply committed to
assisting in whatever way I can in this issue, and I look
forward to exploring any of those issues further through any of
your questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Jones follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Sheriff.
Ms. Vaughan?

TESTIMONY OF JESSICA M. VAUGHAN, DIRECTOR OF POLICY STUDIES,
CENTER FOR IMMIGRATION STUDIES, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Vaughan. Thank you very much for the opportunity to
testify on the public safety problems created when local
governments adopt policies that obstruct immigration
enforcement, commonly known as sanctuary policies.
According to an ICE report that I obtained through a FOIA
request, as of October 2014, there were 276 such jurisdictions
in the United States. Over an 8-month period in 2014, more than
8,100 criminal aliens who were the subject of detainers were
instead released back into the streets as a result of these
non-cooperation policies. Approximately two-thirds of these
individuals already had a serious criminal history as defined
by ICE as the time of their release. Nearly 1,900 of them
subsequently reoffended just in that 8-month period. Only 28
percent of them have been re-apprehended by ICE.
Now, I have just reeled a lot of statistics that I know
sometimes make some people's eyes glaze over, but as someone
who also has lost a close family member--my brother--because of
a negligent act by a sworn law enforcement officer and also a
bad policy--and I should add that the offense that was
committed was one that some on this Committee would call a
minor traffic offense that killed my brother--I have to say
that it is really not okay to refer to these tragedies as a
little thing, as one Member of this Committee has.
I have a friend. Her name is Heather. A few years ago she
was carjacked at knife point and taken to Roger Williams Park
in Providence, Rhode Island and raped repeatedly by an illegal
alien who had been in the custody of the Providence Police
Department more than once, but was released because of then
Mayor Cicilline's sanctuary policies. This was not a little
thing.
I have other friends, some in this room, who can tell
similar stories, and I am afraid that Congress is about to try
to get away with doing just a little thing just by barring
funding from these sanctuary jurisdictions, some funding. And I
am asking you today to not be satisfied with just doing a
little thing. This big problem requires you to have the courage
to do a bigger thing. You have the language in the Davis-Oliver
Act. Please do this for these families who have lost so much.
Sanctuary policies do nothing to build trust between
immigrant communities and local law enforcement. They do not
improve access to law enforcement services for immigrants, nor
have they been shown to increase the likelihood that more
immigrant crime victims will report crimes. On the contrary,
they destroy the trust of the community at large that the laws
will be faithfully enforced to preserve the quality of life for
all.
Despite the widespread public outrage at the San Francisco
sheriff's policies that caused the release of a man who went on
to kill Kathryn Steinle, it is clear that some jurisdictions
will not budge from their criminal alien sanctuary policies. To
make matters worse, the Obama administration's new Priority
Enforcement Program explicitly allows local jurisdictions to
obstruct ICE, and also establishes the entire country as a
sanctuary for nearly all illegal aliens by further narrowing
enforcement priorities and severely restricting the ability of
ICE officers to deport removable aliens, including many with
criminal records.
Therefore, Congress must step in to correct the situation
by clarifying in the law that local law enforcement agencies
are expected to comply with ICE detainers; establishing that
local law enforcement agencies will have qualified immunity
when cooperating in good faith; by implementing sanctions for
those sanctuary jurisdictions that continue to refuse to
cooperate; and by reversing the Obama administration's non-
enforcement policies.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vaughan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Ms. Vaughan.
Chief Biehl?

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD BIEHL, CHIEF OF POLICE,
DAYTON POLICE DEPARTMENT, DAYTON, OH

Chief Biehl. Chairman Gowdy, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to provide testimony on this important
issue.
I am Richard Biehl, the director and chief of police of
Dayton, Ohio Police Department. I have had the honor of serving
in this position since January 28th of 2008. Further, I have
spent the last 35 years working to improve public safety in
urban areas. Through that experience, I know that effective
public safety, even when grounded in evidence-based best
practices, is crucially dependent upon community engagement and
support.
First, I would like to express my condolences to the
Steinle family for their loss and to Sheriff Jones for the loss
of his officer last year. Sadly, I attended the funeral of
Cincinnati Police Officer Sonny Kim less than a month ago
killed in the line of duty. He was my 9th in my career.
I happened to read a Proverb a couple of days ago, and I
think it is quite appropriate to the conversation today. ``Our
passions are the winds that propel our vessel. Our reason is
the pilot that steers her. Without winds, the vessel would not
move; without a pilot she would be lost.''
I know we are here to discuss the topic of sanctuary cities
and the role in public safety. As we have the conversation
about sanctuary cities, the specifics of how we define them are
important, and as we think about how to best protect the
residents and keep our communities safe, it is crucial that we
do not undermine proven community policing practices.
First, I would like to explain Dayton's policy regarding
cooperation with Federal immigration enforcement efforts. Our
policy states that the Dayton Police Department shall not stop,
investigate, or arrest a person solely because of their real or
perceived immigration status. Investigation of a person's
immigration status must be done only for the most serious
offenders. This approach has served the Dayton community well.
During the time these policies have been in place, Dayton has
experienced significant reductions in crime. This is an
important point I want to convey to you all.
As chief of police, my primary concern is with the safety
all residents, and in Dayton we have seen a reduction in crime
in our city. Our immigration law enforcement approach allows us
to focus on true threats to public safety while ensuring that
our immigrant communities maintain necessary trust to report
criminal incidents to our Department.
I am concerned that proposed legislation, such as H.R.
3009, would coerce local law enforcement departments to make
decisions that undermine our ability to keep our community
safe. The Dayton Police Department, like many agencies
throughout the State of Ohio, is facing critical staffing
shortages that are already creating potential challenges for
fulfilling its public safety responsibilities. Making local
police departments fulfill immigrant enforcement
responsibilities will only make it even more challenging.
I have seen the positive effects of community policing in
my city. Dayton as a population is only 4 percent foreign born.
Given its demographics, it may appear an unlikely place for a
national immigration policy to be of much concern, much less an
issue impacting local policing. But in my time as police chief,
I have repeatedly witnessed how significant the issue is to our
community.
Within a month of beginning my service as Dayton Police
Chief, I was approached by multiple community advocates who
expressed concerns that the Latino community members were being
racially profiled. Allegations like this are deeply troubling
to me. Our cities are safer when there is a sense of trust with
our communities, including our immigrant communities. If
families view law enforcement as a threat, or are fearful of
dropping off their kids off at school, or walking around their
neighborhood, no one benefits.
As I stated earlier, Dayton has seen a reduction in crime,
not an increase, as a result of our community policing
policies, such as investigating persons of immigration status
only for the most serious offenses. I might add that we have
bene recognized Statewide, nationally, and internationally for
excellence in problem-only policing and community-oriented
policing.
While immigration enforcement is a Federal responsibility,
collaboration between State and local law enforcement and
Federal immigration enforcement official can and should exist;
but policies need to be clearly tailored to ensure community
policing is not undermined. I agree we should deport serious
violent offenders. No one wants violent crime in their
community, because once we get beyond violent offenders that
some localities and municipalities disagree over collaboration
with Federal immigration enforcement officials.
I support the new Priority Enforcement Program initiative
as the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has described it.
PEP allows local jurisdictions to work with ICE to implement
priorities concerning crimes that most negatively impact public
safety in their communities.
I believe local law enforcement should comply with
notifications as well as detainers as long as the detainers do
not require jurisdictions to exceed their legal authority to
hold persons beyond their current sentence and local charges.
Requiring local law enforcement to hold persons for additional
time must be supported by a legal basis; otherwise, it would
ask local law enforcement to violate the U.S. Constitution,
something none of us wants.
Before Congress tries to impose a legislative solution, I
believe it should first allow PEP to be implemented. What
everybody wants is a safe community. That is what I want, and
that is what community members care about. We should not punish
localities who are trying to promote trust in their
communities. Collaboration with Federal immigration officials
should exist for those serious and violent of criminals. That
collaboration needs to be carefully tailored to address the
priorities of local communities while ensuring community
policing is not undermined, such as through the PEP Program.
A long-term solution requires Congress to come up with a
fix for a broken immigration system and clarify immigration
enforcement responsibilities. Until that time, local community
leaders will continue to implement practical solutions to
promote public safety in our communities.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I am
happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Chief Biehl follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Chief, and thank all our witnesses.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Idaho, Mr.
Labrador, for his questions.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you all for being here. Sheriff Jones,
in your written testimony you provide some suggestions for
fixing our immediate problems between ICE and local law
enforcement, including making detainers mandatory in local
jails and having ICE share resources with localities to ensure
effective enforcement. In your view, given the current
politicized status of ICE's policies, what can be done to
compel ICE to provide these resources to States and localities?
Sheriff Jones. Well, thank you for the question. It is
important to remember that until a couple of years ago, ICE
detainers were mandatory. There was nothing equivocal in the
enabling statute. It says ``local jails shall,'' not ``may'' or
``in their discretion,'' but ``shall'' hold folks for no more
than 48 hours. It is only through policies of this
Administration that that has softened up.
About 3 years ago, they were mandatory. For about a year or
2-year period, the Federal Government literally would refuse to
answer whether they are mandatory or mere requests, and now, of
course, they have simply thrown up their hands and said, well,
look at Clackamas. I guess that is Federal law. Well, that is
not the way our American system of jurisprudence works.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. Can you explain that to the American
people? It is one judge in one jurisdiction does not make the
law for the United States.
Sheriff Jones. It is not even a judge.
Mr. Labrador. It is a magistrate.
Sheriff Jones. It is a magistrate.
Mr. Labrador. They are judges----
Sheriff Jones. I guess.
Mr. Labrador. Yes.
Sheriff Jones. They still have a longer appointment than I
do, so.
Mr. Labrador. Yes.
Sheriff Jones. So it is applicable in that particular
district, nowhere else. And so, the Federal Government could
have done something minimally such as stand up and say we do
not agree with that, let alone challenge it, but they do not.
They allow that to extrapolate to make national policy, and the
ACLU seized upon that vacuum to do so.
So it is not like it is unprecedented that detainers are
mandatory. They have been mandatory, and that was the success
of the Secure Communities Program.
Mr. Labrador. So what can be done now? You see this
Administration not doing their job. What----
Sheriff Jones. Well, there are a number or things, but
specifically relative to detainers, they have to be once again
determined to be mandatory. The fact that you cannot hold
someone based on anything less than a warrant or a court order
is ludicrous. We arrest everyone in this country, citizens or
not, we detain them on reasonable suspicion. We arrest them on
probable cause. They do not see a judge for 48 hours or 2 days
or 3 days. So to suggest that because you are undocumented you
somehow have greater constitutional rights, that----
Mr. Labrador. American citizens.
Sheriff Jones [continuing]. Is ludicrous. You cannot----
Mr. Labrador. It is. Okay. Thank you very much. Chief
Biehl, thank you for the work that you do in your community,
but I do have some questions for you. Your testimony discusses
the need for comprehensive immigration reform to help law
enforcement know who is present in the community. But is it not
true that Kate Steinle's killer was previously in the custody
of San Francisco law enforcement officials, and, thus, was
already known by the San Francisco law enforcement?
Chief Biehl. That is a fact.
Mr. Labrador. Your written testimony contains a quote from
an email by community advocates you received regarding alleged
racial profiling in Dayton. Were any of the allegations in the
email substantiated?
Chief Biehl. They were not substantiated through
investigation. I will say that in terms of arrest data, there
was clearly a surge of arrests of Hispanics and Latinos that
occurred 1 year prior to my arrival that was substantial. So
whether the actual basis of those allegations----
Mr. Labrador. Were any of these arrests taken out because
there was insufficient data about their criminality?
Chief Biehl. That is my understanding.
Mr. Labrador. Were any of these arrests dismissed, or were
they not prosecuted because of racial profiling?
Chief Biehl. Yes, a number of them were--I am sorry.
Mr. Labrador. Because of racial profiling?
Chief Biehl. No, not because of racial profiling. A number
were dismissed, though.
Mr. Labrador. But not because of racial profiling.
Chief Biehl. No.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. Your testimony notes that your
department is focused on serious chronic and high rate
offenders. Would it not make sense to protect residents of
Dayton by working with Federal immigration agencies to enforce
laws so that aliens never have the opportunity to commit so
many crimes as to be considered serious, chronic, and high rate
offenders?
Chief Biehl. Actually we do work with Federal immigration
authorities. In fact, we have partnerships with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Administration,
United States Marshals Fugitive Task Force, Department of
Homeland Security, including individuals who have homeland
security investigation credentials, even the Trafficking and
Steering Committee, and also the United States Secret Service.
So we have partnerships across Federal law enforcement
agencies.
Mr. Labrador. And you think that is a good thing, right?
Chief Biehl. Absolutely. That is why we do it.
Mr. Labrador. Do you comply with ICE detainers?
Chief Biehl. Actually they are complied with in my county.
Mr. Labrador. Excellent. And would you have complied with
an ICE detainer in the case of Juan Francisco Lopez-Sanchez, a
seven-time convicted felon who has been deported by the U.S.
five times?
Chief Biehl. Absolutely.
Mr. Labrador. Absolutely. Your recent opposition to
allowing State and local law enforcement officers to help
enforce Federal immigration law include that immigration law
include that immigration laws are very complex. I do not know
that immigration laws are any more complex than other criminal
laws. Why do you not think that your officers are smart enough
to be able to act as a force multiplier for Federal immigration
enforcement?
Chief Biehl. Thank you for that question, Congressman. My
understanding for individuals to be credentialed on a 287
requires 3 weeks of training. That is a substantial commitment
of training time for police officers for a very specific area
of enforcement. I cannot think of any agencies that could spend
that amount of time with personnel and training.
There are training requirements now being proposed through
the State of Ohio. There have been a number of tasks forces
established--the 21st Century Task Force on Policing, the
Presidential Task Force--that are once again emphasizing the
need for additional training for law enforcement. I can tell
you training time is at an absolute premium specifically as it
relates to critical staffing levels. So how do we spend time
training police officers?
And just from talking from individuals who are in this area
of law, the law is constantly changing, so 3 weeks of training
is only valuable as long as the laws do not change.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Idaho yields back. The
gentlelady from California.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I appreciated
hearing from all the witnesses. Sheriff Jones, you mentioned
that no sheriff would come and take the position of Chief
Biehl. I would like to ask unanimous consent to put into the
record a letter from the Law Enforcement Immigration Task Force
opposing H.R. 3009 signed by a number of law enforcement
officials, including Sheriff Mark Curran from Illinois, Sheriff
Tony Estrada from Arizona, Sheriff Leon Lott from South
Carolina, Sheriff William McCarthy from Iowa, Sheriff Margaret
Mims from Fresno, and Sheriff Lupe Valdez from Texas.**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Note: The material referred to was previously submitted. See page
22.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Lofgren. Also I would like to ask unanimous consent to
place in the record a letter from the Major County Sheriffs'
Association opposing the idea of removing grant funding as a
mechanism to enforce anything.***
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
***Note: The material referred to was previously submitted. See
page 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Ms. Lofgren. You know, as we seek efforts to make our
communities safer, we do not want to make it more dangerous.
And, Chief Biehl, your testimony I thought was very
interesting. In your op-ed recently you said that crime in
Dayton dropped by nearly 22 percent after you engaged in your
new community policing effort, and that serious property crime
dropped almost 15 percent.
Now, why do you think this happened? Was it community
trust? And have these favorable crime reduction figures
continued or not?
Chief Biehl. Thank you, Congresswoman. In fact, they are a
direct outgrowth of not only innovative policing strategies,
but also community partnerships. Our community working with us
to address crime and particularly serious violent crime has
been crucial in reducing crime in Dayton as crime trends have
continued through my tenure as police chief.
Ms. Lofgren. Now, again, there has been a lot of discussion
about detention and whether that is constitutional and citing
one particular case. However, there are a number of cases, and
rather than go into all of them here, I would ask unanimous
consent to place a summary of a series of cases, Federal cases,
that have found that you cannot hold somebody on a civil matter
at the request of ICE absent a warrant or something else.
[The information referred to follows:]
Federal Court Decisions Invalidating ICE Detainers
Morales v. Chadbourne, 996 F. Supp. 2d 19, 29, 32-34 (D. R.I. 2014)
(holding that plaintiff stated a Fourth Amendment claim where she was
held for 24 hours on an ICE detainer issued without probable cause),
affirmed, Morales v. Chadbourne, --F.3d --, 2015 WL 4385945, *4-*8 (1st
Cir. July 17, 2015) (slip op.) (holding that ICE agent could be held
liable for detention because it was clearly established in 2009 that
ICE detainers must be based upon probable cause).

Galarza v. Szalczyk, No. 10-6815, 2012 WL 1080020, at *10, *13 (E.D.
Pa. Mar. 30, 2012) (unpub.) (holding that where plaintiff was held for
3 days after posting bail based on an ICE detainer, he stated a Fourth
Amendment claim against both federal and local defendants; it was
clearly established that the ``detainer caused a seizure'' that must be
supported by ``probable cause''), rev'd on other grounds, Galarza v.
Szalczyk, 745 F.3d 634 (3d Cir. 2014) (holding that the County
operating the jail, too, may be liable for violating the Fourth
Amendment).

Mendoza v. Osterberg, No. 13-65, 2014 WL 3784141, at *6 (D. Neb. July
31, 2014) (unpub.) (recognizing that ``[t]he Fourth Amendment applies
to all seizures of the person,'' and thus, ``[i]n order to issue a
detainer[,] there must be probable cause'') (internal quotation marks,
ellipses, and citations omitted).

Villars v. Kubiatowski, 45 F.Supp.3d 791, 808 (N.D. Ill. 2014) (holding
that plaintiff stated a Fourth Amendment claim where he was held on an
ICE detainer that ``lacked probable cause'').

Miranda-Olivares v. Clackamas Cnty., --F.Supp.2d ---, No. 12-02317,
2014 WL 1414305, at *10 (D. Or. Apr. 11, 2014) (slip op.) (holding that
plaintiff's detention on an ICE detainer after she would otherwise have
been released ``constituted a new arrest, and must be analyzed under
the Fourth Amendment'').

Uroza v. Salt Lake County, No. 11-713, 2013 WL 653968, at *5-6 (D. Ut.
Feb. 21, 2013) (unpub.) (holding that plaintiff stated a Fourth
Amendment claim where ICE issued his detainer without probable cause;
finding it clearly established that ``immigration enforcement agents
need probable cause to arrest . . . [and] detainees who post bail
should be set free in the absence of probable cause to detain them
again'').

Vohra v. United States, No. 04-0972, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 34363, *25
(C.D. Cal. Feb. 4, 2010) (magistrate's report and recommendation)
(``Plaintiff was kept in formal detention for at least several hours
longer due to the ICE detainer. In plain terms, he was subjected to the
functional equivalent of a warrantless arrest'' to which the
```probable cause' standard . . . applies''), adopted, 2010 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 34088 (C.D. Cal. Mar. 29, 2010) (unpub.).

Ortega v. ICE, 737 F.3d 435, 439, 441 (6th Cir. 2013) (dismissing
plaintiff's due process claims against individual officers based on
qualified immunity, but clarifying for future cases that
``transfer[ring] [a prisoner] from home confinement to prison
confinement'' based on an ICE detainer ``amounts to a sufficiently
severe change in conditions to implicate due process''; dismissing
plaintiff's Fourth Amendment claim because it was not clearly
established in 2011 whether ``moving a convict from home confinement to
prison confinement'' based on an ICE detainer ``resulted in a new
seizure within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.'').

Mendia v. Garcia, 768 F.3d 1009, 1013 (9th Cir. 2014) (where plaintiff
alleged that ICE caused his extended detention by issuing an ICE
detainer that precluded him from posting bail, his injury was traceable
to ICE for purposes of establishing standing to sue for damages).
__________

Ms. Lofgren. And I think that is why sheriffs all across
the United States, whether or not their communities say they
are ``sanctuary cities,'' have been reluctant to do this. And
that is why the Administration has gone to this Priority
Enforcement Program because it does not violate anybody's
constitutional rights if you ask to be notified before you
release somebody.
And what we have heard from ICE is if you have got a
serious character like this guy in San Francisco, they will get
there, and they will pick him up, and they will take him away
and deport him, which is what should have happened in this
case. Actually he should never have been sent to San Francisco
in the first place.
I am wondering whether you have any objection, Chief Biehl,
or whether your community would have any objection to the
Priority Enforcement Program that requires notification so that
ICE can come and remove people who are priorities for
enforcement, who are serious criminals.
Chief Biehl. I am not aware of any objection from my
community with that program at all. None have been expressed to
me. I have been involved in the Committee conversations, the
task force conversations for the development of some of the
mechanisms and notification and also for, you know, basically
be involved in the roll out. I mean, it is just literally being
rolled out as we speak.
I just met with our local field office director last week,
who actually gave me a packet describing the program and its
implementation. So this is literally just being implemented.
Ms. Lofgren. I would note also, and I see that my time is
almost expiring, that when someone is booked into a jail, their
fingerprints are taken. And those fingerprints, I mean, of
everyone.
Chief Biehl. Correct.
Ms. Lofgren. Immigrants, undocumented, legal, American
citizens. Those fingerprints are shared with the Federal
Government and made part of the database. And that has not been
changed at all, has it, Sheriff? No. And I do not think there
is any confusion that that interferes with community policing
or building trust with the community. Have you heard that?
Chief Biehl. Not at all.
Ms. Lofgren. Mr. Chairman, I am hopeful that we can hone in
on the need to make sure that the ability to remove dangerous
criminals by ICE is enhanced, and that we do not get diverted
by disagreements over overall immigration policy because I
believe that we can have the ability to come together to reach
consensus in a way that would be a very positive outcome.
And with that, my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte [presiding]. The Chair thanks the gentlewoman
and recognizes himself for his questions. And let me just say
that there are 5,000 ICE agents in the country responsible for
enforcing our immigration laws, which we know there are 350,000
convicted criminal illegal aliens on the streets right now.
There are 11 million or more people who are unlawfully present
in the United States. And that when you have over 900,000 local
law enforcement officers, some communities may want to
participate, some may not. We do not require them to enforce
our immigration laws.
But the people who are unlawfully present in the United
States and cause various types of problems, including
committing crimes, are a concern to not just the national
government, to local governments as well. So I think the first
step is to see that our laws are enforced by the Federal
Government, and I do not believe they are, and by State and
local governments. And I think that beyond that, legislation is
needed to address many aspects of our immigration policy.
Let me ask Mr. Steinle and then Sheriff Jones to talk a
little bit more about the personal experiences that they have.
Mr. Steinle, do you believe that San Francisco should have been
required to honor ICE detainers?
Mr. Steinle. Well, absolutely.
Mr. Goodlatte. And do you agree that the U.S. immigration
and enforcement policy should not be to the detriment of U.S.
citizens and legal lawful resident immigrants?
Mr. Steinle. Yes.
Mr. Goodlatte. So would it not be best to remove unlawful
aliens before they commit serious crimes as opposed to simply
trusting and hoping that they will not, in fact, commit serious
crimes? In the case of Mr. Lopez-Sanchez, he had committed some
drug offenses, and he had committed the offense of illegally
entering the United States. He had not committed murder at that
point in time. But this whole debate about how serious a crime
you have to commit before you can be subject to the enforcement
of the laws which apply to everybody gets to be problematic,
does it not?
Mr. Steinle. Well, Mr. Chairman, if I may, our intent with
Kate's law is to get rid of or do something with the violent
felons. The way I understand the law is if any undocumented
person comes into the United States and subsequently is
deported, then comes back into the United States, they are a
felon.
Mr. Goodlatte. That is correct, and they do not have to
have committed any other crime. They are a felon at that point
in time.
Mr. Steinle. They are a felon at that point.
Mr. Goodlatte. And Kate's law would impose a mandatory
minimum sentence.
Mr. Steinle. But where I see that we have to hone in on is
a felon is not a felon is a felon. We are talking about violent
felons that come in here to the United States. If we try to
arrest every felon, the jails would be full, and the officers
here would be extremely busy. I think we need to differentiate
somehow or another the levels of felonies, and that is another
can of worms. I understand that. But do you see that as a----
Mr. Goodlatte. But if you have cooperation between local
law enforcement and the Federal Government, with limited
resources they do have to set priorities, but they will set
those priorities based on the best information, not based
upon----
Mr. Steinle. I understand.
Mr. Goodlatte [continuing]. Individual localities trying to
set their own immigration policies.
Mr. Steinle. Sure, I understand.
Mr. Goodlatte. Sheriff Jones, would you tell us about
Deputy Danny Oliver, his life, and what kind of person, deputy
he was, and the circumstances of his murder?
Sheriff Jones. Yes, thank you. He was not unlike any cop in
this country who has answered the call, who law enforcement is
a calling, not a job, to help people, and for a life of
service. He was particularly assigned to the Problem-Oriented
Policing Unit, or ``POP officers'' might be more familiar. They
are what I call the quality of life police. Their job is to
address quality of life issues, not answer calls for service.
It is what he was doing on that date with a particular
problem motel in our jurisdiction, had already made contact
with someone in the front, and was onto the back of the hotel
when he came in contact with two people in a car. And I believe
the last words he ever spoke was ``How is your day going
today,'' and then he was shot a single time in the forehead
killing him almost instantly.
Mr. Goodlatte. Are there changes to immigration enforcement
that could have prevented Deputy Oliver and Investigator Davis'
murders?
Sheriff Jones. First of all, he was booked in under an
alias that we did not even know his true identity for several
days. Secondly, we realized that he had a driver's license that
was issued from one of the States that issue them. Now
California does as well. Had suffered 11 different misdemeanor
traffic-related convictions from hit and run to DUI. Was able
to walk in and renew his driver's license.
And he had been removed from the country four times, the
first time with a deportation. The second time the next year he
was simply released back across the border the very same day he
was captured, 3 days later was back in this country. Once
again, released across the border that very same day, and the
next year came into this country illegally. Was arrested on
felony warrants for a local crime, was deported again 3 days
later. So not only escaping consequences for any of his
deportations or prior illegal entry, but in the last case at
least escaped any consequences for his local criminality
because presumably it was easier to deport him than face his
criminal conduct.
Some time thereafter, I know not when, he entered the
country illegally, and fast forward to the events of October
24th of last year.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. One last question. Ms. Vaughan,
what are your thoughts when you hear sanctuary cities
proponents state that unlawful aliens are no more likely to
commit crimes than native-born individuals?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, I have reviewed a lot of the literature
on this, and there is no evidence that immigrants are any more
or less likely to commit crimes than anyone else. That is
really not the relevant question. The question is what do we do
with that fraction of the immigrant population that is
committing crimes, that has committed crimes? How do we handle
that? And that is where ICE needs the cooperation of law
enforcement agencies because it is the local agencies who know
who those problem individuals are.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois for his questions.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start off
by expressing my deepest sympathies to the family of Kathryn
Steinle. Her death is a senseless tragedy. I have two daughters
of my own, and as a father I cannot even begin to imagine the
pain that her parents are going through. I am truly very sorry
for your loss.
I am often criticized by my supporters because I do not
have a soft spot for immigrant criminals no matter how small or
how old their violations. Many argue that old convictions on
drunk driving should be forgiven when determining whether
someone should get deported or not. After all, they have
already served their time and paid the consequences doled out
by the criminal justice system.
I am not one of those people who argue for leniency for
criminal immigrants. If you have serious criminal activity on
your record, you have given up your USA privileges, and,
generally speaking, I will not spend time or energy fighting
for you. There are too many immigrants in this country who have
never done anything wrong or never committed crimes, and I
fight for them because they are part of what enriches America
and what benefits all Americans.
The tragedy in San Francisco has generated an important
dialogue regarding our communities, the police officers we have
entrusted to protect us, and our broken immigration system. The
fact is, he should have never been released to be on our
streets again. Deported five times. It seems to me they caught
him and deported him, and he should have been deported once
again.
But there are serious questions about just how it is the
local police should go about it. Nearly 300 jurisdictions have
decided that they will not comply with a detainer from Homeland
Security. The fact is the courts have said that they do not
have to comply with those detainers, so what we need to figure
out a way is to fix the broken immigration system that we have.
We spend a lot of time talking about Mr. Lopez. We do not
spend a lot of time talking about people who enter this country
through other borders--JFK, LAX--and commit crimes in this
country from all over the world. So if we are truly going to
protect our Nation, then we need to have a holistic approach to
our broken immigration system.
It breaks my heart, Mr. Steinle, because I could have been
walking on that pier, as I have, with both of my daughters, and
I want to make sure that it does not happen. And I will
continue to work with my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle to fix our system, not in pieces and bits, but in its
totality so that we can protect everybody in America, because
indeed there are many people who want to fix our broken
immigration system, and we need to do it in a holistic way.
Had we done it, we would have secure communities. We would
have more. We would have verification of employment. We would
have so many other means. We would have the ability to flush
out the bad people. Why? Because we would let the good people
come forward so that they cannot hide among the good people,
the good people who live in my congressional district.
Now, I would like to take a moment, Mr. Chairman, to go
back just for one moment. I know it might seem a little just, I
do not know, unnecessary, but I would like to go back to a
transcript at the end of the DHS hearing which you presided
over, Mr. Gowdy, on July 14, 2015. I said, and this is the
record, a transcript of the record of the July 14 hearing,
which I stayed for the whole hearing, all 3 hours.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir, you did.
[The information referred to follows:]

direct quote from 7/14/15 full Committee
hearing deg.  Mr. Gutierrez. ``First, thank you, Mr. Gowdy, for
your excellent presiding over these hearings. . . . I just want
to just for the record, because I think it's very important''--
listen to this--``I want to say to you, Mr. Gowdy, I share with
you the same anguish and pain, as I know the Secretary does and
every American, at the death of that woman, and that nobody has
come here to look for excuses or anything else. . . . I mean,
this is a career criminal we have on our hands. So I think we
should just try to figure out a way. . . . This man is not an
immigrant. Immigrants come here to work hard, sweat, and toil.
We should be warm in receiving. This man's a foreigner who came
here to cause damage. And let's fix our broken immigration
system so we can get rid of foreigners that come here to cause
damage and harm and welcome the immigrants.''

Mr. Gutierrez. That was my statement. I would just like to
put it in the record once again because apparently Ms. Vaughan
did not read it or take the time to read it.
Secondly, for the record, on the floor of the House of
Representatives on July 9, and this is in the record, and I
would like to put it in the record once again because
apparently Ms. Vaughan does not read what actually is said in
the English language that I have said. ``Now, the anti-
immigration wing of the Republican Party in this body and on
the air say that Trump may have a point. After all, this woman
was shot in cold blood by a Mexican immigrant in San Francisco
just last week. Why was he not deported? Why was he not held in
jail the last time? Why is it? And you actually hear this on
Fox News. 'Why is President Obama letting Mexicans kill
beautiful young American women?'
As the father of two daughters about the age of Kate
Steinle, the young woman who was shot and killed, I pray every
night that no one of any racial or ethnic background ever does
them harm, and I can only imagine the grief that her family is
feeling. When we have felons in Federal custody or State or
local custody with warrants for drug crimes who are deported
multiple times and come back, this Congress has not done its
job, unfairly leaving States and localities to cope with
decades-old inaction on immigration criminal justice and the
range of other issues. I have no sympathy for the man accused
of this crime. Murderers should rot in hell.''
Apparently people have decided to besmirch people's
reputation and take their words and exploit the death of a
beautiful young American woman, and I will not simply stand
here and remain silent while that happens. You may not believe
that we should have, Ms. Vaughan, a fixing of our broken
immigration system, but do not exploit a young woman's death in
order to receive a paycheck to put food on your table. You
should find a more decent and practical way to go about earning
your living.
So, Mr. Steinle, I am so sorry about the death of your
daughter. I assure you, I have a 36 year old and a 27 year old,
and I love them dearly. I can never imagine losing them. And I
will work to make sure that we fix this immigration system and
that situations like the ones you suffer never happen again.
That has been my record in the past in working with Members
of the minority and the majority in this House, and I take
great offense at anybody suggesting otherwise. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Gowdy [presiding]. The gentleman from Illinois yields
back. The Chair would now recognize the gentleman from Texas,
the past Chairman of this Committee, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Steinle, thank you
for your heartfelt testimony. It is sad that we need to be here
today. The tragic murder of a beautiful young woman, your
daughter, I think could have been prevented.
There are also thousands of other victims that did not need
to be victims and would not have been victims if this
Administration had enforced immigration laws. In my view,
someone in this Administration probably should be arrested for
negligent homicide or for any of another dozen crimes that are
so frequently committed by illegal immigrants in this country
who should not even be here.
In the case of the sanctuary cities, in just 8 months last
year, they released almost 9,000 individuals who had been
either arrested or convicted of serious crimes. Two-thirds of
those 9,000 individuals had either committed or been arrested
of serious crimes. In just the few months since they were
released, one-quarter have committed other crimes. How many
others are going to commit more crimes in the coming months, if
one-quarter have already been arrested for other crimes.
This Administration last year released 30,000 criminal
aliens; 2,000 under the Constitution they had to release, but
28,000 were released voluntarily by this Administration. They
committed the worst crimes imaginable, thousands of crimes. So,
if anything, you have got an Administration setting an example
for sanctuary cities rather than trying to prevent sanctuary
cities from trying to escape enforcing immigration laws.
Sanctuary cities have increased exponentially under this
Administration for one good reason, that is the Administration
has done nothing to encourage municipalities and other
jurisdictions from becoming sanctuary areas.
Many people claim that by being a sanctuary city or area or
jurisdiction that that is somehow going to encourage illegal
immigrants to report crimes. In my view, that is a specious
argument, apocryphal. It is simply anecdotal, and I have never
seen one shred of evidence that that is the case. It is just a
simple assertion. And, in fact, every study I have seen, three
out of three, have actually demonstrated just the opposite.
One major study found no decline in crime reporting by
Hispanics after the implementation of a local police program to
screen offenders for immigration status and to refer illegal
immigrants to ICE for removal. Another academic survey found
that by far the most commonly mentioned reason or not reporting
a crime was a language barrier followed by cultural
differences, not fear of being turned over to immigration
authorities. And a third study found that significantly more
removals of criminal aliens did not affect patterns of crime
reporting in immigrant communities. It would be nice if the
media would just once cite any of these studies. We only hear
the other side.
My question to Ms. Vaughan, who has done some research on
this subject, what do you think about the arguments made that
somehow we are going to reduce crimes if we allow illegal
immigrants to seek sanctuary and stay in this country in
violation of current immigration laws? It seems to me it is
very clear that more crimes are committed as a result of this
policy, not fewer, but I would be interested in your opinion.
Ms. Vaughan. This so-called ``chilling effect'' is a myth
and has been refuted by the studies that you mentioned and by
the words of immigrants themselves when the ones who have been
victims of crimes tell researchers that it is because of
language barriers. So access to law enforcement services is
something that law enforcement agencies do legitimately need to
focus on, but the way to do that is through community outreach
programs, having personnel on the staff of these forces who
speak the language of the community. Anonymous tip lines. Most
law enforcement agencies have these anonymous tip lines. No one
need be afraid of reporting a crime.
ICE simply does not target witnesses or victims of crime
for immigration enforcement. And I wish that the advocacy
organizations that claim to speak for immigrants, who go around
telling people that immigrants have to be afraid to report
crimes because of cooperation with ICE should be telling them
that victims and witnesses are not subjects for immigration
enforcement, and that that would be a much more constructive
message that would help the immigrant community.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Vaughan. Mr. Chairman, I simply
do not understand how anyone could oppose enforcing current
immigration laws. These unnecessary victims are not Republicans
and not Democrats. They are innocent Americans. And immigration
laws should be enforced by everyone in America, and yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. The Chair thanks the former Chairman of the
Committee and recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chairman and the Ranking
Member. Mr. Steinle, I add, again, as I know all Members have
done, sympathy to you and your family. The sound of the violent
act against your daughter simply penetrated around this Nation
and beyond. I would also indicate, Chief Jones, that any time
we lose someone in the line of duty, we, too, feel that pain.
And frankly, we should try to find the solutions that we need
to find.
So let me just offer a few thoughts in the instance of the
facts in San Francisco, but I think it is important to join in
my colleague from Texas and say that the laws that are on the
books that are legal should be enforced as they relate to
immigration issues in this country.
Those of us who support comprehensive immigration reform in
no way view that reform as coddling criminals. They stand aside
from the population of families, of students, of workers, who
have come in this country to do good and not to do harm. And I
think that when we get into a process of viewing one group of
wanting not to abide by the immigration laws and another group
as, then it is a misrepresentation of many of the American
people who support our perspective.
And I might just add one thought. When you have deferred
adjudication, that is actually a legal use that can be utilized
under the term ``prosecutorial discretion,'' which ICE has and
a number of other agencies have. It is not in this instance
that I think that prosecutorial discretion played out in any
way. It did when we speak of these young DREAMers that have
been allowed to stay and go to school.
But what I do want to make note of is that I wish the clock
could have been turned back on this terrible tragedy, and just
make mention that the individual in question in your daughter's
tragic circumstances was in the Federal Bureau of Prisons. They
did hold this individual, and in March 2015 transferred him to
the custody of the San Francisco's sheriff's office on a 20-
year-old warrant for a marijuana charge with the expectation
that the district attorney would pursue. We wish this had not
happened, but what did not happen, which was a simple act, was
a phone regarding Mr. Lopez-Sanchez's statement or status.
This bill dealing with the sanctuary cities and removing
all opportunity for such cities, and frankly why do we not all
agree that that name connotes a problem for many, because it
suggests that you are giving sanctuary to everybody, has a
right to stay under that umbrella, crooks, and criminals, and
bad actors. And I want you to know that is absolutely not the
case. It was utilized in a time when people came and did not
speak English, and they were afraid of harm. And the only way
that law enforcement officers could do their effective job was
to be able to find out who did it.
So I want to ask--yes. I am not seeing the name, and I am
looking for my list. I always like to call the name, but I will
call it in a moment. But, yes, did I characterize if we use a
different term other than ``sanctuary.'' We are not giving
sanctuary to crooks and criminals, are we?
Chief Biehl. I am sorry, Congresswoman. I cannot quite hear
your question.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay. With respect to sanctuary cities, we
are not attempting to give, and I do not particularly hold to
the name. It comes out of a religious basis of sanctuary, and I
appreciate my faith community who started out trying to help
people who are in need.
My question to you, in the law enforcement, it is not a
refuge for crooks and criminals. Is that correct? That is not
the definition of ``sanctuary city.''
Chief Biehl. I am not aware actually what the exact
definition for ``sanctuary cities.'' I think the terminology is
used as if it is understood what it actually means. Not being a
sanctuary community, I cannot really speak to the intent of
those who have passed laws and/or other policies to, in fact,
be a sanctuary city.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, let me just without not being one,
however, an overall position, you do not perceive that anyone
is trying to protect anyone that is a criminal with an
established criminal record. You would not perceive that to be
the case.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlelady is out of time, but the chief may
answer.
Chief Biehl. I am sorry.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlelady is out of time, but you may
answer her question.
Chief Biehl. I cannot think of anyone in professional law
enforcement that that would ever be their intent in adopting
any policy that may be considered a sanctuary city.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chairman for allowing him to
answer, and I have a number of statements from law enforcement
that oppose H.R. 3009, Mr. Chairman: The National League of
Cities and the National Conference of Mayors; the Major County
Sheriffs' Association; and the Fraternal Order of Police. I ask
that the statements be put into the record.****
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
****Note: The material referred to was previously submitted. See
pages 18, 20, and 27.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Mr. Gowdy. The Chair would now recognize the gentleman from
Iowa, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for your testimony today, and I continue to be amazed at the
composure that you are able to bring to this issue, Mr.
Steinle.
I wanted to inform you that some of us have been doing some
things to try to move this Congress and this country in the
right direction. I look back on testimony at this same table
about the first year I came here in Congress, which would be
around 2003 or 2004. The witnesses were testifying then of the
number of people who died trying to get across the Arizona
desert.
I asked a witness who was seated in your seat, Chief
Biehl-- actually I asked each of the witnesses--he had an
answer. I said, do you know how many Americans died at the
hands of those who did make it into the United States. And his
answer to me on September 11th was fresher in our minds than it
is today. He said, I do not know the number, but I can tell you
it would be in multiples of the victims of September 11.
And at that point, I began the effort to get a GAO study,
which Ms. Lofgren cooperated with me on. In April of 2005 we
got a study out. It was not quite apples to apples because we
do not keep records well enough to have it exactly apples to
apples. We refreshed that study again in March of 2011. I
continued to bring amendments that cut off funding to sanctuary
cities.
I never believed that there should be a separation between
the levels of law enforcement in this country. I grew up in a
law enforcement family, and I understand the interrelationships
that are part of the testimony we have heard here today.
I wrote an op-ed last year dated August 26. It is in the
National Review: ``The ACLU Reverses the Rule of Law.'' In it I
objected to the ICE detainer decision. What has been missing
here is that then acting director of ICE, Dan Ragsdale, issued
a statement, a letter to the political jurisdictions on
February 25, 2014, that said that ICE detainers are not
mandatory as a matter of law. And so, this is initiated not by
ICE reacting to the ACLU's threat of lawsuits. That letter from
ICE, contributed to this tragedy that we have here before us.
And they changed the word ``shall'' to now it is a suggestion.
The last sentence in that op-ed says, as I wrote, ``If we
bow to the outrageous demand of the ACLU and ignore detainer
orders, the price will be paid by thousands of crime victims
who would otherwise have been protected by law.'' I think we
have clearly heard today the effect of that, and we have heard
it from expert testimony and very painful experiences.
Mr. Steinle, on the day that I saw the news of your
daughter's death, long before I knew it would be a national
story, I sent out a tweet, and it is dated July 3. And it says
this, ``100 percent preventable crime. Just enforce the law.
This will make you cry, too.'' And it happens every day. That
was the Breitbart article from that day, and I sent out a
subsequent tweet the following day, and it says this: ``This
story happens every day in the U.S.''
And as of 2011, 25,064 criminal aliens were arrested for
homicide in the United States. That is as of the end of 2010.
How many since then? How big is that number? I look at the
report and I do the math. That number comes to perhaps 48,000.
I look at the crimes that have been committed by criminal
aliens. This report, coupled with a subsequent report, brings
us to a number in the area of 7,200,000 crimes for perhaps less
than around half of that many as crime victims.
The devastation in this country because we refuse to
enforce the law is breathtaking when you look at the
statistics, and it is a tragedy that causes my heart to cry
when I see what happened. And we knew it. This Congress knew
it. I saw it 12 or 13 years ago. Many of us have seen it, but
because of political desires people that gain a political
advantage from having the political support, they are pandering
to and catering to people that they know are lawbreakers. And
this tragedy was 100 percent preventable.
I feel like I ought to ask a question, so I want to say,
Sheriff Jones, I think your testimony has been very specific
and well informed. And I would ask if you could comment on what
I said about ICE detainer orders.
Sheriff Jones. Yeah, absolutely. First of all, it is
important to note that even under the Priority Enforcement
Program prior removal felonies, any felon conviction, as long
it is not aggravated, extensive gang activity, and any
misdemeanor convictions will not get you into the first
priority. But even if you were in the first priority, ICE
detainers are not working.
It is naive to believe, to assert, that for the most
offensive crimes that we are able to hold the person until ICE
can get down. Even if we notify them, if Ms. Steinle's murderer
were somehow released from court today, they would not hold
them 1 minute for them to get out of custody. I cannot even
honor an ICE detainer for the person that killed my officer
that is currently in custody. If he were to somehow get
released or charges dismissed, he would get out before ICE
would ever come down to the jail.
By ICE's own numbers, their in-custody arrests are down 95
percent over a year ago. That is 95 percent. That is more than
just folks that are falling in the first priority. That is
almost every single person escaping a consequence for being in
this country illegally or whatever crimes they may have
committed.
Mr. King. Thank you, Sheriff. I would just say to the
Chairman that the families that have suffered this kind of
tragedy that it was 100 percent preventable are becoming the
equivalent of gold star families here in this country. And I
want to honor you and thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman yields back. The Chair would now
recognize the gentleman from Colorado, the former district
attorney, Mr. Buck.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sheriff Jones, have long
have you been with the sheriff's office? I heard earlier, but I
forgot.
Sheriff Jones. Since 1989.
Mr. Buck. Okay. And in your office or in your jail, I take
it that you implement a program with ICE.
Sheriff Jones. We do. We cooperate with ICE to the extent
we are able to.
Mr. Buck. And that program, at least when I was in local
law enforcement, used to be known as the 297 Program or 287G
Program?
Sheriff Jones. That is correct.
Mr. Buck. And it requires you to send some of your deputies
to be trained with ICE. Is that my understanding?
Sheriff Jones. There is a training component. I am not
certain as I sit here today what it is. We have a large jail.
We are right next to a Federal courthouse, and so we have a
pretty handy ICE presence in our jail. They are able to be in
our jail unlike many jails.
Mr. Buck. And when I was district attorney, I inquired of
ICE how they found out about individuals' nationality and made
their determination. And I was concerned with profiling issues
because they were raised to me. My understanding is that ICE
asks neutral questions to begin their questioning. They will
ask something like, where were you born, and they will ask that
of everyone that they interview in custody. Is that your
understanding?
Sheriff Jones. That is correct, but because of Secure
Communities and its progeny, they will already have an
indication many times if there is a fingerprint match, if
someone is in the country illegally.
Mr. Buck. And if they do not have that indication----
Sheriff Jones. Right.
Mr. Buck [continuing]. They would still ask the neutral
question of everyone.
Sheriff Jones. Right.
Mr. Buck. They will not just ask people who speak Spanish
or people who speak a foreign language. They will ask that
question of everyone that is in custody taken in that day, for
example.
Sheriff Jones. That is correct, or folks that have self-
indicated that they were born outside of the United States or
are here illegally.
Mr. Buck. Okay. And I have seen in my experience changes in
the morale of the ICE agents that are working there. Many of
the ICE agents that I deal with feel like they have been
handcuffed by this Administration recently. Do you have that
feeling also with the ICE agents that you work with?
Sheriff Jones. Absolutely I do. The line level officers in
both ICE and us have the same desire, and that is to keep the
community safe. They took an oath. They have a mission. They
are not being allowed to carry out that mission. That morale
issue was discussed and addressed by the Administration with
the raise, but that is not what is giving the ICE at the line
level poor morale.
Mr. Buck. Can you pay a law enforcement officer enough to
ignore crime?
Sheriff Jones. No.
Mr. Buck. We do it. I did it or we do it for other reasons.
We do it because we feel like we make our communities safer. We
do it because we want to help people around us. We do not do it
for another $1,000 a year in pay. Is that fair to say?
Sheriff Jones. Yes. I said earlier, it is a calling. We do
not choose law enforcement. It chooses us.
Mr. Buck. And you have mentioned a statistic that shows
decreased crime, but it is also your sense that there is
decreased enforcement as a result of changes in Administration
policy.
Sheriff Jones. There is undoubtedly less enforcement on
immigration issues and certainly detainers as a result of----
Mr. Buck. And that is what you hear anecdotally from the
people that you deal with in ICE.
Sheriff Jones. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Buck. Chief Biehl, as part of your job as a--oh, I am
sorry. I wanted to mention something also, Sheriff Jones. I
really appreciate you drawing the distinction between sheriffs
and chiefs, and it I something that I have noticed. Chiefs are
appointed by mayors typically or city councils or
administrators who work for mayors and city councils in urban
areas. And they tend to be more liberal, and they tend to have
more liberal policies. Sheriffs run for election. They deal
with individuals. They have a sense of the community that far
exceeds, at least in my experience, that of a police chief.
We have had so many times in the Colorado legislature bills
that have been supported by sheriffs and opposed by chiefs,
bill that have been supported by chiefs and opposed by
sheriffs. Two very different spokesmen or women for law
enforcement, and I appreciate you drawing that distinction.
Chief Biehl, I want to ask you really quickly, do you have
a task force, for example, with DEA when you deal with drug
cases?
Chief Biehl. Absolutely.
Mr. Buck. And in those task forces, you gather intelligence
and share that intelligence with DEA.
Chief Biehl. That is correct. We actually are on the DEA
task force.
Mr. Buck. Okay. And the same is true if you know of a large
gun running organization, national gun running, you would share
information with ATF.
Chief Biehl. That is correct.
Mr. Buck. And I take it if you heard of some international
terrorist organization, you would share information with the
FBI.
Chief Biehl. We are a member of the FBI/JTTF, Joint
Terrorism Task Force.
Mr. Buck. And but when your officer shows up at a domestic
violence situation, what you are telling me is they do not make
inquiries about nationality, and they would not share
information if they had a suspicion about someone being in this
country illegally.
Chief Biehl. For the victim, absolutely not. In fact, what
we do is try to work with victims to have an advocate work with
them and see if they are eligible for a U visa application. So
that is one of the community partnerships we have. If the
person is a suspect, it would really depend on the
circumstances if the insistence of the immigration would be
helpful in our investigation. Did it bring something additional
to the table that will help us in this case or not? We have the
authority to act on that case and take that person into
custody. When they get to jail, they will be screened through
ICE.
Mr. Buck. I am out of time, but you distinguish between the
various types of crime and how you interact with the Federal
Government.
Chief Biehl. Correct. Correct.
Mr. Buck. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Colorado yields back. The
Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Texas, the former
U.S. attorney, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Steinle, as the
father of two daughters, I cannot begin to comprehend the grief
that you have endured over the last 3 weeks. And I would like
to join all of my colleagues, many of them, in expressing my
deepest condolences to you and to your entire family.
Can I ask you whether in the last 3 weeks President Obama
has expressed his condolences to you?
Mr. Steinle. I did not hear the question.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Can I ask you if in the last 3 weeks
President Obama has expressed his condolences to you or your
family?
Mr. Steinle. [Nonverbal negative response.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. Well, I am very sorry to hear that. When
there have been other very public deaths in this country, like
Michael Brown and Trayvon Martin and Freddie Gray, the
President has expressed his condolences to the family. I would
have expected him to do that here. He did more than express his
condolences in those cases. He had a lot to say about those
circumstances I think because they tied into policies that he
cared about like gun control and alleged police profiling. And
yet when one of his policies with respect to immigration
enforcement is at the root of a problem here that we are all
discussing today, we do not hear anything from him, and you did
not hear anything from him.
About the kindest thing I can say about that is that is
incredibly disheartening and troubling to me because I very
much believe that the loss that you have experienced is
unacceptable if for no other reason that it was entirely
preventable had the immigration laws in our country been
enforced. And this Administration has, frankly, refused to
uphold the law, and its inaction has emboldened cities across
the country like San Francisco to ignore and, in some cases,
actually obstruct enforcement of our immigration laws. And we
all know that the status quo is not working, and since the
Administration is not going to apparently do anything about
that, Congress has to step in and act.
You know, today the House is expected to vote on a bill
that would deny certain Federal funds to sanctuary cities, and
I do think that is a good first step. I agree with Ms. Vaughan
that that is all it is, that it is just a good first step and
that we certainly have to do more, and that we have to have the
courage and conviction not just to do more, but to do what is
right.
So, Ms. Vaughan, let me ask you a question. In your
testimony, you noted that detainers have been used for decades
and have been viewed by law enforcement as mandatory rather
than just optional. In your opinion, what do you think is at
the root of this dramatic departure from prior interpretations?
Ms. Vaughan. I believe that this whole series of events of
more and more jurisdictions becoming sanctuaries was set off by
the policy change at ICE to suddenly declare that detainers
were optional. In this letter that Mr. King referred to from
Dan Ragsdale to just suddenly declare that they were optional,
not mandatory, with no legal foundation whatsoever that to my
knowledge has ever been made public as to what, you know, legal
reasoning they had for changing that policy.
But once that was done, that then provided legal cover for
all of these other jurisdictions around the country to change
their policies to stop complying with the detainers. And it
also provided an opening for groups like the ACLU to threaten
litigation against those sheriffs who are complying with
detainers. And I think that is why it is very important that
language such as that in the Davis-Oliver Act be included in
any effort to address the sanctuaries to protect those law
enforcement agencies that are doing the right thing and
complying with all detainers all the time so that they are not
going to be held responsible.
Knowing that ICE's policy nowadays is not to assist them in
litigation, even if it is ICE's mistake, we have to give them
cover, and protection, and qualified immunity to do the right
thing in these cases in complying with detainers.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Vaughan, and I appreciate you
being here. I found your testimony earlier compelling. Sheriff
Jones, I found yours compelling as well, and I would like to
give you an opportunity because you talked about this same
issue about detainers being interpreted as mandatory previously
rather than just requests. And I would like to ask you the same
question about whether you have an opinion about what has
caused this dramatic shift.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman is out of time, Sheriff, but you
may answer the gentleman's question.
Sheriff Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Clearly it is policy
differences, and obviously as the Member pointed out, these
policy and the preferences came about long before the decision
in Clackamas County, Oregon. That was just a catalyst and
vehicle for them to make that a nationwide policy shift.
You have to understand that the DHS assistant secretary
over State and local law enforcement is Heather Fong. She is
the former police chief of San Francisco. So not saying
anything about her competence as police chief or in the
position she currently holds, but that does give you some
insight into the political will and mindset of this
Administration.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. I appreciate you all being here,
and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. The Chair thanks the former U.S. attorney, and
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Trott.
Mr. Trott. I thank the Chair for organizing this hearing
today, and all the witnesses for sharing their insight. I also
want to thank my good friend from Texas for his question. Mr.
Steinle, I was going to ask you if the President had reached
out to you, but I decided not to do that because I assumed
that, of course, he had done that. So I am sorry that has not
happened.
I thank you for your courage in being here today, and I,
too, hope this is just a beginning. And my question is to Ms.
Vaughan. One of my concerns is I am going to support H.R. 3009.
I am going to vote for it this afternoon. But it really has to
be just the beginning because it targets about $800 million of
money for law enforcement.
And my concern, and I would like you to speak to it, is it
has to be just a first step because many times law enforcement,
sheriffs, and police chiefs are following the directive of a
city council, or a mayor, or a county commission. And I think
we have to go further upstream and withhold TIGER grant money
for road funding for sanctuary cities that decide to ignore
Federal law. I think we have to make the repercussions of a
sanctuary city deciding to ignore Federal law much more severe
than H.R. 3009. Can you give you any suggestions or thoughts in
that regard?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, again, I think the language that is in
the Davis-Oliver Act is very comprehensive in addressing this
problem. I do agree with you that, you know, money talks. In
most cases, sanctuary policies are not something that law
enforcement agencies ask for. They are imposed on them usually
by political elected officials. And so, but money is a way to
target them that we can come up with objective ways to define
what a sanctuary is. And I think it should be a jurisdiction
that does not comply with all detainers all the time for all
types of people who are removable, whether they have committed
serious crimes or not.
And I do think that the policies of the Obama
administration in enabling sanctuary jurisdictions and greatly
restricting what ICE agents can do, despite the plain language
of the law, also ought to be given attention through
legislation from Congress because we know that the
Administration is not going to make an effort. They have said
as much. They are not going to address this on their own. And
so, Congress needs to reassert its constitutional authority
over these matters.
Mr. Trott. Thank you. Chief Biehl, during your testimony
you commented that, you know, resources are finite. It is
difficult for police departments to balance the different
needs, and the Federal immigration laws on some level are a
distraction perhaps in balancing all the different demands on
your police officers. That is true of so many things today in
State and Federal Government, so it is not unique to whether we
should enforce our immigration laws. Do you agree with that?
Chief Biehl. I think it raises the issue of where we spend
our enforcement resources always. How do we prioritize what we
do? In fact, that is what every police chief and every sheriff
across this country does. That is what the Federal
administration is attempting to do. I would believe as it
relates to immigration and enforcement policy to try to do
everything, we do nothing well. So we focus and are very
strategic in how we deploy resources. That is how we are
effective.
Mr. Trott. But if we boil it down where we are talking
about with respect to today's tragedy that led to this hearing
is a phone call, right?
Chief Biehl. I think I have already testified to the effect
that the notification should have been made. In fact, I think
we need to move just a little back upstream that the Federal
Government had the capability to act on that deportation
without ever involving San Francisco authorities. And I have
not heard that comment much today. The authority existed. The
capability and ability to take action existed, and somehow that
is not being recognized I think.
Mr. Trott. In your testimony you kind of suggested that
sanctuary cities maybe are helpful insofar as unlawful
immigrants are not afraid to report crimes. Ms. Vaughan
disagrees with that, suggests it is a myth. Do you want to
comment on that?
Chief Biehl. I think we just see this differently. Mine is
based on my actual experience with my city, so I yield to my
experience.
Mr. Trott. Sheriff Jones, the President's policy is just to
seek custody of folks that have been convicted of crimes, not
charged. Do you want to comment on that?
Sheriff Jones. Well, I can say that the only vehicle for
that to happen, the only vehicle for the Federal Government or
ICE to be notified of that is the detainer process. And as I
have tried to illustrate, the detainer process is not working.
We are not able to honor ICE detainers for 1 second after the
local charges are cleared.
Now, if someone is sentenced to local time, doing time in
jail, then ICE can have a pretty decent idea, relatively
accurate idea of when they are getting out. And for those folks
it might still be effective. But for the 58,000 people that I
book in my jail every year that overwhelmingly mostly get out
on their own recognizance, bail perhaps, they are able to bail,
they get released from court, that happens with no notice or
warning to ICE, and they do not have the ability to run down to
the jail before I have to release them.
Mr. Trott. Thank you, Sheriff. And, Mr. Steinle, I will
close with this. I am out of time. But the head of Amtrak
apparently could not find time a few months back after the
tragedy in Philadelphia to call the eight families that were
affected by that. So apparently there is a pattern and practice
here in Washington of people not being considerate of the
tragedies that affect our citizens.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentleman from Michigan yields back. The
Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steinle, I want to thank you for beautifully capturing
the essence of your daughter was. And I have read everything
that I can get my hands on, and I last night watched the clips
of various family members describing your daughter, and she is
precisely the kind of person that our country desperately
needs. So I want to thank you for sharing her with us today.
Mr. Steinle. If I may, I would like to recognize my sisters
here in grief that supported us during this. They have been
there, done that, and we are going to carry this forward, and
hopefully some good will come from Kate's death. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir, which is a perfect segue. I was going
to thank Chief Biehl and Sheriff Jones and ask that they
specifically tell the women and men that work with them how
grateful all of us for folks who go into that profession and
that calling. And I suspect that both the chief, and the
sheriff, and the women and men that work with them would tell
you that there are lots of really hard parts of being in law
enforcement. The crime scene photos never leave your head. You
never get them out. The crimes scenes themselves you never get
out.
But the hardest part for most law enforcement officers that
I have talked to is having to talk to the families, like the
four ladies sitting right behind you because they have got
really good questions. Why? Why did this happen? How did this
happen? And those questions go all the way up to the
theological. Those are not just law enforcement questions. They
are life altering, lifelong questions. So tell the folks that
you work with how grateful we are.
Sheriff, this is something that I am struggling to
understand. ICE had probable cause for Mr. Francisco Lopez-
Sanchez, correct? I mean, he is a five-time convicted illegal
entrant. I think even some of the members of this panel could
have won that case in court. So they had probable cause.
Sheriff Jones. That is my understanding.
Mr. Gowdy. Why not a warrant? Why a detainer?
Sheriff Jones. You know, I would not claim to be an insider
into the dynamics. I have talked to some of my friends in ICE
about that particular case. There were certainly failures, but
it is an overarching policy-level decision to not challenge or
enforce the existing immigration laws or challenge contrary
laws that led, at least in part, to the release of this
suspect.
Mr. Gowdy. But surely even sanctuary cities like San
Francisco would have to honor a Federal warrant.
Sheriff Jones. Clearly.
Mr. Gowdy. Because the Bureau of Prisons honored a local
warrant.
Sheriff Jones. Yes, and we had this discussion about why do
you not just create the detainer process into somewhat of a
probable cause declaration and have them reviewed by a
magistrate. It is case load prohibitive, but there are 93
Federal districts in this country, including three territorial
district courts. And if we were to supply one additional
magistrate to each of those districts, I am sure they could
handle the workload of reviewing the probable cause detainer
declarations. These things are easily fixable. There just has
to be a desire and the political will to be able to do that.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I want to give you one other way to fix
it, Chief, and I will go to you for this one. San Francisco
wound up dismissing that warrant, correct?
Chief Biehl. And I would have expected that. Quite honestly
in my experience, I would be shocked if that case would have
gone forward.
Mr. Gowdy. But they could have dismissed it while he was
halfway through his Federal prison sentence.
Chief Biehl. Absolutely.
Mr. Gowdy. They could have dismissed it when he had a month
to go on his Federal prison sentence.
Chief Biehl. That is correct.
Mr. Gowdy. They could have dismissed it at any point in his
Federal prison sentence. Therefore, he never would have been
returned to the City of San Francisco.
Chief Biehl. That is a fact.
Mr. Gowdy. And if I were Mr. Steinle, those are some of the
question that I probably would be asking is you knew you were
going to dismiss this warrant. You knew that. Hell, I am not
even sure drugs are still illegal in San Francisco. So you knew
that case was not going to be prosecuted. Why did you wait
until he was in your custody to dismiss it, leading to this
result?
All right. I want to move to one other thing. To both my
law enforcement officers, have you ever noticed throughout the
pendency of your careers that folks start with misdemeanors,
and then they kind of work their way up to aggravated
misdemeanors, and then they get into felonies. Rarely do you go
from zero to 100 miles an hour. Rarely. And when you do go from
zero to 100 miles an hour and commit a murder or a sexual
assault or a kidnapping, you are in jail. If you have got a
decent prosecutor and a halfway decent case, those folks are
already locked up.
So since we accept the fact that you do not go from zero to
100, I think we are missing the boat if we focus solely on
felonies when it comes to background checks for folks who want
to be in this country. Look, all misdemeanors are not the same.
Speeding is a violation. DUI is worse. Recidivist DUIs are
worse. Property damage DUI is even worse. Personal injury DUI
is even worse. I get all that. But this obsession that we have
with only felons, we can only deport felons. Sheriff, has that
been your experience, that people who commit misdemeanors
always learn their lessons and never graduate?
Sheriff Jones. Clearly some do, but the best predictor of
future behavior is past behavior. And I think there are studies
that will demonstrate that generally is an escalation of
criminality, especially when you do not have the consequences
to try and deter the behavior. And it is not just felonies that
are getting deported. It is only aggravated felonies. So there
are many felony convictions that escape scrutiny whatsoever,
even under the highest priority of the Priority Enforcement
Program.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. I am out of time, but I want to ask
one final question because this deals with broader issues of
immigration. I want to assume for the sake of argument that
there are 11 million undocumented folks in the country. Let us
assume that. And I do not know what the percentage is. Ms.
Vaughan, maybe you do. Of that 11 million, what percentage have
either felony or what we could consider to be serious
misdemeanor criminal histories?
Ms. Vaughan. I do not know the exact answer to that. ICE
estimates that there are more than 2 million criminal aliens in
the United States.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. Let us do this.
Ms. Vaughan. Twenty-nine million are removable because some
of them have green cards.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, let us do this. Just for the sake of
conservatism, let us cut that in half. Let us say it is a
million. Let us err on the side of being conservative. What is
the Administration's plan for removing those 1 million? To wait
until they reoffend? Does anyone know the plan?
[No response.]
Mr. Gowdy. This is not a rhetorical question. I am honestly
asking if the strategy is to wait until those 1 million
reoffend. Somebody is going to be apologizing to a whole lot of
moms and dads. Is there another strategy that either of the law
enforcement professionals or Ms. Vaughan, is there a strategy
other than simply waiting for that 1 million to reoffend?
If you cannot ask about status, if you cannot place a
detainer, how are we going to identify that universe, however
small it may be? If you are Mr. Steinle, it does not matter if
it is one. What is our plan to identify that universe before
they reoffend? Not all at once.
Chief Biehl. Mr. Chairman, I just would suggest that the
Federal Government, ICE, certainly should have an idea based on
their database, which is not shared with local law enforcement,
of who those individuals are and who poses significant risk.
And they have the ability to take action, and if they need the
assistance of local law enforcement, they certainly can request
that.
Mr. Gowdy. When you say ``take action,'' you mean wait for
them to do something else wrong where they interact with law
enforcement?
Chief Biehl. They have the ability to take proactive action
just like any police officer does.
Mr. Gowdy. But there are less ICE agents than there are
officers in certain big cities in the United States. There are
5,000. All right. I am out of time. I cannot ask about U visas.
I will close in just a second.
I want to recognize my colleague from California for any
closing remarks she may have.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I first would like to
ask unanimous consent to put in the record the priorities for
removal.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Ms. Lofgren. There have been several comments made her that
are just not correct. The priorities for removal are Priority
1A, B, C, D, and E, and Priority 2A and B. And what that is,
terrorism, gang, any felony as well as any aggravated felony.
Under Priority 2, and this is equal with 1, three or more
misdemeanors other than traffic, and significant misdemeanors,
which includes a single DUI, no matter when that offense was
included. Those are all priorities for removal.
I would just note that no system is perfect, and clearly
there was a failure here in San Francisco. I mean, there is no
question about that. I think your question about the warrant is
a good one and one we ought to explore. One of the reasons I
think every jurisdiction has a multiplicity of bench warrants
that have been issues, and there generally is no process for
going back and taking a look at old bench warrants to see
whether they ought to be dismissed. Maybe that is part of the
answer.
On the other hand, if the bench warrant was not for a drug
offense but for a rape, you would not want that dismissed. So,
you know, we need to sort through with some granularity to make
sure that we are actually solving a problem and not creating
new ones.
And I would just close with saying that although the system
is far from perfect, it is often the case that individuals who
have either no status or they gain status who commit an offense
are the subject of enforcement action. In fat, I have met a
number of people who are legal permanent residents of the
United States who have lost their legal permanent residence
because they have been convicted of a crime that allows them to
be removed. So I am not saying it is perfect, but it is far
from rare.
I think that as we move forward in this, we have plenty of
questions and an opportunity to work together to make sure that
this whole system works better for the safety of our community.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing me, and I yield
back.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlelady yields back. And with respect to
the warrants, the gentlelady is exactly right. I do want them
enforced, particularly if there is a victim involved. But it is
really easy. You just tell the prosecutor and the local law
enforcement agency you have X amount of time with which to
resolve this warrant. You can try it. You can plead it. You can
dismiss it. That is up to you. But you are going to return this
person back to the Agency or entity from which they came. You
are not going to release them. That is an easy fix. Give
California, give San Francisco 30 days. It is 20 years old.
Good luck finding the witnesses. My concern more is that all of
that could have been done while that person was serving a
prison sentence. All of it could have been done.
So let me just in closing, Chief Biehl, Sheriff Jones, I
want to tell you, I think you have got folks on task forces. I
do not know if you have folks on task forces that are not. They
are probably Federal task forces. They may be RICO. They may be
OCDETF. Those are pretty complex matters, too, if you have ever
tried to unlock a Federal RICO case. Hell, for that matter
State DUI laws are 16 pages long, and your guys are smart
enough to do DUI laws. So I reject the notion that somehow
immigration law is too complex for State and local law
enforcement.
But I want to end the same way I started, Mr. Steinle, by
thanking you for your courage. For those of us that are parents
or, frankly, even if you are not a parent, I could not do what
you have done. I could not have the grace. I could not do it.
So thank you.
Mr. Steinle. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. Ms. Vaughan, thank you. And, Sheriff Jones and
Chief Biehl, if you would be kind enough to let the women and
men that work with you know how grateful we are for their
service.
With that, Members have 5 legislative days to put whatever
they want in the record and with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
