- OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-26

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-894 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania, Vice Chairman          Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          MAXINE WATERS, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JOE BACA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York           JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 14, 2011...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 14, 2011...............................................    49

WITNESSES
Thursday, April 14, 2011

Cook, Robert W., Director, Division of Trading and Markets, U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).......................    16
Gensler, Hon. Gary, Chairman, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC)..............................................    10
Goldstein, Hon. Jeffrey A., Under Secretary for Domestic Finance,
U.S. Department of the Treasury................................    11
Huff, Hon. John M., Director, State of Missouri Department of
Insurance, Financial Institutions, and Professional
Registration, on behalf of the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC).................................    13
Liang, J. Nellie, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy
and Research, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(Fed)..........................................................    15
Long, Timothy W., Senior Deputy Comptroller, Bank Supervision
Policy, and Chief National Bank Examiner, Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)..............................    19
Murton, Arthur J., Director, Division of Insurance and Research,
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)...................    18

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Neugebauer, Hon. Randy.......................................    50
Cook, Robert W...............................................    52
Gensler, Hon. Gary...........................................    60
Goldstein, Hon. Jeffrey A....................................    67
Huff, Hon. John M............................................    72
Liang, J. Nellie.............................................    81
Long, Timothy W..............................................    88
Murton, Arthur J.............................................   102

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Neugebauer, Hon. Randy:
Written responses to questions submitted to Robert W. Cook...   110
Written responses to questions submitted to Hon. Gary Gensler   116
Written responses to questions submitted to Hon. Jeffrey A.
Goldstein..................................................   121
Written responses to questions submitted to Hon. John Huff...   130
Written responses to questions submitted to J. Nellie Liang..   132
Written responses to questions submitted to Tim Long.........   135
Written responses to questions submitted to Arthur J. Murton.   137
Capuano, Hon. Michael:
Speech given by Federal Reserve Governor Daniel K. Tarullo on
March 31, 2011, entitled, ``Regulating Systemic Risk''.....   143
Frank, Hon. Barney:
Various articles on British banks facing tougher standards
than those in the United States............................   148

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

----------

Thursday, April 14, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy Neugebauer
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Neugebauer, Fitzpatrick,
Pearce, Posey, Hayworth, Renacci, Canseco; Capuano, Lynch,
Waters, Miller of North Carolina, Ellison, Himes, and Carney.
Ex officio present: Representatives Bachus and Frank.
Also present: Representatives Biggert, Royce; Green, and
Perlmutter.
Chairman Neugebauer. This hearing will come to order.
Without objection, all members' opening statements will be made
a part of the record.
I will start by giving my opening statement.
Given the recent creation of and mandate of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), it is important that we
have this hearing today to better understand its roles and
responsibilities, the impacts of its decisions on global
competitiveness and our capital markets, and whether there is
sufficient leadership by the Chairman of the Council to carry
out the broad mandate called for in the Dodd-Frank Act.
I am deeply concerned that if the problems identified in
this hearing today are not addressed early, this entity could
have a severe negative impact on the functionality and the
competitiveness of our businesses and our markets.
The Council states on its Web site that it is ``committed
to conducting its business in an open and transparent manner.''
Yet, documents reviewed by my staff clearly demonstrate that
the Council has kept hidden from public view the criteria for
formulating ``systemically important'' designations.
The Council also has a statutory duty to facilitate
coordination among member agencies regarding policy development
and rulemaking. Yet since the enactment of Dodd-Frank, there
appear to be serious deficiencies in rulemaking coordination,
most notably between the SEC and the CFTC.
The Council is also required to monitor international
financial regulatory developments and ``advise Congress and
make recommendations in these areas that will enhance the
competitiveness of U.S. financial markets.'' Yet, FSOC's
initial recommendations under Dodd-Frank would place U.S. firms
at a competitive disadvantage with its global counterparts.
Finally, the FSOC's role to designate certain non-bank
financial firms as ``systemically important'' is proceeding
without any representative at the Federal level who truly
understands all of the businesses, for example, insurance.
I think one of the things that we are going to hear today
is that this process is moving forward and decisions are being
made without the voting member from the insurance agency being
available or actually having been appointed.
We also have Mr. Huff here as well, whom I think will
testify that he has been trying to get some additional help and
resources because of this immense responsibility.
And because, I think, of the nature of FSOC, and it was
thought by many to be one of the most important pieces of Dodd-
Frank, this hearing today is extremely important, and I think
there will be hearings in the future to monitor how these
criteria are put together, how the FSOC as a committee is
functioning, but that transparency piece is, I think, an
extremely important piece of that because decisions are being
made, evidently, within the organization. And when we look at
the rules coming out, they are not matching up with some of the
internal discussions. So the importance of this FSOC to, I
think, the financial markets moving forward is an extremely
important piece of our responsibility, and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today.
And with that, I recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Frank. Thank you.
Mr. Frank. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The ranking member of
the subcommittee is on his way over. We have a caucus.
One of the big issues that has been debated since the
passage of the financial reform bill was whether the section
dealing with systemically significant institutions was, in
effect, a license for those so designated to take more risks
because people would think they could never fail or whether it
was something that would be more restrictive to them.
We believe very strongly that the law is very clear that
being designated is more of a burden than a license, and we
have had this debate. But it is now overwhelmingly clear what
the answer is. It is seen more as a burden than as a license by
the institutions involved.
What the FSOC has been getting is a series of lobbying
efforts by institutions very eager not to be named, and that is
a direct refutation of the argument that we created a too-big-
to-fail element.
As a matter of fact, Adair Turner, who recently did a very
good article, and I think we should be pursuing this question
about what the real value is of much of the financial trading
activity, but he notes in his very comprehensive study,
``Public debate focuses on the need to avoid any taxpayer
support in the future. Indeed, the Dodd-Frank bill in the U.S.
makes it legally impossible to provide such support on a bank-
specific basis.''
So one of the things that is very clear, if there is a
failure, then if the regulators think there needs to be
something to alleviate the consequences, it cannot be with
taxpayer money. And so it is very clear that there is, I
believe, clearly no such thing as too-big-to-fail.
Nothing can be done to deal with the consequences of such a
problem until the institution is abolished. Again, somehow, in
fact the institutions would like to be, they would benefit from
being designated.
I would ask unanimous consent to put into the record these
articles I am about to quote from.
From Tom Braithwaite in the Financial Times on April 3rd,
``As Congress debated the law that became Dodd-Frank, lawmakers
wrangled over the systemic risk designation. Some warned it
would crystallize the too-big-to-fail funding advantage enjoyed
by the largest groups by underlying the fact that government
considered them crucial. Others said it would instead be a
scarlet letter, a sign that profits would be hit by the new
standards.
``Nine months after the designation became law, it looks
like the scarlet letter brigade has won. Disclosures show a
long list of companies and industry trade groups engaging in
lobbying efforts. People involved in the talks say they are
desperate to prove they do not deserve to be branded. They do
not think that this is a great blessing and a license to be
considered too-big-to-fail.''
From Ian Katz, November 17th of last year, ``BlackRock
lobbies Fed to avoid designation as systemically important
firm.''
From that article on November 5th, ``The Investment Company
Institute, a Washington-based lobby group for the mutual fund
industry, told the Council in a letter that mutual funds pose
little threat to the U.S. financial system and should remain
beyond the Fed's reach.''
From Tom Braithwaite again in the Financial Times, ``U.S.
regulators divided on systematic risk list.'' He had two
articles in the same paper, a busy day for him.
``Non-bank financial groups are engaged in their biggest
lobbying effort since the passage of the financial reforms last
year in an attempt to escape the net which they fear will hit
profits with hundreds of millions of dollars of extra costs and
trapped capital.''
But then the other argument is, oh, well, this is going to
put American banks at a disadvantage. So let me put into the
record an article by Francesco Guerrera and Sharlene Goff in
the Financial Times on April 11th, ``Global banking regulation
took a step towards convergence on Monday as a UK commission
proposed measures that will bring the country's financial rules
closer to the U.S.''
In fact, there was a fear that Britain was going to be
tougher than us. What we have is the financial institutions
have had a very nice time. The British banks have said to the
British people, ``You are being too tough and we are going to
America.'' The American banks said, ``If you are so tough, we
will go to England.'' I was afraid there was going to be a
major clash in the Atlantic Ocean as they passed each other.
It is an illustration of a phenomenon I once discovered. It
is my contribution to economic theory. I have been hearing for
years about the absence of a level playing field, and it turns
out it is a phenomenon of great interest.
There is apparently a constantly unlevel playing field in
which no one has ever been at the top. You wouldn't think that
was possible, but it is an unlevel playing field in which
everybody is at the bottom.
Now, I think it is very clear from the behavior of the
institutions that being designated is not a great boon. I don't
think it will be a great negative either, because it will only
lead to increased restrictions if people are behaving
irresponsibly.
But, again, this argument as to whether or not the way this
scheme was set forward in the bill enables institutions by
certifying that they are too-big-to-fail or in fact potentially
subject them to greater restrictions, capital increase,
leverage requirements and others, it is overwhelmingly clear
what the institutions themselves say.
For those who still say that this is somehow some great
favor we have done the large institutions, I will quote again a
quote from Marx that I have used before, and the Marx in
question is Chico: ``Who are you gonna believe, me or your own
eyes?''
It is very clear from the evidence that what we tried to do
last year is perceived by the institutions themselves as having
worked the way we hoped it would.
I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the ranking member of the full
committee.
And now, I yield to the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Bachus, for 3 minutes.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
panelists for being here today.
The drafters of Dodd-Frank provided FSOC with new and far-
reaching powers over the financial system, and the Council's
use of the new powers will have a profound effect on our
financial system and on our economy as a whole. And I think
oversight of your activities is going to be a high priority for
our committee.
One of the significant responsibilities, and Ranking Member
Frank referred to this, is determining which non-bank financial
institutions will be determined or would be designated as
systemically important.
Of course, we know that all banks of over $50 billion, some
30-odd banks, will be automatically designated as such. And
those 30 or so banks plus any non-financial institutions will
have heightened prudential standards and Federal Reserve
supervision. That, in and of itself, I don't think is a bad
thing.
However, the moral hazard implications of these
designations and of this power I think can't be overstated. The
stamp of ``systemically important'' will be interpreted by many
market participants as a designation of ``too-big-to-fail,''
prompting them to exercise less market discipline when dealing
with such firms.
Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo concedes that the
designation could exacerbate moral hazard. In a speech on March
31st, he stated, ``There is a reasonable concern that
designating a small number of non-bank affiliated firms would
increase moral hazard concern.''
Additionally, I have questions regarding the transparency
of the process for making the determination. Both the Council's
advance notice for proposed rulemaking and its notice for
proposed rule-making restated language in the Dodd-Frank
statute. However, recent testimony from the FDIC Chairman and
press reports indicate the Council is using additional
standards to make its determination.
The significance of the systemic determination process
requires transparency, and the Council should clarify what
metrics are being used to classify firms in addition to those
in the statutory language.
Congress must also ensure that the Council fulfills its
statutory duty to coordinate the rulemaking, reporting, and
enforcement actions of the financial regulators. I am sure, for
instance that there has been a lot of discussion about the need
for coordination at the CFTC and the SEC.
I think it is imperative for the Chairman of the FSOC, who
is our Treasury Secretary, Secretary Geithner, to direct the
Council's coordination efforts. And he should strive to ensure
that the rules implementing Dodd-Frank are neither duplicative
nor conflicting.
So far, the results on this front are not encouraging as
regulators have not been successful at developing a coherent
and coordinated approach on several fundamental issues with
derivatives regulation and mortgage servicing standards. There
appear to be conflicts and duplications.
I do believe that a lot of that is because of the short
timeframe. It makes it almost impossible to have a coherent,
organized rulemaking. And for that reason, I think that more
time is needed than the statute gives. I would like to hear
your comments on whether you have sufficient time.
Finally, decisions made by the Council must not undermine
the competitiveness of U.S. financial firms or treat U.S. firms
less favorably than their foreign competitors. The chairman of
the subcommittee mentioned this.
The Council should be sensitive to how its rules and
recommendations impact the ability of American companies to
compete globally.
The Council should also keep in mind that in addition to
being subject to Dodd-Frank, U.S. firms are also subject to
Basel III capital standards, as well as rules issued by the
Group of 20 and the Financial Stability Board. The activities
undertaken by the Council show it may not be taking this issue
as seriously as it needs to.
In response to a query on the international context of the
Volcker Rule that was included in the Council's request for
information for the Volcker study, I submitted a comment letter
making the point that ``unilateral U.S. adoption of the Volcker
Rule could hurt the U.S. economy and create opportunities for
regulatory arbitrage.'' This concern has been echoed by others.
However, the Council's final Volcker study indicated just
one reference to concerns about U.S. global competitiveness.
And the Council's study and recommendations on concentration
limits for U.S. firms devoted less than a page to
competitiveness concerns. I hope the panel will address these
issues today.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the chairman.
And now the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I would like to thank you, ladies and
gentlemen, for being here with us today, and I look forward to
your testimony.
I want to make it clear that I am not interested in
relitigating or re-debating the concepts that are here. The law
was passed. I like most of it. I don't like some of it. But we
are here. I am most interested in moving forward in what the
FSOC is going to do going forward.
I will be clear. I believe that FSOC has a responsibility
to clearly outline the criteria that you will be using for
designating someone as a significantly important financial
institution. I think it is only fair to the country, fair to
the individual companies to let them know what rules will
trigger what.
I also think that it is probably best to start with a
relatively small list, because you have to start somewhere, and
if you bite off more than you can chew, I think that is a
recipe for disaster.
At the same time, I believe that the FSOC should be looking
at a potentially significantly larger list of potential SIFI
designees. Those are the people who would be just under the
lines, whatever lines you draw, or people who might want to
game the system.
And there will be someone who games the system. We all know
that. As a matter of fact, the minute you come up with a
designation, everyone will try to game the system.
For instance, on the list that I just got last night of the
banks, bank holding companies that will be automatically
designated, there are 36 banks that are currently on that list.
At least two of them could probably move a few numbers around
on their balance sheets and be de-designated the very next day.
I don't really mind where you draw the initial line, but I
think it is absolutely essential that you have a big group of
other people that you are kind of keeping an eye on, that might
become, for several reasons.
Number one is that things could change. You could change
your opinion. Number two is that they could become significant
in a day or a week. And number three is that, again, people
will be gaming that system.
I do think it is probably fair to keep that list private,
but also to let those people know that they are on that list of
potential SIFIs so that they know they are being carefully
scrutinized.
I also believe that some of the concerns that have been
raised about the lack of coordination in the regulations
between various agencies is a fair point. It is not useful
anywhere, ever, to duplicate or overlap regulation.
And I actually think that is one of the main reasons for
the existence of the Financial Stability Oversight Council. I
believe that is one of their main responsibilities, to get
agencies to work together and to not overly burden the system.
I am not in favor of overregulation. However, I am also not
in favor of under-regulation. Overregulation is clearly defined
at least in one case where you have the same agencies requiring
different things for the same activity. That makes no sense,
unless there is a reason. If there is a reason, then both
agencies should be requiring both activities.
And I guess, finally, I would like to make it clear that as
far as I am concerned, the activities that you are engaged in
and that will be discussed today are a living thing. It is not
just something that we wrote down in concrete never to be
changed.
The regulations will be critically important. Whatever
regulations you come up will probably have to be amended in the
next year or two because you will miss something, or somebody
will game something. You will realize something has to change.
I actually believe that the reason we had a financial
crisis is because the regulators all stayed in their own little
silos and didn't move beyond them when the entire financial
services industry said, ``That is the little silo you are in?
Fine. We are moving outside.''
I think if the regulators had been more flexible and more
broad in their perspective, we would not have had the financial
meltdown that we had.
But either way, I think that whatever you do, there will be
mistakes. There will be things that I don't agree with, and
there will be things that I agree with. But I hope that you all
look at it as a living, breathing item to be amended as you go
forward, particularly in the first couple of years.
As far as I am concerned, we are about to engage in things
that we have never done, which I think makes it, number one,
important, and number two, critically, that it be flexible. And
with that, I will end simply, again, by saying thank you, and I
look forward to your testimony.
Chairman Neugebauer. And I thank the ranking member.
And now, the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr.
Fitzpatrick for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are here today to receive some clarity on the intentions
of FSOC. And I know we all appreciate the panel and the
witnesses being here to hopefully provide some of that.
Among FSOC's most important, and perhaps most impactful
duties, is to determine which financial institutions may
provide systemic risks to our economy.
Considering the financial crisis we just went through, we
want to improve our regulatory system and have procedures in
place to monitor the financial sector. I think it is important,
however, that we not allow our zeal to put American companies
at a disadvantage or, more importantly, to make us set aside
some fundamental American principles.
Sound rules are necessary, and regulation allows us to
enforce those rules. But we must be fair, and we have to adhere
to established procedures.
American companies deserve a transparent, clear and open
process, a designation process that includes safeguards to
ensure that the right companies are receiving proper scrutiny,
and detailed criteria to provide a clearly defined framework
that all the affected parties understand and are able to work
within.
I do not believe any member of this committee will object
to fair and reasonable rules with a well-defined regulatory
system to enforce them. We only seek to understand how these
rules are being made and how America's financial regulators are
going to ensure that American companies will continue to
succeed and continue to be able to provide American jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you.
And now, the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Hayworth?
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am honored to be participating with all of you in
this hearing because we are pursuing, as we must, a key
oversight function. Dodd-Frank represented, in the minds of
many of us, an enormous overreach and one that is, in fact,
putting our economy and job growth in jeopardy.
The FSOC is a very important part of Dodd-Frank. It has the
authority to measure systemic risk, to identify institutions
that pose that risk. And, of course, FSOC also has to establish
enhanced regulations for those institutions.
So we are asking you as regulators to act in agreement as a
Council as you exercise this extraordinary level of authority.
And I trust you to be executing that responsibility to the
utmost of your ability. There is no question.
But I want to make sure that, indeed, FSOC is acting as
intended, to identify systemic risk in a way that doesn't
increase--and to define systemic risk in a way that doesn't
increase moral hazard of too-big-to-fail, that doesn't create
market distortion because of the perception that the Federal
Government is going to guarantee certain aspects of market
activity.
This, of course, was at the root of the 2008 crisis in the
minds of many of us, and certainly including me. So today, in
our oversight function, we seek your help in decreasing
ambiguity, decreasing uncertainty, and decreasing unintended
consequences which is a theme, as you know, among us this year,
for so many reasons.
So I thank you in advance for your candid and thorough
answers as we all work through the challenges that are posed to
FSOC and also are posed by FSOC.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. And now to the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Waters?
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In 2008, the financial markets of the United States melted
down and today, nearly 3 years later, our Nation is still
struggling to get out of the economic quagmire that meltdown
caused.
The meltdown, which was caused by the greed and
irresponsibility of several banks on Wall Street but had
systemic implications for the entire market, had real negative
impacts on everyday Americans. These costs included the loss of
over $10 trillion in household wealth and the loss of 10
million jobs. Since the meltdown, incomes have declined, with
households losing an average of $3,250.
All of this is to say that Democrats realized that we had
to act to protect our financial markets and to prevent
institutions from becoming too-big-to-fail and the result of
Democrats' action was the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act.
Dodd-Frank ends too-big-to-fail by providing a mechanism
for the orderly liquidation of failing companies that
guarantees the company dies while protecting the rest of the
financial system.
Now, what did my friends on the opposite side of the aisle
propose to help prevent another crisis? I heard the argument
that the only way to end bailouts is to put firms through the
bankruptcy process. But that doesn't end too-big-to-fail, and
it certainly won't prevent another crisis because bankruptcy
itself can create systemic problems when used to unwind large,
interconnected financial companies.
If my friends had their way, we would now have a system
that would exacerbate, not solve those problems. In fact, I
believe that if we had implemented a bankruptcy strategy as
suggested by my friends on the opposite side of the aisle, the
markets would have no confidence that another crisis would not
occur and our hard-fought economic recovery would never have
been achieved.
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I strongly support the work
Democrats undertook to save this Nation from another financial
and economic collapse. The Dodd-Frank Act and the Financial
Stability Oversight Council are critical to the continued
stability of not just our financial markets, but also our
economy.
I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
And now the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Canseco, for 1
minute.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to thank the witnesses for appearing here
today and offering your testimony.
For the first time in history, Federal regulators have been
asked to identify systemic risk in our financial markets. While
it is a noble goal to root out systemic risk before it brings
down a financial system, this new regulatory responsibility
carries significant implications for our country and our
economy.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council, FSOC, will have
to make some of the most consequential decisions in the coming
years about our financial institutions, financial markets, and
our economy.
The Council needs to be certain that it does not legitimize
the most damning accusations being made about its existence,
that its function will be to identify firms that are too-big-
to-fail and put taxpayers at risk yet again.
Recently, there have been some worrisome developments about
the Council's operations. Proposed rules from the Council are
extremely vague, and representatives from agencies that make up
the Council have made conflicting statements about the
Council's intent. I hope today's hearing serves to clarify what
the Council's intentions are and what steps they are taking to
protect our economy and our consumers.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to
hearing the testimony.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman, and remind
members that without objection, all members' statements will be
made a part of the record.
I would now like to introduce our panel today: the
Honorable Gary Gensler, Chairman of the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission; the Honorable Jeffrey Goldstein, Under
Secretary of Domestic Finance in the Department of the
Treasury; the Honorable John Huff, Director of the Missouri
Department of Insurance, Financial Institutions and
Professional Registration; Ms. Nellie Liang, Director of the
Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Federal
Reserve; Robert Cook, Director of the Division of Trading and
Markets at the Securities and Exchange Commission; Mr. Arthur
Murton, Director, Division of Insurance and Research, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation; and Mr. Tim Long, Chief National
Bank Examiner and Senior Deputy Comptroller for Regulatory
Policy, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
I would remind all of you that without objection, all of
your written statements will be made a part of the record. We
ask you to limit your testimony to 5 minutes.
And with that, I recognize Chairman Gensler.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GARY GENSLER, CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY
FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFTC)

Mr. Gensler. Good afternoon. Thank you, Chairman
Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano, Ranking Member Frank, and
all the members of the subcommittee. I thank you for inviting
me here to speak at this hearing about FSOC. I am pleased to
testify along with our fellow regulators here and to hear your
thoughts.
I think that the FSOC provides an opportunity for
regulators now and in the future to ensure that our financial
system works better for all Americans. The financial system
should be a place where investors and savers can get a return
on their money. It should provide transparent and efficient
markets where borrowers and people with good ideas and business
plans can raise needed capital.
One of the challenges for the Council and for the American
public is that, like so many other industries, the financial
industry has gotten very concentrated around a small number of
very large firms. And as it is unlikely that we could ever
ensure that financial institutions will not fail, because
surely some will fail in the future, we must do our utmost to
ensure that when those challenges arise, the taxpayers are not
forced to stand behind those institutions, and yes, that these
institutions are free to fail.
There are important decisions that the Council will make,
such as determinations about systemically important non-bank
companies or SIFIs as you mentioned. There are other things
about clearinghouses and completing studies and so forth.
More specifically, the Council is suggesting a
clearinghouse. This is something that the CFTC gets very
involved in, but some clearinghouses will be so large that they
are systemically important. The CFTC has proposed comprehensive
and robust rules to oversee the clearinghouses, including those
that may be systemically important.
And I look forward to the Council's work moving forward.
There will be some proposals on how that designation process
should come forward. I think they should be detailed and the
criteria should be explicit.
Further, the FSOC put forward a Volcker Rule study. This
was very important for the CFTC because we, along with other
Federal regulators, have to complete some proposals on the
Volcker Rule.
It is our hope to put out a proposal sometime this summer
along with other Federal regulators. And importantly, the study
included derivatives as well as cash products to assure that
there is not a regulatory arbitrage.
Though these specific issues are important, to me, it is
essential the Council make sure that the American public
doesn't bear the risk of the financial system and that the
system works for the American public and investors and small
business, retirees and homeowners.
To accomplish this, the regulators must coordinate closely
on their mission and work together regularly to assess the
health of the financial system and to make recommendations and
annually report this to the Congress.
The CFTC is consulting heavily with the other agencies of
the FSOC to implement all of this, but we are only one agency.
And with regard to consultation, we put out all of our proposed
rules, our term sheets, our memos to the seven other member
agencies. We have been enormously benefited by the other
agencies' direction and advice on this.
We are at a bit of a pause right now. We have about 45
rules outstanding. We have about four to go, maybe five. Before
we move to any final rules, we are going to, again, get input
from all of the seven member agencies. Most of that is from the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal Reserve
because that is where most of the input is.
With that, I thank you, and I look forward to any of your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Gensler can be found on
page 60 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Gensler.
Mr Goldstein?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JEFFREY A. GOLDSTEIN, UNDER
SECRETARY FOR DOMESTIC FINANCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Capuano, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today.
In July 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act created the Financial Stability
Oversight Council to monitor and address risks to financial
stability. In conjunction with my duties as Under Secretary of
the Treasury, I serve as the Chair of the Council's Deputies
Committee, as well as its Systemic Risk Committee. And I am
working with my Council colleagues to build and execute the
mandate of this new organization.
In the short time since the Dodd-Frank Act was signed into
law, the Council has built its organizational framework,
initiated monitoring for potential risks to financial
stability, laid the groundwork for the designation of non-bank
financial companies and financial market utilities, completed
statutorily required studies, including a study on the
effective implementation of the Volcker Rule, and served as a
forum for discussion and coordination among the agencies
implementing Dodd-Frank.
We have built the structure for the Council that is
designed to promote accountability and action. The Council's
work monitoring systemic risk has focused on significant market
developments that could affect the financial system.
The remainder of the Council's agenda over the 8 months has
been driven by specific statutory responsibilities. For
example, in January the Council released studies on the Volcker
Rule which prohibits proprietary trading by banking entities
and on the Dodd-Frank Act's limits on concentration of large
financial companies.
In addition, as Chair of the Council, the Treasury
Secretary is required to coordinate several major rulemakings,
including joint rulemakings on credit risk retention and the
Volcker Rule.
We are also developing an analytic framework for, and have
engaged in a public rulemaking related to, two of the Council's
most important authorities, its authority to designate non-bank
financial companies for consolidated supervision and financial
market utilities for heightened standards.
Through its designation authority, the Council will help
ensure that large interconnected financial companies whose
material financial stress could pose a threat to U.S. financial
stability will not be permitted to avoid adequate supervision
based on their corporate form.
Similarly, the Council's work will help ensure that
financial market utilities, which facilitate clearing
settlements and payments, do not put the broader financial
system at risk.
We expect to publish a final rule on the process and
criteria for non-bank designations that will take into account
the comments we have received and incorporate the qualitative
and quantitative considerations mandated by the statute.
In that work, we are guided by a desire to ensure
transparency and to obtain input from all interested parties.
We are also committed to establishing a process that will
endure changes in firms, markets and risks over time.
Our commitment to a robust designation process goes beyond
transparency during rulemaking. Every designation decision will
be firm-specific and subject to judicial review. Even before
the Council votes on proposed designations, the company under
consideration will have an opportunity to submit written
materials to the Council concerning its designation.
If challenged, the designation will be subject to review
through a formal hearing process and a two-thirds final vote,
after which the Council must then provide to Congress a report
detailing its final decision.
As we continue to work to implement the Wall Street reform
legislation, our overarching goal will remain the same--to
establish new rules of the road to fix what failed and
contributed to the financial crisis. And the Council plays a
critical role in achieving that goal.
Let me end by thanking the members for the opportunity to
be here today, and I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Under Secretary Goldstein can be
found on page 67 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Huff?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN M. HUFF, DIRECTOR, STATE OF
MISSOURI DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE, FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, AND
PROFESSIONAL REGISTRATION, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS (NAIC)

Mr. Huff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Capuano,
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today.
My name is John Huff. I am Director of the Department of
Insurance, Financial Institutions and Professional Registration
for the State of Missouri. I serve as a non-voting member of
FSOC.
I am also a member of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, NAIC, and I am testifying on behalf of that
organization today. Specifically, I am here to discuss the
experiences of our Nation's 56 insurance regulators and working
through NAIC with FSOC.
There are three matters I wish to address in my testimony
today. First, insurance is a unique product, fundamentally
different from banking and securities products. Second, in
passing Dodd-Frank, we believe that Congress intended that
insurance regulators have thorough representation on FSOC.
And finally, despite the NAIC's best efforts, there is
inadequate insurance expertise on FSOC today, a problem that
will continue for the foreseeable future.
Insurance is a unique product, and insurance policies
involve upfront payments in exchange for a legal promise is to
pay benefits in the event of a future loss. Contrasting bank
products involving money deposited by customers subject to
withdrawal on demand at any time, insurance products are not.
U.S. insurance companies are also subject to stringent
capital requirements, limits on the nature and extent of their
investments, and quarterly analysis and periodic examination.
These regulatory reviews enabled the insurance sector to
weather the recent financial crisis better than other sectors.
For these reasons, it is the view of the NAIC that
traditional insurance products and activities do not typically
create systemic risk. However, connections with other financial
activities and non-insurance affiliates may indeed expose some
insurers to the impact of systemic risk, and certain products
may provide a conduit for systemic risk.
Beyond our participation on FSOC, the NAIC is taking steps
to mitigate systemic risk and address the areas of concern that
were raised during the recent financial crisis.
Through the NAIC, regulators consult with each other, share
information, and develop effective policies. In the past year
alone, we have made important changes to the Model Insurance
Holding Company System Regulatory Act and Regulation to provide
a clearer view of the operations of financial groups and their
impact on any insurers within those groups.
We have enhanced securities lending disclosures requiring
additional transparency in an area that received attention
during the crisis. We have also reduced regulatory reliance on
credit ratings by changing how commercial and residential
mortgage-backed securities are valued for determining risk-
based capital.
In addition, NAIC is a founding member of the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors, IAIS, which represents
140 countries of insurance regulators.
It is at the IAIS Financial Stability Committee that
approaches are being developed now to evaluate insurers and
determine whether such entities will be considered Globally
Systemically Important Financial Institutions, or G-SIFIs.
Congress recognized that insurance is regulated primarily
at the State level, and for that reason the Act mandates that
an insurance regulator be appointed to FSOC through a process
determined by all of the insurance regulators.
We also believe Congress intended for my position to
represent the interests of the entire insurance regulatory
system. The important role that Congress intended for State
insurance regulators to play is further supported by Section
111(b) of the Act, which provides specifically for FSOC to
appoint special advisory committees of State regulators to
assist it in carrying out its mission.
While FSOC engages in work that could impact insurers, two
of our three insurance representatives, the Director of the
Federal Insurance Office and a presidential appointee with
insurance experience, are absent from the table. And I have
been prohibited from utilizing available State regulatory
resources, including engaging other State regulators.
Clearly, today there is inadequate insurance expertise on
FSOC. Our regulatory system requires regulators to work
collaboratively and share information with one another in
confidential settings. Yet to date, I have been restricted with
consulting with my fellow insurance regulators.
Quite simply, FSOC should want and the U.S. taxpayers
should demand the resources and expertise that their regulators
can provide to FSOC's work in protecting the U.S. financial
system.
From the beginning, the State regulators and the NAIC have
been and continue to be willing to contribute to FSOC's work
relating to insurance. While we have made some limited progress
with the U.S. Treasury Department on this issue, I am
frustrated that it has taken so long for our concerns to be
addressed.
And while I appreciate the accommodations made to date,
they are simply not sufficient in light of the very important
work facing FSOC. I am concerned that if progress on this front
continues to be made at a similarly slow pace moving forward,
decisions impacting insurance companies, insurance consumers,
and our country's financial stability will be made without the
benefit of nearly 140 years of proven insurance regulatory
experience.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huff can be found on page 72
of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Huff.
Ms. Liang?

STATEMENT OF J. NELLIE LIANG, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF FINANCIAL
STABILITY POLICY AND RESEARCH, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM (FED)

Ms. Liang. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the Federal Reserve Board's role as a member of the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.
The FSOC members represent a number of regulatory agencies
that oversee a broad range of participants in the U.S.
financial market. The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System is a voting member of the FSOC. I am
here testifying on behalf of the Chairman as the Director of
the Board's Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research.
The Dodd-Frank Act charged the FSOC with the important task
of identifying and mitigating risk to the stability of the U.S.
financial system. The Council is well-placed to address risk
that might not fall clearly with the jurisdiction of a single
agency.
To execute its duties effectively and efficiently, the
Council has established a structure to leverage the existing
expertise of the member agencies to promote the sharing of
information to identify risk and to facilitate coordination
with respect to policy development, rulemaking, reporting
requirements, and other actions.
The Federal Reserve is committed to working with the FSOC
and other Council members to strengthen systemic oversight. We
are helping to develop the analytical framework and procedures
to identify systemically important non-bank firms and financial
market utilities and for systemic risk assessment.
We are contributing to numerous studies and rulemaking and
are meeting regularly with staff of the other agencies to
discuss emerging risks to financial institutions and markets.
In addition to the Federal Reserve's role as a member of
the FSOC, the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Federal Reserve other
new, important responsibilities. These responsibilities include
supervising non-bank firms that are designated as systemically
important by the Council and supervising thrift holding
companies.
They also include developing enhanced prudential standards,
including capital, liquidity, stress tests, single counterparty
credit limits, and living will requirements for the largest
financial firms.
The Federal Reserve has made some internal changes to
better carry out its new responsibilities. To strengthen
supervision of the largest, most complex financial firms, we
created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating
Committee, a centralized multidisciplinary body.
Relative to previous practices, this new structure makes
greater use of horizontal or cross-firm evaluations of the
practices and portfolios of firms.
It relies on additional and improved quantitative methods
for evaluating the performance of firms. And it more
efficiently employs the broad range of skills of the Federal
Reserve staff, for example, in the areas of economic research,
financial markets, and payment systems, in addition to
supervision. Similarly, we have reorganized to improve the
oversight of systemically important financial market utilities.
As the Dodd-Frank Act recognizes, supervision should take
into account the overall financial stability of the United
States in addition to the safety and soundness of individual
firms.
Our revised internal organizational structure facilitates
our implementation of this macroprudential approach to do
oversight.
More recently, we created an Office of Financial Stability
Policy and Research to better coordinate our financial
stability work. This office contributes to supervision of the
large complex institutions. It also helps identify and analyze
potential risks to the broader financial system and the
economy.
Such risk could stem from, among other things, potential
asset price alignment, excessive leverage, outside financial
flows, and structural vulnerabilities in financial markets.
In closing, Congress has given the FSOC an important
mandate, and the Federal Reserve will work closely with our
fellow regulators, the Congress, and the Administration to help
FSOC execute its responsibilities and promote financial
stability in the United States.
Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today.
I would be pleased to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Liang can be found on page
81 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Ms. Liang.
Mr. Cook?

STATEMENT OF ROBERT W. COOK, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF TRADING AND
MARKETS, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Mr. Cook. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano, and
members of the subcommittee, good morning.
I am Robert Cook, Director of the Securities and Exchange
Commission's Division of Trading and Markets.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
SEC Chairman Schapiro regarding the progress of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council.
As you know, FSOC was created by Title I of the Dodd-Frank
Act. Its duties include identifying and designating certain
non-bank financial companies as systemically important
financial institutions, or SIFIs, for heightened prudential
supervision by the Federal Reserve Board, identifying and
designating financial market utilities, or FMUs, that are or
are likely to become systemically important, monitoring the
financial markets and regulatory framework to identify gaps,
weaknesses and risks and making recommendations to address
those issues to its member agencies and Congress, and combining
the information of its member agencies in working with the
Office of Financial Research to facilitate the collection and
sharing of information about risks across the financial system.
Since passage of the Act, FSOC has taken steps to create an
organizational structure, coordinate interagency efforts and
build a foundation for meeting its statutory responsibilities
to begin defining and implementing the process.
To identify and designate SIFIs for heightened supervision
by the Federal Reserve Board, FSOC created an interagency
committee and several staff committees.
Last October, FSOC requested initial comments on the
designation process, and in late January issued a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (NPR). The rule proposes the various
factors and attributes of firms that will be considered by FSOC
as part of designation determinations as well as processes and
procedures established under the Act for such determinations.
FSOC also established another interagency committee to
develop a framework for the designation of systemically
important FMUs. These entities form critical links among
marketplaces and intermediaries that can reduce counterparty
credit risk among market participants, create significant
efficiencies in trading activities, and promote transparency in
financial markets.
However, FMUs by their nature create and concentrate new
risks that could affect the stability of the broader financial
system. To address these risks, the Act provides important new
enhancements to the regulation and supervision of FMUs
designated as systemically important.
Accordingly, FSOC sought comments last December regarding
the designation process and in March published a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking to provide further information on the
process it proposes to follow when reviewing the systemic
importance of FMUs.
In addition to initiating work on the identification of
SIFIs and systemically important FMUs, FSOC has established a
Systemic Risk Committee that seeks to identify, highlight, and
review possible risks that could develop across the financial
system.
Beyond the work of these interagency committees, FSOC has
prepared and issued two studies, including its study and
recommendations regarding the implementation of Section 619 of
the Act, commonly referred to as the Volcker Rule.
That study recommends the creation of rules and a
supervisory framework that would effectively prohibit
proprietary trading activities by covered banking entities,
while appropriately distinguishing statutorily permitted
activities, such as market making and risk-mitigating hedging.
In addition, the study identified potential challenges in
delineating prohibited activities from permitted activities.
While FSOC has made substantial progress in taking up its
new responsibilities, its efforts are ongoing and the most
challenging issues lie ahead, including the potential
designation of SIFIs and FMUs.
Continued public input, both generally on this process and
specifically with respect to the notices of proposed
rulemakings, will be critically important. In addition, as
Dodd-Frank implementation proceeds, sustained coordination of
the FSOC agencies remains a vital consideration.
I look forward to continuing to work closely with Congress
as implementation continues, and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cook can be found on page 52
of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Cook.
Mr. Murton?

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR J. MURTON, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF INSURANCE
AND RESEARCH, FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Murton. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano,
Ranking Member Frank, and members of the subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today on behalf of the
FDIC on the issue of the Financial Stability Oversight Council,
known as the FSOC.
The recent financial crisis exposed shortcomings in our
regulatory framework for monitoring and addressing risk in the
financial system. Before the crisis, regulatory agencies tended
to focus narrowly on the institutions and markets within their
jurisdiction.
We regulators did not pay enough attention to crosscutting
developments that contributed to the buildup of significant
risk within the system.
In addition to regulatory gaps, the absence of a resolution
process for systemically important financial institutions left
regulators with limited options for addressing problems facing
such firms.
This created a no-win dilemma for policymakers--bail out
these companies or expose the financial system to the
destabilizing effects of applying the bankruptcy process to
financial firms that are not well-suited for it.
My colleagues on the panel have already covered many of the
key aspects of the FSOC. Therefore, I will focus my remarks on
a few points of particular importance to the FDIC.
As others have mentioned, an important responsibility of
the FSOC is to determine whether a non-bank financial company
should be designated as a systemically important financial
institution, or SIFI.
Designated firms will be supervised by the Federal Reserve
and subject to prudential standards and to new requirements for
developing and maintaining resolution plans. From the FDIC's
perspective, the requirement that SIFIs have resolution plans
is an important reason why we must get the SIFI designations
right.
The purpose of these resolution plans, often known as
living wills, is to ensure that if one of these firms were to
face failure, it would be possible to liquidate the firm under
the Bankruptcy Code in an orderly way.
The FDIC and the Federal Reserve Board have the joint
responsibility for rulemaking and oversight of resolution
plans. Within the last few weeks, the Boards of the FDIC and
the Federal Reserve have approved a joint proposal for comment.
Once these rules are in place, if the resolution plans
submitted by the firms are not found to be credible, we can
require change which could ultimately result in downsizing and
simplification of these firms.
Resolution plans and the FDIC's Orderly Liquidation
Authority (OLA) are critical features of the Dodd-Frank Act
because they will provide future policymakers with a means of
handling the failure of a large, interconnected financial firm
in a way that does not destabilize the financial system and
does not bail out creditors and investors.
It is important that we put these rules in place
effectively so that market participants will know they are at
risk when they invest in or lend to large, systemically
important financial firms.
This will ensure that these firms are subject not only to
regulation and supervision, but also to meaningful market
discipline. Both are necessary for the financial system to
safely and efficiently allocate the capital and credit
necessary to support economic growth.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. And I would
be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murton can be found on page
102 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Murton.
Mr. Long?

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY W. LONG, SENIOR DEPUTY COMPTROLLER, BANK
SUPERVISION POLICY, AND CHIEF NATIONAL BANK EXAMINER, OFFICE OF
THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY (OCC)

Mr. Long. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member
Capuano, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Tim Long. I am Senior Deputy Comptroller and
Chief National Bank Examiner at the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency. In this role, I serve as OCC's representative
on the Financial Stability Oversight Council's Deputies
Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to provide the OCC's
perspective on the functions and operations of the FSOC.
Congress set forth very specific mandates regarding the
role and function of FSOC, but its primary mission is
threefold: to identify risks to the financial stability of the
United States; to promote market discipline; and to respond to
emerging threats to the stability of the U.S. financial system.
In some cases, the Council has a direct responsibility to
make decisions and take action. This includes designating
certain non-bank financial companies to be supervised by the
Federal Reserve and subject to heightened prudential standards
should the Council determine that material financial distress
at such companies would pose a threat to the financial
stability of the United States.
In other areas, the Council's role is more of an advisory
body to the primary Federal regulators, such as conducting
studies and making recommendations to inform future agency
rulemakings.
The OCC believes the very roles and responsibilities that
the Congress assigned to the Council appropriately balance and
reflect the desire to enhance regulatory coordination for
systemically important firms and activities, while preserving
and respecting the independent authorities and accountability
of the primary supervisors.
As detailed in my written statement, and as the other
witnesses have described, FSOC has taken action on a number of
items, including the publication of two required studies and
proposed rulemakings on the designation of systemically
important non-bank financial firms and financial market
utilities.
The Council and its committees are also making strides in
providing a more systemic and structured framework for
identifying, monitoring, and deliberating a potential systemic
risk to the financial stability of the United States.
Briefings and discussions on potential risks and the
implications of current market developments on financial
stability are a key part of the closed deliberations of each of
the Council meetings.
In summary, I believe FSOC enhances the agencies'
collective ability to identify and respond to emerging systemic
risk.
I would, however, offer two cautionary notes. First, I
believe the Council's success ultimately will depend on the
willingness and the ability of its members and staff to engage
in frank and candid discussions about emerging risks, issues
and institutions.
These discussions are not always pleasant as they can
challenge one's longstanding views or ways of approaching a
problem. But being able to voice a dissenting view or
assessment will be critical in ensuring that we are seeing and
considering the full scope of issues.
In addition, these discussions will also involve
information or findings that will need further verification,
that are extremely sensitive, either to the operation of a
given firm or market segment, or, if misconstrued, could
actually undermine public and investor confidence and thereby
create or exacerbate a potentially systemic problem.
As a result, I believe that it is critical that these types
of deliberations, both at the Council level and at our staff
level, be conducted in a manner that ensures their confidential
nature.
Second, even with the fullest deliberations and the best
data, there will continue to be unforeseen events that pose
substantial risk to the system, markets or groups of
institutions. Business and credit cycles will continue.
We should not expect FSOC to prevent such occurrences. FSOC
will, however, provide a mechanism to communicate, coordinate,
and respond to such events to help contain and limit their
impact.
The issues that the Council will confront in carrying out
these duties are, by their nature, complex and far-reaching in
terms of their potential effects on our financial markets and
the economy.
Developing appropriate and measured responses to these
issues will require thoughtful deliberation and debate among
the member agencies. The OCC is committed to providing its
expertise and perspective in helping FSOC achieve its mission.
Thank you, and I will be happy to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Long can be found on page 88
of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Long.
It is the intention of the Chair, and I talked to the
ranking member, that we try to conclude this hearing prior to
the--we think we are going to have a series of votes around
12:30.
Now, what that means is we have a number of people in the
queue here who want to ask questions, and I want everybody to
have an opportunity to ask a question, because it is not fair
to some of the members, and then we get right to the end, and
they have waited here all day and didn't get to ask a question.
The Chair is going to hold pretty strictly to the 5-minute
rule for members. So keep that in mind and get to your best
question first. And I ask the panel members to be as succinct
as they can so that members will have an opportunity to ask as
many questions as they can.
I will start the questioning. I think one of the things
that I think that the Council states publicly on its Web site,
as I said in my opening statement, too, is that it is committed
to conducting its business in ``an open and transparent
manner.''
Yet, we understand that there are an internal memo, in
fact, my staff member went over and reviewed an internal memo
that is about 80 pages, that has some very specific information
in there about a process that is under way to determine some of
these non-bank financial institutions and the criteria for
them, particularly when it comes to insurance companies.
The memo says, ``to the extent to which large insurers
could be subject to orderly resolution of the market share of
MBS and CMBS held by the insurer, a number of demand accounts
held by the insurer.'' And so then when, I look at the original
document put out for rule, it basically just restated what is
in Dodd-Frank.
And so, Mr. Goldstein, I wonder if we are going down a
process here of being transparent, and as important as the
criteria is to this process, it may be one of the most
important pieces of it, that it doesn't appear that we are
being very transparent.
What we are hearing from people who are trying to respond
back to that is they got the same response. If you reprint
Dodd-Frank, it is the same response that they had to Dodd-
Frank. I think what they were looking for--I think what we are
looking for is a little bit more transparency and meat in this
process. Can you respond to that?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I will. Thank you very
much. It is a very important question because I think that FSOC
has committed itself to transparency and to clarity.
The very first meeting of the FSOC in October put out an
advance notice of public rulemaking. In addition--that received
50 comments, 50 important comments.
In January, a notice of public rulemaking was put out which
received approximately 35 comments, and those comments are
being taken very seriously.
The process is one which is also meant, as I mentioned in
my testimony, to be highly transparent, to be firm-specific and
the designation process will invite firms to provide comments
that can be utilized in making a determination.
If a firm wants a hearing, that hearing will be provided.
And in addition to that, there will be a requirement for
transparency under the statute to ensure that Congress is
informed of the basis for designation.
I think that the comments, as I mentioned in my testimony,
have asked for greater clarity. And in the final rule text, we
expect to provide greater clarity.
What was put out was an attempt to try to take the 11
criteria that were in the Act and try to map them into two
broad buckets.
Bucket one is, what would be the implications of failure
for an institution? For example, what is its interconnectivity?
What is its size? What are the--does a firm have substitutes
that other firms can provide? So what are the implications for
the system of failure?
The second broad bucket was a bucket of, what are the
vulnerabilities of that specific firm? So for example, maturity
mismatch, liquidity, leverage, extent of existing regulatory
scrutiny. And all of this was informed by the statute. We are
advancing that work and would continue to advance that work.
You made reference to a report. I would just spend one
moment emphasizing that the report was a draft report that was
meant to help inform staff on the designation process. It never
made its way to deputies. It has never made its way to
principals. It was an early-stage document.
And so I wouldn't want to suggest to you that there was an
FSOC document that had been reviewed, validated, and did not
make its way into the public domain.
Chairman Neugebauer. Got it, just a quick follow up. When
the criteria comes out in the final rule, there will be no
further opportunity for comment, though. Is that correct?
Mr. Goldstein. I think we have received, as I said, 50
comments from the ANPR. We received 38 comments--
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes or no, when the final rule comes
out, there is no opportunity for final comment? Is that
correct?
Mr. Goldstein. That would be my understanding.
Chairman Neugebauer. And so what we have sent out is a very
general, broad framework, and people--the reason, I think one
of the reasons you have gotten very few responses is that
people really don't know what to comment on.
I think what we owe in this process, and I am extremely
disappointed that we didn't come out with specific criteria
that the working group is thinking about and let people comment
on that.
Now what you have done is you have taken very general
comments and you are going to huddle up, make the final
decision, and nobody is going to have any input into that. And
quite honestly, that is not transparency to me.
With that, I recognize the ranking member, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was actually going
to ask the same question.
And I will be very clear. I don't like that answer, and I
don't like that situation. I think it is totally--I think
everything you have done so far is fine. But to come out with a
final regulation with specific criteria that doesn't allow
anybody an opportunity to respond to or comment on, I think
that is unfair. And I don't think that is transparent by any
fair definition of the term.
I am not prepared to argue with anything you have done thus
far, and I am not prepared at all to argue with whatever
criteria you may choose. But to then choose it, when we are
into a whole new world, particularly when it comes to insurance
and other non-bank, we have never regulated some of the people
we are about to regulate.
I think it is only fair to give them an opportunity to
respond and say, ``Well, maybe you shouldn't count this or
maybe you should count that.'' Not that you have to agree, but
at least an opportunity for an open dialogue. That is my
definition of transparency.
I want to be very clear that I do not like that situation
or that answer, and I would strongly request that the members
of the FSOC reconsider that approach, again, not for the
conclusion or the result, but in deference to true transparency
and fairness.
I guess that actually answers most of the questions I have,
to tell you the truth. That is where I was going to go is, what
is going to be public, how are they going to know?
But I do want to ask another question. When you finally get
to the point of designating somebody, when will that become
public? When will my wife know that firm XYZ has now been
designated as a SIFI? Will that be at the end of the process?
Because, as I understand it, even once you designate somebody,
there will then be some give and take, some appeals process.
When will that happen that it becomes public? Will it be at
the beginning when you initially designate, or at the end, when
they have finalized their opportunities to appeal and consider
the matters? Do you know yet?
Mr. Goldstein. I think the designations process is meant to
be, as I said, open in the following sense. It is meant to
provide an opportunity to any firms that would like to provide
information relevant to its designation. That firm could,
subject to its own decision--
Mr. Capuano. I understand that--
Mr. Goldstein. --put it in the public domain.
Mr. Capuano. --but what is the intent at the moment?
Mr. Goldstein. I think the intent of the FSOC, as I
currently understand it as, would be to not make a designation
public until it went through the totality of the process.
Mr. Capuano. Good. I think that's a fair approach.
Mr. Goldstein. And that would be after a two-thirds vote of
the Council. But it would not be anticipated--
Mr. Capuano. So the two-thirds vote of the Council wouldn't
come until after they have had an opportunity to respond?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. That is a fair approach.
I guess I would like to know, in general, from everybody,
what do you think of the concept of originally starting with a
smaller list so that you can kind of walk before you run?
And then the concept of obviously having a larger list that
would be kept by somebody, in my opinion preferably private,
for the companies that either are going to game the system or
might potentially become significant.
I am just curious. Is that the general approach that is
being considered, or is somebody still fighting to have a
humongous list right to begin with?
Ms. Liang. I can address some of that, building on what Mr.
Goldstein said. Designation is not a simple process, and it is
not a one-size-fits-all process approach.
There are multiple factors in the statute that we have been
asked to consider, in contrast to banks, where Congress chose a
$50 billion cutoff. And as Jeffrey mentioned, there is a
process for a notice, hearings, review.
So we are collecting information and we are trying to
consider all the comments that we have received. We need to
consider this carefully and thoughtfully.
Mr. Capuano. I respect all that, but is the intention to
consider it thoughtfully and thoroughly with 4,000
organizations or with 100? I fully respect everything you just
said, but it still doesn't answer the question.
Mr. Gensler. I guess I will just--speaking as one voting
member of the Council, I should hope that we do something
similar to what the ranking member said, that the Council staff
be looking at in each of these industry groups a small group.
But I think it is the clear intent of Congress that this is a
small group that are truly systemically relevant institutions.
Mr. Capuano. And I think that is obviously the right way to
go, but I am also--and my time is almost up--I am very
concerned about only looking, for the sake of discussion, at 50
groups, 50 entities to begin with, but missing those next 200
that might become significant tomorrow or might merge the next
day.
And if you haven't looked at them going forward, then the
minute they become significant, you will have known nothing
about them. And I am hoping that there is a thoughtful process
by having an ongoing review of that.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the ranking member.
Mr. Fitzpatrick?
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goldstein, in her testimony, Ms. Liang mentioned that
it is an important thing that the U.S. financial firms be
coordinated with international efforts to implement the Dodd-
Frank Act and that they are well-aligned with the efforts of
the G-20, the Financial Stability Board and Basel.
This is, I believe, an important part of the duties of
FSOC, and I am curious why this was not mentioned in your
testimony. I will give you a chance to elaborate on that.
Mr. Goldstein. The omission from my testimony does not in
any way diminish the critical importance of the point you have
just made. I think that it is the responsibility of FSOC and
the member agencies to look at all of the relevant issues
through an international lens.
And I think that looking at the work of the Council and its
member agencies is meant to ensure that outreach takes place on
individual issues and collectively and that it, in fact, is
taking place.
It is incredibly important that we seek wherever possible
international consistency, and I would be in full agreement
with you on that point, sir.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. So what type of coordination do you
foresee?
Mr. Goldstein. I think that there is coordination that
takes place at multiple levels. Many of the members of the FSOC
are participants in the Financial Stability Board. Many of them
are, of course, part of the Basel process.
In addition to that, many of the members of the FSOC engage
with their European and other counterparts on issues related to
derivatives, which I am sure Mr. Gensler can speak to, on
issues across the spectrum. And so it is done at the individual
agency level, and it is also done at an FSOC level wherever
appropriate.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Secretary, one key position on the
Council remains unfilled and that is a person with the
insurance background and expertise. Can you indicate for the
subcommittee when this position will be filled?
Mr. Goldstein. I am not in a position to speak for the
President of the United States. This is a presidential
nomination subject to the confirmation of the Senate. It is my
understanding that people are hard at work on this issue.
I think we do have the benefit in the interim of Mr. Huff,
who is a State insurance member. And we also have named Michael
McRaith to head the Federal Insurance Office, who brings with
him extensive State insurance expertise. He is currently the
Illinois insurance commissioner.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. So you feel it is appropriate to go
forward with Section 113 designations without that permanent
position being filled at this point?
Mr. Goldstein. I think we have extensive insurance
expertise in Mr. Huff and Mr. McRaith, but I think, as I said
earlier, we are not at the point of making designations today.
We are in a deliberative process and so I would not anticipate
that designations will be forthcoming in a very short time
horizon.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. If Mr. Huff wanted to bring on additional
staff and regulatory consultants, bring them on board tomorrow,
would you let him do that?
Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Huff has, like all FSOC members, the
ability to utilize fully his own agency. And that is true
across all of the FSOC members. In addition to that, he
requested additional personal support to utilize people from
outside of the public sector.
The FSOC discussed and has worked with Mr. Huff to be able
to make sure that those people who are outside of the public
sector are covered by appropriate confidentiality constraints.
And that is true of all FSOC members, meaning all FSOC members
have the ability to lean on their own staffs and utilize their
own staffs, and are subject to confidentiality constraints
given the sensitive nature of the work done by the FSOC.
We will continue to work with Mr. Huff. We are trying to
balance in our discussions at the FSOC the need that Mr. Huff
has, but also the critical confidentiality, given that the FSOC
is exposed to confidential supervisory information,
confidential trade information.
But I would also add that there should be no limitation,
nor has any limitation been imposed on Mr. Huff consulting
without the utilization of that confidential information.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Is that a yes? Can he bring them on board?
Mr. Goldstein. We will continue to work with Mr. Huff to
make sure that he has appropriate support.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Frank
from Massachusetts?
Mr. Frank. Mr. Goldstein, I am going to continue that line.
We worked very hard in writing the bill to make sure that the
insurance industry was given representation. There is a
delicate balance there because it is State-regulated, but we
are going to be making decisions that could affect them. Please
err on the side of inclusion. Let us not get too bureaucratic.
And Mr. Huff talked about State insurance commissioners.
When you say ``public sector,'' would that exclude State
insurance commissioners? Are you talking--is that shorthand for
the Federal public sector? What about if he wanted to work with
some State insurance commissioners? Would they be covered?
Mr. Goldstein. What we have tried to do--
Mr. Frank. Quick. No, State insurance commissioners, could
he deal with them? Would they be--because they are public
sector people whom I assume better be confidential or there is
real trouble with the State. Would there be a problem with him
working with them in this work?
Mr. Goldstein. I think what we would need to do is--
Mr. Frank. You need to answer my question, Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Goldstein. What I would like to do, sir, is to just try
to balance the--
Mr. Frank. No, Mr. Goldstein, I am sorry. You are not
answering the question. I don't understand. Let us not have a
lot of Federal, State, ``we will pursue this'' kind of
jealousies here.
We worked hard to balance a lot of concerns, including
representation of the insurance industry. It is not your fault
that the appointments haven't been made yet, but you have to
take that into account.
Let me go on now. I was very disappointed that Mr. Bachus
engaged, I thought, in a kind of partial quotation. He quoted
Mr. Tarullo as saying, ``There was a reasonable concern that
designating a small number of non-bank affiliates would
increase moral hazard concerns.''
He forgot, I guess. He didn't get that far, and he got
interrupted. In the next paragraph, Mr. Tarullo says, ``Any
moral hazard that might be created by the designation process
should be substantially offset by the specially applicable
supervisory and regulatory requirements'' to which I now turn.
In other words, yes, some people were afraid that being
designated would be this badge to go out and collect money, but
Mr. Tarullo says in that same speech, he couldn't have had to
read that much longer, ``We will offset that because you are
subject to requirements.''
And the fact is, and I want to ask people, the judgment of
those who could be covered and could not be covered, who fall
in that discretionary path, appears to be that the benefits of
being covered are far outweighed by the hindrance of being
covered.
That is, they don't see it as a moral hazard in the sense
that this would enhance their ability to attract counterparty
funds. They think it is a pump.
So let me ask you, the people here at the FSOC, without
getting into companies, although some have been mentioned, and
the press overwhelmingly reports that the companies are
lobbying you not to be included, meaning they do not see the
benefit of being the beneficiaries of moral hazard. They see
the offsets that Mr. Tarullo mentioned.
Would several members tell me, have you been lobbied by
people trying to be excluded from designation, Mr. Goldstein?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes.
Mr. Frank. Let me ask at the Fed and the FDIC, at the Fed,
have you been lobbied by people who don't want to be included?
Ms. Liang. Yes.
Mr. Frank. FDIC?
Mr. Murton. Yes, we have.
Mr. Frank. Comptroller?
Mr. Long. No, we haven't.
Mr. Frank. SEC?
Mr. Cook. Yes.
Mr. Frank. Yes, what was that?
Mr. Cook. Yes.
Mr. Frank. Yes, okay. The Comptroller, of course, wouldn't
be because you only do banks and so they don't have the
discretion.
So all those where there is discretion have been lobbied by
people who don't want to be covered, suggesting that this
supposed advantage of being too-big-to-fail doesn't exist in
the eyes of those supposed beneficiaries.
Let me ask you, have any of you been lobbied by people who
want to be covered?
Mr. Gensler. No.
Mr. Frank. Let us go down the list.
Mr. Goldstein. No.
Mr. Long. No.
Mr. Huff. No.
Ms. Liang. No.
Mr. Frank. No, out loud, no, no.
Mr. Long. No.
Mr. Cook. No.
Mr. Murton. No.
Mr. Frank. All right. I think that pretty conclusively
answered this question. And in fact, we had this inaccurate
characterization that they are going to be too-big-to-fail and
the taxpayers will be forced to cover--absolutely untrue.
In the statute, it says yes, there are institutions that
may be too-big-to-fail and have that failure be ignored. There
may be institutions that are too-big-to-fail without negative
consequences, although, as Mr. Tarullo mentioned, as we all say
in the war, there are efforts here to do things that will keep
that from happening.
But if they do, if they do fail, they go out of business so
no institution survives. That is where Sarah Palin's death
panels show up in our bill, not in the health bill. It is for
large financial institutions.
And secondly, any money that is used to pay some of the
debts, not all of the debts, has to be recouped from the large
financial institutions that are covered by this. So let us lay
this to rest.
And again, the financial institutions themselves have
answered the question, is there some benefit to being
designated? Everyone here has said they have been lobbied by
people who don't want to be designated. And nobody has been
lobbied by people who want to be designated, so we ought to be
able to put that one to rest.
Finally, on the competitive side, I repeat again, the
British banks were worried that they were going to be too
tough. You were asked why you didn't talk more about the
competitive issues. Are the competitive issues entering into
your conversations?
Let me ask the Federal Reserve. Have you been concerned
about the competitive issues internationally?
Ms. Liang. We are working with our international
counterparts in trying to promote financial reform, moving
roughly in the same direction.
There are a few issues in Dodd-Frank that raise competitive
issues. We put those out in studies. We have noted those
concerns and asked for comments, and are considering those as
we are--
Mr. Frank. Very appropriate.
Ms. Liang. --following the statute.
Mr. Frank. Thank you.
Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank you.
And now the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Pearce?
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gensler, I am happy to see on page two that you are
saying that we need to ensure protections for the American
public where investors and savers can get return on their
money. If you get that part of the report out really quick, you
have a lot of retirees out there who are getting one-quarter of
1 percent.
I don't know if that qualifies as a return on their
investment, but many of them have lost 25 percent, maybe 50
percent of their core savings. And so if the government is
going to insure these things, I think the American people would
really appreciate us getting to it.
Mr. Goldstein, Mr. Gensler refers to AIG and then he
refers, on page two of his report that taxpayers should not be
forced to stand behind institutions and then there are a
variety of institutions. And you yourself mentioned something
to that effect.
Now, when we look at insurance, and we look at failures of
insurances, the first one that we have to think about is the
Flood Insurance Program.
And so I wonder if you all are going to--if you think it is
proper that the American public is being asked to stand behind
the Flood Insurance Program, and we are doing that, first of
all, through taxpayer dollars, but then, secondly, we are
forcing the fees into homes that were not previously required
to have flood insurance, many in New Mexico.
Our elevation starts at 4,000, basically 4,000 feet above
sea level. That is where New Mexico starts. We start pretty
high in the atmosphere, and yet we are being required to pay
for those. Is that a proper thing, and is that something that
you are going to look at?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, this is not an issue that I am well-
versed in, and I would be happy to come back to you and work
with my staff and--
Mr. Pearce. But you would generally say you agree that
taxpayers or people who receive new fees which are indeed a tax
might not should have to stand behind programs that are in the
process of failing? Is that more or less correct?
Mr. Goldstein. I am not familiar with it, sir. I apologize.
Mr. Pearce. No, this is a generality, that taxpayers should
or should not stand behind? You were just saying that the
taxpayers, in the previous line of questioning, taxpayers are
not going to be required to pick up the tab. And is this, or
should they or should they not be?
Mr. Goldstein. I think that the context of the Dodd-Frank
legislation makes abundantly clear that taxpayers should not be
at risk for those--
Mr. Pearce. So you are going to take a look at the Flood
Insurance Program, where taxpayers are having to bail out a
program that has failed, a program that is originating from the
same government that is saying now it is going to stop all
failures in the future. I find that curious. But you are going
to take a look at that?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pearce. Okay, I appreciate that.
You mentioned that every designation, in page five of your
testimony, that every designation is going to be firm-specific.
When you tell me that every designation is going to be firm-
specific, that is almost--that goal is rated to people and
taxpayers who are trying to ensure that they get a return on
their investment would look at that list of institutions and
say, well, the Federal Government has declared that they looked
at this as firm-specific, and yet you are not going to give any
implicit guarantees.
I find myself believing that there are going to be beliefs
in the minds of people that are the same. In other words, GSEs
never had a guarantee. It was just sort of implicit. The
government had, sort of, taken a position on it.
And so, to find that you are firm-specific giving
designations, and then you are not going to stand behind it,
which was, I think, the context of the ``No, no, no, noes,'' I
find that to be a curious position.
Could you clarify that briefly? We have a lot of questions
still behind us, and--
Mr. Goldstein. I think the purpose of Dodd-Frank was to
help ensure that no large interconnected institution that could
do damage to the U.S. financial system would be outside of
effective supervision, would be able to operate without
appropriate prudential standards, and would ensure that the
large financial institutions would--
Mr. Pearce. Let me get to my last question. I am not, kind
of, hearing an answer there. But I would appreciate it.
The last question is that you yourself say that there are
failures of the regulatory system. And then Mr. Gensler also
refers to the financial system failing and the regulatory
system failing.
So you have created this new agency. Are you in the process
of dismantling the systems that failed, or are we just going to
continue to fund those? We are spending $3.5 trillion right
now, and we are bringing in $2.2 trillion, so we are deeply out
of balance. We need to find ways to save money in the
government, ways that don't take money away from end users.
So this system failed, and it is being replaced by a new
system. Is the old system being dismantled and defunded?
Mr. Goldstein. I think what Dodd-Frank does is create--
Mr. Pearce. No, I am asking--you all have the jurisdiction.
Are you all dismantling the pieces that failed? You said they
failed. Just a yes or no would be--
Mr. Goldstein. We do not have jurisdiction to change
independent regulatory agencies, sir, if that is your question.
And maybe I have misunderstood.
Mr. Pearce. So you all are not realigning the oversight, or
somebody is not realigning the oversight of the financial
system? I think they are, and I don't think we are doing the
legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch?
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all the
witnesses for your attendance here.
Recently, after a long legal battle over an information
request, a FOIA request by Bloomberg financial company,
Chairman Bernanke was forced to disclose the details of his
lending practices during the peak of the crisis.
He fought very hard to keep that information secret from
Congress and from the public. As it turns out, at the peak of
the banking crisis, 70 percent of the lenders who came to the
discount window at that time and 70 percent of the loans--
excuse me--were foreign banks.
Many of them had very little business here in the United
States, but the top 6 institutions that requested loans,
discount loans, backed by the Federal Reserve, totaled $274
billion. They got loans from the Fed for $274 billion. And they
tried to keep that secret from the American people.
Part of your responsibility under Title I will be to
address issues of U.S. competitiveness. Ms. Liang, since you
are in the seat for the Fed, is it not counterintuitive that we
would be bailing out foreign banks at a time when your
responsibility is to make us more competitive in a global
financial market?
We are bailing out, with American taxpayer money, or backed
by the American taxpayer, we are bailing out foreign banks that
we compete with. Can you try to help me reconcile that action,
where we take $274 billion, give it to foreign banks, and like
I said, many of them with insignificant activity directly here
in the United States, yet we are bailing them out? Can you help
me with that?
Ms. Liang. Congressman, we have a statutory requirement
that branches and agencies of foreign banks have access to the
discount window under the same conditions as domestic banks.
These are loans. They are not gifts. They are fully
collateralized. They are subject to the same haircuts as
domestic institutions would receive.
Mr. Lynch. I just want to point out, though, that the vast
majority here went--70 percent. So we are not talking about at
the same level of support for domestic banks. We are talking
about 70 percent of the loans going to--that is not equal. That
is heavily favoring foreign banks.
Ms. Liang. I can only speak to--
Mr. Lynch. And I am not sure that the statute requires us--
they may be eligible for support, but that is a discretionary
function of the Fed, whether to loan the Dexia Bank in Belgium
$33 billion or to loan Depfa Bank in Ireland--I think theirs
was $28 billion. I might be wrong on that number, but it was
considerable, and there is $274 billion.
So what I am asking you is, you have a responsibility here,
and I just see some inconsistency, if you don't mind, where we
are supposed to compete with folks, yet we are using U.S.
taxpayer-backed funding to bail them out. And it bothers me to
no end, number one, but, number two, I just don't see the
consistency in that policy.
Ms. Liang. We provide--
Mr. Lynch. And if anybody else would like to jump in and
explain this, go right ahead, because maybe I am asking the
wrong person.
Ms. Liang. We set the terms and standards to be the same.
We do not determine the volumes at which they might want to
borrow.
Mr. Lynch. I am sorry. I am having a hard time hearing you.
Ms. Liang. We set the terms and standards. They are the
same as would be available to domestic institutions. We do not
determine the amount that they borrow.
The foreign entities play a pretty big role in the United
States in credit provision in the United States. For example,
the firm Dexia that you referred to is a main primary liquidity
provider to municipal, State, and local governments.
So I think the foreign institutions do play a large role in
the provision of credit in this country. There would be many
considerations if Congress wanted to consider changing this
law, in terms of international cooperation and reciprocal
treatment. I think those are issues that could be discussed.
Mr. Lynch. Okay, I believe my time has expired. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Hayworth?
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to return--a couple of our colleagues have talked
about the Financial Stability Board and our coordination of the
regulations that FSOC is now preparing.
And I am concerned, fundamentally, with the arbitraging of
regulations, the outmigration of capital from United States'
markets. And I think we are already seeing that. Certainly, one
of my friends who serves in the financial services industry,
said that Singapore, for example, had a growth in its domestic
product of 14 percent last year.
I have the sense that there is an opportunity for our
counterparts internationally to hang back on creating
regulations in anticipation of what FSOC will be doing so that
they can then promulgate their own sets of regulations that may
be more conducive to capital investment in their own country.
So how is FSOC monitoring that kind of potential
development, and what tools do you have at your disposal to
address those concerns, particularly if we in the Congress
raise them on behalf of our constituents, on behalf of the
country? What is your plan for dealing with that potentially
significant problem?
Mr. Gensler. I can speak less about FSOC as FSOC and more
about just one area in Dodd-Frank, and that is the derivatives
regulations. I think each of our agencies has been working very
closely with Asia and in Europe. We do it in turn. Sometimes,
it is the Secretary of the Treasury, and sometimes it is the
head of the SEC and the head of the Federal Reserve.
In my case, I have gone over to Europe on a repeated basis.
Our staff--we are actually sharing some of the internal work
product with them. It does look like Europe is going to be
moving forward as Japan has already moved forward on
derivatives reform. Their parliament is taking it up right now.
We also at the CFTC host between 15 and 20 countries coming
in on a periodic basis where we compare and try to coordinate
and harmonize. We are different cultures and different
political systems. There will be differences. And,
Congresswoman, you are absolutely right, there will be probably
a little bit of a race to the bottom.
But I am optimistic, particularly in terms of the
coordination between Europe and here, Canada and here, Japan
and here, but there are some countries that will do just what
you said.
Dr. Hayworth. Yes, sir. And I appreciate that.
By keeping in close touch with them, obviously, you are
also letting them know what we are doing, so anybody who did
want to compete with us in that way would have the keys to the
kingdom, in a sense. But you are confident that we will be able
to adapt should we detect a competitive disadvantage, if you
will?
Mr. Gensler. We at the CFTC are certainly taking it into
consideration in each of our rules, then have deliberations,
and then sharing that across--even when I meet with the
Secretary of the Treasury, it is usually one of the topics in
our regular meetings is this international aspect.
Dr. Hayworth. Yes, sir?
Go ahead, please.
Mr. Goldstein. I was just going to emphasize that there are
multiple fora, including the G-20, including the Financial
Stability Board, including Basel. And as the Secretary has
stated on repeated occasions, a primary objective needs to be
the setting of an international level playing field.
And so we agree with the concern that you have articulated
and are trying to ensure through those fora and other
mechanisms to address the important concern.
Dr. Hayworth. Yes, sir.
Please?
Mr. Huff. If I could just build on that, speaking from the
insurance side, because the United States is 40 percent of the
worldwide insurance market, the NAIC, the insurance
commissioners, are very active at the International Association
of Insurance Supervisors. And we are working within that
committee's structure to build the metrics for designation.
I would just add, because we have different insurance
commissioners working on that and we have staff that overlap,
this issue on involving insurance commissioners in FSOC does
make that coordination more difficult because we need to be
able to communicate with one another as we work to harmonize
those international with domestic.
Dr. Hayworth. Clearly, that is an important concern.
So we can then assure, and you are assuring our financial
market participants, our financial institutions, that they can
be confident in continuing to prepare to invest capital
resources in the United States because we will not allow other
nations to compete successfully with us in the regulatory
climate. Is that fair to say?
Mr. Goldstein. I think, as Mr. Gensler said, it is
impossible to assure that there will not be some people that
will try to arbitrage the system. I think what we need to do is
to make sure that through global fora, we ensure and push
aggressively for a level playing field. And I think that should
be our objective.
I would say, however, that having a strong U.S. financial
system is itself a competitive advantage. I think that what we
need to do and one of the benefits of Dodd-Frank is it helps us
accomplish that. The unique role of the financial system is
built on its stability, and I think that should be a primary
objective as well.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
And now the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sometimes the rule of law raises difficult issues in
democracies. Elections should have consequences, but they
should never have the consequence of either being prosecuted
because your party lost an election or being excused from
prosecution because your party won an election, that the
criminal law should be neutral. It should not be subject to
political considerations.
But the movie ``Inside Job'' repeated a criticism that a
great many people have had with respect to the financial crisis
and what followed it, that a couple 3,000 people went to jail
as a result of the savings and loan crisis, and no one had gone
to jail as a result of this crisis.
And I don't think the criticism was that an angry public
was demanding that people be rounded up and put in jail, that
we have mob rule, but that the ordinary prosecutorial judgments
were, in fact, being interfered with where there would be
prosecutions otherwise.
I don't want to urge prosecutions, but I do want to inquire
about whether there are criminal investigations at least going
on.
There is now pending, I think, in New York, but there is
now pending litigation, Ambac v. Chase, that actually has to do
with conduct by Bear before they were acquired by Chase, that
seems clearly to give rise--these are admitted.
These are allegations, but they are allegations in an
admitted complaint that does seem to include information
contained in discovery, documents produced in discovery, that
Bear bought mortgages from originators, immediately securitized
the mortgages, sold the securities. Some of those mortgages
went into default almost immediately, 30 days, 60 days, 90
days.
And what Bear did was instead of requiring the originator
to buy those back, settled for attached compensation, kept the
money, even though they had no beneficial interest at that
point in the mortgages, they had sold them to the investors,
did not pass along the money to the mortgage investors, and in
fact did not tell the investors.
That appears to give rise to--it certainly sounds criminal.
Other allegations were that Bear would turn over to a third
party due process examiner mortgages.
They would sample the pool, 1 in 10, and then the mortgages
that investigator, that due process firm said did not meet the
requirements of the representations and warranties of the
pooling and servicing agreements, Bear would remove those from
those pools, from that pool, but then put them in another pool
where they would be subject to a 1-in-10 chance of being
reviewed.
Again, that sounds pretty likely to be criminal, if those
allegations are true.
Mr. Cook, the SEC is one of the agencies of government that
has investigatory powers in this area. I think the concerns
have been not--well, perhaps to some extent that potential
defendants had great political and economic power, but also
there was a judgment that criminal prosecutions or even civil
litigation might undermine the health, the return to health of
some of those institutions. Are those allegations being pursued
by the SEC, and if not, why not?
Mr. Cook. As you probably know, the SEC does not have
criminal prosecutorial authority. I know you are asking really
about civil authority and--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. But you refer matters for
prosecution when your investigation shows possible--
Mr. Cook. It can be referred by the SEC to prosecutors. The
investigations enforcement proceedings that you are talking
about would be handled by our Division of Enforcement. And I am
not familiar with the details of their investigations. I
believe that their investigations are ongoing.
I would be happy to arrange for further updates to you, or
a briefing for you on some background. I am sorry--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay.
Mr. Cook. --it is just not my division.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay.
And, Mr. Long, the OCC obviously has investigative powers
here as well. Almost all of these institutions are regulated or
are subject to the OCC. Is the OCC pursuing any of these
investigations, investigating any of these allegations?
Mr. Long. As part of our exam process and as part of our
look back on incidences that we see, we certainly will embark
on investigations and open criminal referrals and subpoena
documents. We do that on a regular basis.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Well, do--
Mr. Long. I would, on this specific--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. --but do you know anything
about this--
Mr. Long. No, no, I don't.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay.
All right, my time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey?
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't want to be piling on, but I want to echo the
comments of you and the ranking member here about the
rulemaking process. It is my understanding that in the
rulemaking on systemic relevance, the FSOC was not specific.
And I think that lack of specificity makes it all the less
transparent, as was pointed out.
Can you tell me how that is going to get corrected?
Mr. Goldstein. As I indicated, I think we have had 50
comments on the ANPR, another approximately 35 comments on the
NPR, and we are trying to bring forward a rule that is highly
informed by those comments, and we would share your view that
greater clarity would be highly beneficial in the final rule
text. And we will do our very best to help accomplish that
objective, informed by the comments that we receive.
Mr. Posey. Will it contain the metrics that you will use to
analyze financial firms or how it intends to weigh the various
criteria Dodd-Frank requires for FSOC to consider?
Mr. Goldstein. The work on that is still very much a work
in progress, and so I can't answer specifically what it will
include or will not include.
The basic framework that we have been talking about will,
however, I think, continue to help inform the approach, meaning
the two buckets that I alluded to earlier.
One bucket of issues that affect the firm's impact on the
system and that includes its interconnections. It includes its
size. It includes its uniqueness, if you will, or lack of
substitutes.
It will include as well reference to the impact that a firm
is likely to have if it fails. Those--excuse me--in addition to
the impact, it will include a bucket that talks about the
vulnerability of that firm.
Mr. Posey. Okay, so you are not going to cut and paste the
factors spelled out in Dodd-Frank. You are going to go into
more detail. Is that correct?
Mr. Goldstein. As I said, sir, this is a work in progress
and I can't speak to specifics of the final rule. That is work
that is currently being undertaken, but I can assure you that
the comments that have been received will be taken very
seriously, and we will do our very best to be responsive to
those comments.
Mr. Posey. I assume that you are going to take the message
back that the chairman and the ranking member are probably
going to have you back here, and it may even get ugly next time
if the picture is not clearly received.
Is that correct, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Neugebauer. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Chairman Neugebauer. I think one of the things that is
becoming clear in this hearing is that, and this is I think
what we were talking about throughout the implementation of
Dodd-Frank, is what we are hearing is that these rules are
being put out with very little information, very difficult to
respond to or to give comment to because they are really not
sure what they are commenting to.
The other thing that we are hearing from the people is that
there is no across the spectrum of analysis of what jointly all
of these rules, the implications that they are going to have on
competitiveness, on safety and soundness and on compliance
where we have, and I think the question is going to come up
here shortly, that we have some conflicting rules.
And so, I think it is absurd that we are going to issue a
rule as important as this, and we do not have specifics of what
criteria are going to be used until after you have already
decided that, and you are already deciding it without everybody
at the table.
And so Mr. Goldstein, I hope that when you go back to the
Secretary, I think the message is that I think a review of this
process is in order.
And with that, I apologize and yield back.
Mr. Posey. Yes, thank you. Just to put it one more way, I
think everyone is troubled that FSOC appears to be ignoring the
question of what precise criteria that it is going to use in
its designations of whether a company is systemically relevant.
I think that you would have to agree that it would be a
good idea for FSOC to get out to the public some kind of
additional information about the rule proposal metrics.
And rather than keeping that information vague and
uncertain, which is what we have heard today and which is what
there was before, it should be clear what standards are going
to be used to make that kind of determination and allow an
opportunity for the interested persons to comment before any
final version of the rule is issued.
Is there any question about what I just said? Did anybody
here not understand what I said? Is it pretty clear to
everybody?
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Mr. Gensler. It is clear here, and as one member of the
FSOC, I would hope that we would put the transcript of this
hearing in our comment file at the FSOC because I think this is
very important.
Chairman Neugebauer. Absolutely. I think you can expect
more than just a comment.
Mr. Gensler. No, no. I understand that. I am listening
pretty closely.
Mr. Goldstein. We fully appreciate--
Chairman Neugebauer. Now, the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Ellison?
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having this hearing.
Just a few questions, and my first question is this. We are
in the middle of a huge budgetary debate here in Congress, have
been since the beginning of the year, and certainly will be for
the foreseeable future.
How does this budgetary fight impact your ability to
collectively provide the financial oversight that was
envisioned in Dodd-Frank? For example, if there are massive
cuts to the CFTC or any one of your agencies, can you do the
job that we are asking you to do?
Mr. Gensler. No. The CFTC is a small agency, about 675
people. I think we are a very good investment for the American
public. But we have just been asked, along with the SEC, to
take on a market, the swaps market, that is 7 times the size of
what we currently regulate.
It is interconnected to the entire real economy. It is very
important to the real economy, so the real economy can lock in
prices, hedge the risk in a transparent and competitive
marketplace. I look forward to working with Congress on
securing the necessary resources.
Mr. Ellison. Mr. Cook?
Mr. Cook. I would just echo the comments with respect to
the SEC. The amount of work that the SEC has as a result of
Dodd-Frank is quite significant and extensive. There is the
rule-writing phase and then there is the implementation phase,
and I think we need to think about both of those in terms of
the adequate resources.
We recognize the very difficult situation we are in, in
terms of the budget, but I think at some point a decision will
have to be made about what is doable and not doable in terms of
implementing those parts of Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Ellison. So we have charged you with financial
oversight and systemic risk, but we are not going to give you
the tools you need to do it, or we might not?
Let me ask my next question. In the aftermath of all of the
mergers and acquisitions that we have seen over the course of
the last 24 months, and you all know exactly what I am talking
about, right? We have seen a more concentrated, it seems to me
more systemically interconnected and perhaps vulnerable system.
Do you agree with that? If you do, have you given any
thought in your work to really scale down and also increase the
number of financial firms so that we are not so--we don't have
so many eggs in one basket?
Mr. Goldstein. I think that is a very important point. And
in fact, it is addressed in Dodd-Frank through the updating of
the concentration limits. Before Dodd-Frank, concentration
limits were based upon deposit market share.
In Dodd-Frank, that was updated to have a more broad view
of liabilities. And one of the studies that FSOC did was to
assess the impact of this concentration limit which limits any
one institution to 10 percent of aggregate liabilities and
cannot grow beyond that by acquisition.
That study found that in the fullness of time, that
concentration limit will, in fact, make the system stronger,
deeper, wider and help eliminate moral hazard and other
problems. And we think that is a very important part of the
legislation.
Mr. Ellison. Anybody else on this concentration problem?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, I would just maybe add, I do think it is
a perverse outcome of a crisis, and a crisis that the system
failed, that it is more highly concentrated. One of the things
Congress said was that the swaps marketplace, the derivatives
marketplace get the benefit of risk reduction in something
called ``central clearing,'' which helps to address some of the
interconnectedness--not all of it, but some of it.
And so that is why I think it is very important that we
move forward. We thoughtfully consider comment. We are not
going to rush this by the date of July. We will consider the
comments, but try to finalize our rules on clearinghouses and
other parts of the swaps marketplace.
Mr. Ellison. So I have a yellow light and I have one more
question. The Office of Financial Research is part of what is
going to help you do your job. How are you staffing that? And
where are we at in terms of the appointment of a Director? Can
you just give us a status update?
Mr. Goldstein. The appointment of the Director has not
taken place as yet, and that is a decision by the President.
But we have not let the absence of a director inhibit our
continued aggressive push on the three core mandates of the
Office of Financial Research, the standardization agenda.
And some important work that is taking place, by way of
example, in partnership with the CFTC and the SEC on one
standardization project by way of example on so-called ``legal
entity identifiers.''
There is important work that is taking place on the second
mandate, which is the development of collection and data
dissemination, importantly being guided by an FSOC group on
data to help ensure that work is not duplicative, but rather is
coordinated across FSOC members.
And in addition to that, there is the development of an
already early implementation of an important part of the
research and analysis agenda of the Office of Financial
Research.
Mr. Ellison. I have a red light, so let me thank all of you
for being here and wish you the best in protecting our
financial system.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And we have been joined by a member of the full committee,
one of the more ranking members and Mr. Royce, from California,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to direct my question to Mr. Goldstein. Just
going over the concerns that economists had, and certainly a
vigorous opposition that was put up to both the labeling of
firms as systemically important, given the market distortions
that would surely follow, and the resolution mechanism that
could be used should they begin to fail.
Given the concerns over moral hazard and all the rest of it
that we had here in the United States, let me ask you from
Treasury's standpoint, this is a purely domestic resolution
authority. So it is going to apply only within the United
States.
Any type of cross-border resolution authority would require
either agreement among the various governments involved or some
form of synchronization of the relative parts of the commercial
Bankruptcy Codes and procedures. This would have to be worked
out to be uniform. Let me just ask you if Treasury is engaged
in such conversations.
Mr. Goldstein. I think Treasury is engaged in those
conversations, but I also think that other members of the
panel, including the Federal Reserve Board and the FDIC, have
been engaged in discussions to help ensure that the Orderly
Liquidation Authority is robust, not only domestically but
internationally.
But I would agree with you, sir, that work needs to be done
in order to help ensure that this is an international process.
Mr. Royce. And I follow the conversations about the
conversations, but I don't think that work is going to get
done.
Simon Johnson is the former chief economist at the IMF. And
as he says--and I am just going to quote him: ``For more than a
decade the IMF has been advising that the euro zone adopt some
sort of cross-border resolution mechanism, but European and
other governments do not want to take this kind of step.''
And as he says, ``rightly or wrongly, they do not credibly
commit to how they would handle large-scale financial failure,
preferring instead to rely on various kinds of ad hoc and
spontaneous measures.'' That is the reality of where Europe is
on this.
And in closing, I understand that you are testifying today,
the witnesses, to the belief that this designation and the
resolution authority is going to help long term with mitigating
systemic risk. I simply disagree.
I think the economists who have raised their concerns in
terms of the moral hazard of doing this are correct. And beyond
this fact, the greater worry I have here is that it is likely
unworkable.
It will cause significant market distortions. That is
readily apparent to all economists and even to many of you who
might support what was done here. It is going to cause market
distortions.
Increased measures to control risk such as higher capital
requirements are constantly undermined anyway and avoided by
the regulated entities. There is a precedent for this, and I
see no reason why that isn't going to continue.
You are doing this in an environment in which you are not
getting buy-in by the regulatory authorities overseas. I just
don't see that happening. And being stamped too-big-to-fail is
unprecedented, but on top of that, it is irreversible once you
stamp an institution that way.
These firms have benefited from being caught in the
government's safety net throughout the financial crisis. They
are surely going to benefit now from this explicit backstop in
the future. It is going to be a lower cost of capital for them.
And I would simply like to caution you to tread carefully
here. The broader this line is drawn, the more institutions
labeled systemically important, the larger the safety net will
grow under our financial sector and the harder it will be to
reverse.
And the one thing I would hope we would learn from the past
is the cost of that safety net continuing to expand in this way
and the moral hazard that goes with it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the chairman.
And I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, before I forget, I would like to ask
unanimous consent to put a recent speech by Governor Dan
Tarullo into the record.
Chairman Neugebauer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Chairman, I guess everybody here except me
knows what Europe is going to do. I am not even sure what
America is going to do. That is what the purpose of this
hearing was about, to try to figure out what you guys are doing
behind those closed doors, maybe actually open up one or two of
those doors.
Does anybody here know what Europe is going to do, or any
portion of Europe? Does anybody here know what Asia is going to
do? I don't see any hands raising, so I assume you are as much
in the guessing game as we all are.
But all I can say is that what I did see Europe do when
this crisis first unfolded was first go down one direction, and
then in a matter of weeks, withdraw from that direction and
follow the same direction the United States took. Now, whether
that was right or wrong, I don't know. But that is what
happened.
So I guess I do want to be clear, market distortion, that
is what I want. And I want it because the market technically
``undistorted'' ruined or came close to ruining the world
economy, which is the whole purpose of the Dodd-Frank bill, to
limit the ability of 1 or 2 or 10 or 100 firms to destroy the
world economy again.
Now, if you want to call that a market distortion, so be
it. I don't. I call it thoughtful, intelligent regulation,
which is where we hope that you will go.
But in order to get back to what I thought was the purpose
of this hearing, which is to kind of figure out what you are
doing as opposed to relitigating what we have already done and
having those debates again, which we will have if we are forced
to have. I don't find them very useful.
I do think it is important, to the best of our ability,
which is why I go back to what I said in my opening statement,
that I see this as a living situation. Europe will take action
at some point. Asia will take action at some point. And when
they do, there certainly will be a need to coordinate.
My hope, and I would like to hear it verbally, is that you
are aware of that, and not necessarily will follow them or take
their lead, but at least consider whatever they do, as I hope
they will consider whatever we do, so that there will be a
reduced as much as possible difference of opinion.
Nobody is looking to overregulate American companies and
non-American companies, but at least an idea to intentionally
know what we are doing. Is there anybody here who disagrees
with that as we move forward?
Mr. Gensler. I agree. It is what we are doing at the CFTC
on derivatives regulation. It is what I do as a member of the
FSOC.
Mr. Goldstein. I, too, fully agree with that, and we are
trying both individually and collectively to be in
communication with and, hopefully, advance the level playing
field.
Mr. Huff. I also agree, and on insurance, it is imperative
that we remain very active internationally and domestically for
systemic risk.
Ms. Liang. I agree on all fronts.
Mr. Cook. I would echo that. And to that, I think that
there are two dynamics there. One is the ongoing close dialogue
with the other regulators to maintain information sharing. And
the other part is as we roll out our rules, to make sure we are
being very thoughtful and careful about what we are doing.
And as you say, it is not a one-shot thing. We need to
think about how the framework will evolve over time and maybe
approach it with a sense of what should we do first and what
should we do second and what should we do third, a phasing
mentality.
Mr. Murton. We agree also. And we have been working on many
fronts, particularly on cross-border resolution issues. We have
been working with other jurisdictions quite a bit on that.
Mr. Long. I agree with everything that was said.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Long. And since the yellow
light is on, I want to add my voice, too, to the exhortation
and suggestion that the insurance industry be more fully
included in this.
The Federal Government has never regulated insurance
companies. I am a proponent of an optional Federal charter for
insurance companies. So I think that is the way it is going to
head whether we do it tomorrow or next year or 10 years from
now. It is going to get there.
So I think that the insurance industry should be heard, but
I will be clear. It is not just the insurance industry. We have
never regulated the hedge fund industry. We have never
regulated the mutual fund industry, all of which may or may not
be included.
So all of those industries that none of you have ever
overseen should be heard, which is why I go back to my original
point. When you have come up with these regulations, give them
all an opportunity to be heard again as to specifically how
that might impact industries that you have never regulated. And
I wouldn't expect you to be experts in those areas--some day,
but not yet.
With that, I yield back the time I don't have.
[laughter]
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the ranking member.
I want to go back to another statutory requirement in FSOC,
and I will read--just paraphrase it here--facilitate
coordination among member agencies regarding policy development
and rulemakings. Recently, the CFTC and the SEC issued rules on
Swap Execution Facilities (SEFs).
And the CFTC proposed that requests for quotes be sent to
at least five SEFs. The SEC required one request for a quote.
Is that the kind of coordination policy that meets the spirit
of Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Cook?
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think when one looks
at the SEF rule and at all the other rules, ultimately they
have been the outcome of a lot of consultation and discussion
across the two agencies. We have had some joint roundtables
together. There is lots of active dialogue.
Now, there are some differences in some of the rules. And I
think we only proposed them at this stage, and we need to go
back and consider the comments that we have gotten.
There may be some differences that are borne out by
differences in products or differences in the trading
characteristics of the market. I think most would agree that
those are legitimate differences and important differences to
maintain.
There may be other differences in our rules that reflect a
different understanding of the facts of the markets or a
different understanding, a different approach to the policy.
And I think on those, as we move forward with the adoption
stage, we need to be in very close coordination and make sure
we understand what is the nature of those differences and try
to bring them as close together as possible.
Chairman Neugebauer. Here is the question, and I am going
to let Mr. Gensler respond, but you are both working on the
same issue. If we are to facilitate coordination of the member
agencies, why, before those rules are put out, would you all
not not coordinate and come up with a consistent regulation?
I think, again, this is a part of the credibility of this
and so it, from my perspective, doesn't sound like that FSOC is
meeting the spirit of some of the statutory duties here if we
are not doing that.
We have other examples. We have the FDIC with an overdraft
policy. I don't know what the OCC's policy is going to be on
that, but it looks like to me there ought to be some dialogue
going on so that we are all seeing it from the same book.
Because these kinds of things have implications on our
financial markets. And the consequences aren't just to these
entities, but are ultimately to the financial markets as a
whole.
So Mr. Gensler, do you want to respond to that?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I think that, in fact, we have at the
CFTC done just what you have said. We have had nearly 600
meetings with fellow regulators. We shared, starting last
September, all of our internal drafts, term sheets and so forth
on the specific rules that you are referring to, it is mostly
with the SEC but the Federal Reserve has been a terrific
partner, as well as the FDIC and the OCC on many of our rules.
And on the specific rule, there are some differences in the
underlying statute and trading patterns in the futures markets
and the securities markets. We have jurisdiction, for instance,
on interest rate swaps that have different characteristics than
some of the equity or credit default swaps that the SEC will
have.
Again, as Mr. Cook says, it is just a proposal. But they
were very aware, and we were very aware of the swap execution
facility rule, we won't get much credit for it in this hearing,
well over 90 percent of it is the same and very similar
language and tack.
But you were right. There is this difference on requests
for quotes. And we have a lot of comments on it, probably
hundreds of comments on it. And we are going to take that into
consideration as we go towards considering final rules this
summer and fall.
Chairman Neugebauer. So the question is, who is in charge
of the FSOC?
Mr. Goldstein. The Secretary of the Treasury is the
Chairman of the FSOC. And the FSOC has some very specific
statutory oversight on rulemaking, so for example, coordination
of the Volcker Rule, implementation and coordination of risk
retention.
In addition, the FSOC has been a very important body for
discussions of this sort for collaboration and coordination.
Ultimately, the decision on something like this is the SEC and
the CFTC. But I think that the FSOC can and will play an
important role in being a forum to help achieve consistency,
which I think all of us would share, is an important objective.
Chairman Neugebauer. And I would agree with you on that.
But I think what we need here is some leadership from that
position, in that it is--obviously we are not necessarily
accomplishing the goal here.
And I think if otherwise we sold that we were going to--
that Dodd-Frank would bring some consolidation to the
regulatory process and not bring additional confusion and
another layer there. And if that coordination is going to be an
integral part of that, and it is not happening, then we failed
here.
So I think another message we want to send back is that
these kinds of differences hopefully would be worked out before
we get out with these regulations rather than after where then
we confuse--if market certainty is one of the roles of
government and transparency and integrity, but certainty is
another piece of it.
We have to bring more certainty than we are bringing, and
what we have heard in this hearing today is we may be not be
helping the certainty piece of it much.
With that, I go back to the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have all, obviously,
handed you an awful lot of responsibility. And much of it, as
Mr. Capuano has noted, may be new areas of regulation.
I know that you are required to meet under Dodd-Frank, I
think, quarterly. And I understand that at least in the
formation stage, your staffs are meeting every couple of weeks.
Is that right?
What about resources? I know there is a sense that the
chairman has pointed out a lack of coordination, but I was just
curious about resources and whether you think that the current
formation, the way this is working, is sustainable.
Mr. Goldstein. I think you are correct that the principals
have met more often than the quarterly mandate in the statute.
Deputies meet on a biweekly basis to help set the agenda and
drive--
Mr. Lynch. I don't want to burn my question. This is a
small question. So resource-wise, do you think it is adequate
right now?
Mr. Goldstein. We think we have adequate resources and we
benefit not only from direct hires, which we will continue to
make, but we also have DTLEs from member agencies that help
make sure that the FSOC staff is informed and has the expertise
from across--
Mr. Lynch. Okay. That is great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Goldstein.
I am also concerned about the designation of financially
significant or risk-based institutions. And you have a bunch of
criteria that you could apply. You have large industries, like
the mutual fund industry that are incredibly large when you
look at their size, but when you look at the history here, they
haven't really been a part of the problem here.
And I just wonder how that balances out, because it seems
like they are, frankly, they have provided the ability for a
lot of working folks, a lot of middle-class folks to accumulate
wealth. They haven't been a source of the erratic behavior or
the danger that we have seen in the economy over this past
crisis.
Yet, they are under the gun, so to speak, where they might
be, because of their size, included within your scrutiny or
heavier scrutiny than was previously the case. How do you
balance out those factors with respect to mutual funds?
Mr. Goldstein. The statute makes very clear that there is a
distinguished--there needs to be distinguished on balance sheet
assets and managed assets.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Goldstein. And I think that there is an awareness of
that important distinction--
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Goldstein. --as we think through the designation
process.
Mr. Lynch. They are managing other people's money. They are
not investing their own, right?
Mr. Goldstein. Correct, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. And lastly, I would like to say that given
the fact that we did bail out a fair number of foreign banks
with U.S. resources, Fed resources, I am always hearing this
threat that we are afraid we are going to lose business to
Europe if we pass certain regulatory guidelines or
restrictions.
And I am just--look, we could put our foot down, so to
speak, and use the strength of the U.S. market to say, look, we
are not going to assist in an emergency capacity or a
nonemergency capacity a foreign bank, if they are engaging in
reckless practices, things that are outside Dodd-Frank, outside
of Basel III, those type of practices that might make them more
attractive to some institutions.
But, there have to be some consequences to those banks
operating in a fashion that we don't agree with. And I think
that we could certainly close down the discount window to those
banks and institutions that we feel are not compliant with
Dodd-Frank.
And I would like to get your sense, Mr. Goldstein, on that,
and anybody else who would like to jump in.
Ms. Liang?
Ms. Liang. I think the issue of access to the discount
window is an issue that the Congress could consider. There
would be a number of considerations, to consider, again,
international cooperation, reciprocal agreements, etc.
I think we are all in favor of trying to promote a level
playing field for U.S. institutions, recognizing the potential
for regulatory arbitrage, moving not just activities from the
U.S. banking system or the regulated sector into foreign
regulated sectors, but outside the regulated sector entirely.
So I think those are all considerations we need to consider, I
think.
Mr. Lynch. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Fitzpatrick?
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our Nation is facing a spending-driven debt crisis. The
national debt is now over $14 trillion. Forty-two cents of
every dollar the Federal Government spends in 2011 will be
borrowed.
Admiral Mike Mullen, who, of course, is Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, has identified the greatest threat to
our national security, not a military threat or a terrorist
threat, but our national debt.
And Erskine Bowles, who is one of the President's leaders
on the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform,
has likened the national debt to a cancer. He said that it will
truly destroy our Nation from within.
Given the fact that it is the job of FSOC to identify
emerging threats, I would ask Mr. Goldstein, what work has FSOC
done to address the debt crisis?
Mr. Goldstein. The FSOC addresses a wide variety of issues.
The FSOC has not taken up this specific issue in its
deliberations, but I would assure you, sir, that, as the
President articulated yesterday, the important fiscal
consolidation, the importance of addressing the debt load of
this country, is paramount in the view of this Administration.
And I think that the $4 trillion number that was
articulated in his speech yesterday and the path to greater
fiscal sustainability is one that has the highest priority of
this Administration, sir.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Has the issue of the national debt ever
come up in any of the deliberations of the Council? And if not,
why not?
Mr. Gensler. It has. Yes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I am sorry?
Mr. Gensler. I just said it has.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. In what context was that?
Mr. Gensler. Oh, we are asked by Congress, I don't remember
the section, but to do an annual report with regard to risks in
the financial system and risk in the financial markets. And I
have certainly directed staff, and I know that others have, in
the consultation on systemic risk and then in consultations on
that report, that is included in the discussions around that
report.
Mr. Murton. I would just note that Chairman Bair feels this
is an important issue. I would refer you to an op-ed piece that
she put in The Washington Post on how the rising deficit is a
concern for the financial system. So we do feel that this is
something that is important, and as we prepare the annual
report, we would want that to be considered.
Ms. Liang. I would that add the Federal Reserve Board
thinks that it is important to address structural fiscal
imbalances.
However, we do not think we can know how any future crisis
will manifest. And so our objective in the FSOC and in the
Systemic Risk Committee is to identify a number of potential
risks, of which this is one we have assessed.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Huff, do you have the resources to
address this issue in the context of the Council?
Mr. Huff. The resources to bring insurance commissioners to
the Council? Yes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Correct.
Mr. Huff. State regulators are ready to help.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Do you have permission from the Council,
the other members of the Council to bring them to bear?
Mr. Huff. No, sir.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Are you waiting for that authority?
Mr. Huff. Yes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. As a follow up to that, what does it
take for you to get permission?
Mr. Huff. I will defer to Mr. Goldstein.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes, Mr. Goldstein, what does it take
for Mr. Huff to be able to bring additional resources to the
table?
Mr. Goldstein. I would like to be clear. The only
limitation that the FSOC discusses as it relates to supporting
Mr. Huff is the confidentiality of the Council's work.
He has not been, nor would we ever want to limit his
capacity to utilize his office in the State of Missouri, nor
have we limited, nor would we want to limit his ability to
consult on this important issue.
The only constraint that we have put is that the member
agencies of the FSOC have expressed concern about having too
wide a group that is under the confidentiality umbrella outside
of--
Chairman Neugebauer. I heard that answer before. I guess
the question is, if they sign confidentiality agreements, can
Mr. Huff bring additional resources to the table?
Mr. Goldstein. We would be happy to work with Mr. Huff to
make sure that he is appropriately staffed.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes. Is there any objection by any of
the other members here?
I know, Mr. Long, you said on the, I guess the chief's
Council, or whatever it is called, would you object to Mr. Huff
bringing additional resources?
Mr. Long. Here is the issue that we have. And, clearly, we
fully support that they need to have positions that are
authorized under Dodd-Frank, and he needs some help.
The discussion that FSOC deputies have had is that Mr. Huff
and some of the other agencies or non-voting entities are going
to need to draw from trade associations. And, those are non-
government, non-State entities. They are trade associations.
So there is a concern, from the OCC standpoint, that if
everybody needs to bring on five or six or seven non-
government, trade association-related people and rotate them
through, the numbers get big. And we do have some concerns
about the confidentiality of discussions of documents.
So clearly, the signing of MOUs is important, and we need
to get that executed. But I think everybody is of the same mind
to get Mr. Huff the help he needs. But there is an issue here
with a lot of people around the table.
Chairman Neugebauer. Why don't we see if we can get it
resolved? That would be helpful.
All right, back to the gentlewoman from New York.
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In listening, and thank you for your patience today and for
all of the thoughtful answers that you have all provided, in
listening, there is a sense that there is this regulatory
world.
You kind of live on this Cartesian plane of ideals, if you
will, and then, of course, there is the real world. And when we
talk about deficit and debt, we need an economy that can
actually support a great leap into greater prosperity.
I had the opportunity, earlier this week, to speak with
some men and women who are substantially involved in the health
of our financial industry. And they expressed great frustration
with a fairly specific piece, a large one of Dodd-Frank, if you
will, Section 716, and it is regarding derivatives trading and
the regulation thereof.
And their contention is that to endeavor to layer
essentially a retail regulatory structure on, at least as they
frame it, a retail regulatory structure onto institutional
derivatives trading will substantially limit their capacity for
flexibility, for opportunity to do their job ever better, if
you will, and could actually increase risk because they can't
hedge as effectively.
And the sense that I also had, in fairness to all of you,
and I don't doubt your dedication at all, was that they hadn't
been heard. They had been trying to break through.
You are obviously all talking with each other quite a bit,
not necessarily with the happiest results sometimes, but that
the real world guys have had trouble breaking through into this
process to say, hey, we need some action on this now.
And we were talking about arbitrage and capital earlier,
regulatory arbitrage. This seems to be one example of that
risk.
What can we do to facilitate a more productive interaction
about that?
Mr. Gensler. Can I just say, the financial system failed
America. There are 7 million people still out of work because
the system failed. And yes, the regulatory system failed, too.
We have had hundreds of meetings. We post them on the Web site.
But I ask, what large Wall Street firm hasn't gotten a meeting
with us?
They are putting their thousands of comments in. They are
getting the meetings. We are soliciting meetings with them. We
are going to change the final rules. But this system has to
work for America and that means the transparency, the openness,
the competitiveness that the Congress intended to come in Dodd-
Frank.
So I think that is what we all take from the intent of what
you all passed.
Dr. Hayworth. I think part of--in fairness to all of you on
the regulatory side, part of the distress, if you will, had to
do with the fact that, during the process of promulgating Dodd-
Frank, they didn't feel that they were breaking through. I
realize I can't lay that at your feet. That is at the
legislators' feet, if you will, in the composition of Dodd-
Frank.
But, nonetheless, this is one of the examples. This is
happening in real-time and real opportunity is being lost in an
economy that desperately needs to be as productive as possible.
There is this stasis, as we all know, going on, as people await
the dropping of the next shoe, if you will.
So can we offer them something today in this hearing to
reassure them?
Mr. Gensler. I personally will attend any meeting you want
in your district with any of the banks, the end users. I mean--
Dr. Hayworth. Okay.
Mr. Gensler. --the input is very needed and helpful to our
process. But I really raise the question of anybody that hasn't
been able to break through. This CFTC process, I am very proud,
is pretty darn open.
Mr. Goldstein. We all have transparency policies, and I
think what will be revealed is the range and depth of
conversations that have been had across multiple stakeholders.
And so I would say that I think there is more than ample
opportunity for people to be heard. And if you have any
suggestions as to who would like to be heard who has not had an
opportunity, I for one would be more than happy to be
responsive to that.
Dr. Hayworth. I appreciate that. And perhaps we can arrange
a meeting. I think that might be very productive and helpful.
Mr. Gensler. I look forward to it.
Dr. Hayworth. Great. Thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman. Before we
conclude here, does the ranking member have any closing things?
Mr. Capuano. Good job.
Chairman Neugebauer. I want to thank all of you for being
here. It has been a very healthy discussion.
I do want to mention one thing. Mr. Goldstein, on March the
15th, Chairman Bachus and I sent a letter to your boss and
asked you for information used for the application and comments
submitted on the financial stability, the FSOC, regarding the
study that was prepared under the Volcker Rule. We would like
to--and we haven't received a response on that, so in your
little tickler file, if you would, maybe?
I think what we have had is a very healthy discussion here
today. The purpose of the Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee is to oversee the implementation of regulation.
And, one of the things that I think we said from the very
beginning of this hearing is this is a very important piece of
Dodd-Frank. It is how it is implemented and, more importantly,
how it is carried is extremely important.
So I would say that this probably is not the last hearing
that we are going to have on this. And when you hear Mr. Frank
and others say that more transparency is important, the ranking
member is saying it.
This is not a partisan issue. I think we are looking for
some leadership from the Secretary in this area on the
transparency. And I think the coordination is an extremely
important piece of that and particularly in this rulemaking is
actually having substantial things to comment on, like, what
are the rules going to be?
I think, when you talk to me about rulemaking, you say,
well, what do you think about the rule? And we already had an
opportunity to speak on what we thought about the legislation.
What we want to have is an opportunity now to speak about the
interpretation of that legislation, which is a rule and
certainly has to be more specific than just regurgitating what
is in the legislation.
So I hope that the next time you have a little team
meeting, you will say, did you hear what I heard when we went
before Congress?
And with that, I remind members that the record will remain
open for 30 days for members to submit additional questions to
the witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:35 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 14, 2011


