- BUDGET HEARING--THE OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUDGET HEARING--THE OFFICE
OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 19, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-118

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-090 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania, Vice Chairman          Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          MAXINE WATERS, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JOE BACA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas   JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 19, 2012...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 19, 2012...............................................    39

WITNESSES
Thursday, April 19, 2012

Shannon, Michele, Chief Operating Officer, Office of Financial
Research, U.S. Department of the Treasury......................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Neugebauer, Hon. Randy.......................................    40
Shannon, Michele.............................................    43

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Neugebauer, Hon. Randy:
Letter to Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner, dated April
18, 2012...................................................    52
Capuano, Hon. Michael:
``Strategic Framework, Office of Financial Research, FY2012-
FY2014,'' dated March 2012.................................    54

BUDGET HEARING--THE OFFICE
OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH

----------

Thursday, April 19, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy Neugebauer
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Neugebauer, Fitzpatrick,
Pearce, Posey, Renacci, Canseco, Fincher; Capuano, Waters,
Ellison, and Carney.
Ex officio present: Representative Bachus.
Also present: Representative Green.
Chairman Neugebauer. Good morning. This subcommittee will
come to order. Today's hearing is on the Office of Financial
Research (OFR).
We will have opening statements by each side, as previously
agreed, for 10 minutes per side, and I ask unanimous consent
that the members of the Committee on Financial Services who are
not members of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
be permitted to sit with us for the purposes of delivering a
statement, hearing testimony, and questioning witnesses today.
We think we are going to have votes here shortly, so what
we are going to try to do is get through the opening statements
and maybe even Ms. Shannon's statement. As soon as the votes
are over, we will reconvene the hearing.
I want to start off by saying we are extremely disappointed
that Dr. Berner was not allowed to come and testify this
morning. We appreciate Ms. Shannon being here, but we think it
was very appropriate for the person who has headed this agency
for over a year to have been here, and this is extremely
disappointing. I think this is somewhat contrary to what Dr.
Berner said when he was here before, and I quote, ``to make
sure this committee in particular understands that OFR wants to
be accountable to Congress and that OFR wants to be completely
transparent.'' I think the fact that Dr. Berner is not here
today is contrary to that statement.
One of the other things that we rolled out in our committee
this week was the Dodd-Frank burden tracker, the purpose of
which is to identify what it is going to cost to implement the
Dodd-Frank Act. Certainly, one of the things we were hoping
that many of the agencies were doing was some more detailed
cost-benefit analysis. But one of the things we learned through
this process is the fact that there are about 400 rulemaking
requirements in Dodd-Frank, and we are about 185 of those rules
into the process. We learned something that I think is
disturbing, and it is a trend that I think has pretty big
consequences, which is, we learned that 24 million manhours
will be required to comply with the 185 rules that have been
promulgated up to this point.
You know, I had to kind of put that in perspective--what
does that mean? Well, what we learned is it only took 20
million manhours to build the Panama Canal, and so one of the
things that somebody said was that instead of joining two
bodies of water, what Dodd-Frank is doing is joining lawyers
with billable hours. There is a cost and there is a burden to
these regulations, and certainly that is just one part, one
aspect of it. I think the CBO has estimated it is going to take
about $27 billion of additional expense over 10 years to
implement Dodd-Frank. So it is with consequence.
Today, we are talking about the OFR, which is another
agency created by Dodd-Frank, and quite honestly there is a
trend here. We have seen two agencies created by Dodd-Frank
that basically don't seem to have a lot of accountability,
agencies that basically can either get money from the Treasury,
or agencies that can get money from the Treasury and create
fees and assessments without anybody really having to approve
it. I think we find that troubling.
I think some of the events that we have seen in the last
few weeks of trips to Las Vegas bring to light that there needs
to be accountability in government. The American people are
demanding that kind of accountability. And so today, hopefully
in this hearing, we are going to hear more about the internal
structure of OFR, the goals and directives.
We are still waiting to see a strategic plan for this
organization, but what we do know is they are spending money
and not small sums of money. We think obviously one of the
requirements of this Oversight Subcommittee is to make sure
that we shed light on those different areas.
But, again, I have to close by saying I am extremely
disappointed. I think when Secretary Geithner said we were
going to start this process of Dodd-Frank, he said we are going
to start it with a lot of transparency and openness. I guess
transparency and openness to Secretary Geithner is not allowing
the person who has been nominated and is currently heading up
this very important agency to come and share his testimony with
us today.
So with that, I will yield to my good friend, the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Shannon, I am
looking forward to your testimony. I totally agree that
accountability of all agencies, even those that are off budget,
is our responsibility. Actually, this is why I wanted this
subcommittee; I actually played a role in creating this
subcommittee, and I am glad that I did. I think we have a
responsibility, I think we are doing it, and I think we should
continue to do it. I think the chairman has done a good job of
making sure that this subcommittee fulfills that obligation.
At the same time, I also do think that we have a
responsibility to see both sides. When we have one side
constantly saying we have to get a Dodd-Frank burden factor,
that is a fair point, I agree with that, but I think we have to
see what the non-Dodd-Frank burden factor was. We talk about
hundreds of millions or billions of dollars it is costing us to
do these things, but we continue to ignore the fact that it
almost cost the entire economy many trillions of dollars
because we didn't do these things previously.
So as we do this, there are two sides of the ledger, and I
would like to--I just think it is important to point that out
on a regular basis. But that doesn't mean that we should just
be throwing money away. That is the accountability factor.
I will tell you that, honestly--I am going to hear this for
the next 6 months, and I know it, and it is appropriate--I was
probably one of the most angered people in America when I saw
this GSA story last week, because I hate waste more than most
people, believe it or not, and I hate it for two reasons.
First, I hate it because I am a taxpayer, and I hate it for the
exact same reason everybody else hates it. Second, I hate it
because I think there is a responsibility and a good part of
government that gets broad painted when you have one agency
that goes rogue and does something incredibly stupid,
probably--certainly unethical in my opinion, immoral, and
possibly illegal.
So, honestly, for those of us who actually think government
has a positive role to play, believe it or not, I think we get
more angry when we see a government agency go crazy than those
people who never liked government in the first place, and
therefore, if anyone at OFR or the Treasury or the Fed or
anybody else you talk to on a regular basis is taking vacations
in Vegas, maybe that should not happen.
But be that as it may, on the presumption that no one at
OFR has been out partying in Vegas lately--I guess I should ask
that and maybe you will put that in your testimony--I still
think that you have an important role to play, and that is what
I am here to talk about today and going forward. I know that I
am going to hear the GSA thing on every committee I serve on
for the next 6 months. Honestly, if I was on the other side, I
would be doing it, too, so I don't blame you, have some fun,
and you are right. But when it comes time to line up the GSA
guys and kind of take care of business, count me in. I will be
at the front of that line.
I am looking forward to seeing Dr. Berner when he finally
does get confirmed. It is my understanding that the policy,
which I don't like in the first place, but at least it is my
understanding that it is not a new policy, it has been a long-
term policy followed by several Administrations, including the
Bush Administration. I didn't like it then, I don't like it
now, but at least I understand it. So although I join with my
chairman in not appreciating the policy, I want to be clear
that the policy is not new, it is not Mr. Geithner's policy; it
is a policy that he is simply extending from previous
Administrations. I guess that is a typical Administration
versus Legislative Branch difference of opinion, but there will
come a time when Dr. Berner hopefully will be confirmed, and
when he does, I am sure he expects to be called here, and I
look forward to that day. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. I have a letter
that I sent yesterday to Treasury Secretary Geithner expressing
my disappointment about Dr. Berner's failure to testify here
today, and I ask unanimous consent that the letter be made a
part of the record.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
I also want to say that without objection, all Members'
opening statements will be made a part of the record, and at
this particular point in time, I recognize the chairman of the
full Financial Services Committee, Chairman Bachus, for 2
minutes.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer, for
convening this important hearing to examine the budget of the
Office of Financial Research. The Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee held its first hearing on the OFR last July when
we discussed concerns about how the Office will secure the vast
amounts of personal and corporate financial data it will
collect. If the OFR is going to stockpile sensitive financial
information, then it needs to make sure the data stays out of
the hands of hackers, criminals, and those who would do this
country harm.
Last July, we also examined whether the OFR's data
collection efforts would burden American businesses. Our
hearing today examines the OFR's budget. For the first 2 years
after Dodd-Frank enactment, OFR is funded by the Federal
Reserve. That 2-year period is about to end. Starting in July,
the OFR will fund itself by leveling assessments on financial
institutions, a process that is entirely removed from the
appropriations process. In light of the fact that the OFR will
impose direct costs on American businesses, and especially
because the OFR has virtually complete autonomy in setting its
yearly budget, it is critical that this committee examine
whether the OFR is spending money in a way that promotes its
mission in a cost-effective manner.
In examining the OFR's budget, I especially look forward to
hearing more about how the Office will fund itself by leveling
assessments on financial institutions, how the OFR is going to
collect data in a way that will minimize the burden on
businesses and individuals, and the systems the OFR is putting
in place to safeguard that data and prevent its unauthorized
disclosure or use.
It is very disappointing, however, that Treasury refused to
make Dr. Berner available today to address these questions.
They are important questions that need to be addressed, and it
is especially troubling and amplifies the concerns that many of
us already have that the OFR lacks accountability and
transparency. I do thank Ms. Shannon for being here today as
our witness, and I thank you, Chairman Neugebauer, for holding
this hearing.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. Now, the vice
chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Fitzpatrick, is recognized
for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are here today
to discuss the unprecedented powers of the Office of Financial
Research. When this agency was created by the Dodd-Frank Act, a
majority of the American public was unaware of the far-reaching
access that the Federal Government would be granted in matters
of personal and corporate finance. The OFR, charged with
collecting information for regulators, was given the power to
demand all data necessary, including sensitive, private
information, information from banks, hedge funds, brokerages,
and other financial companies, as well as information about
individual loans. The vast amount of information would be a
gold mine for anyone able to access it for nefarious purpose.
As someone who is concerned with financial security and also
personal privacy, the OFR approach to gathering and storing
information is a major concern.
I believe, Mr. Chairman, that there are also some serious
questions regarding to the accountability and transparency at
the OFR, two characteristics of vital importance for any
government agency. For example, its budget is set by the agency
itself, and the Office is not funded through the regular
appropriations process, so that there is a lack of meaningful
congressional oversight, and the American people are left
without much of a say at all in its operations. The American
people deserve to know that their information is protected and
that this agency is acting in the best interests of the public
trust.
The most reasonable thing we can expect are clearly defined
budgets, strategic plans, goals, and fully vetted policies and
procedures. These are standard practices in the private sector,
and they hold more importance when agencies are operating in
the public sector. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Canseco, is recognized for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This past Saturday
marked the 100th anniversary of the sinking of the Titanic. In
the aftermath of that disaster, government hearings on both
sides of the Atlantic found plenty of blame to go around: an
irresponsible captain; a faulty design; or an attitude of
arrogance that the ship was unsinkable. All throughout it,
though, very little blame was assigned to the iceberg itself,
which at the end of the day is what sank the Titanic.
In a similar vein, our economy in 2008 was sunk by its own
iceberg, but unlike the Titanic, we had plenty of warning. For
years, Congress and regulators heard warning after warning that
government housing policies and the risks being built up by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were going to sink our economy. Way
back in 2000 at the end of the Clinton Administration, Peter
Wallison told Congress, ``If Fannie and Freddie are not
restrained, it is no exaggeration to say that this is a threat
to the private sector to the same degree it is a threat to the
taxpayers.''
In 2005, former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan said, ``If
Freddie and Fannie continue to grow, they potentially create
ever-growing potential systemic risks down the road.''
These weren't the only voices, but all of them were ignored
by regulators and Members of Congress who continued to push for
government intervention in the housing market. Of course, the
house of cards came crashing down, and we are left today trying
to dig ourselves out of it.
Taking its cue from the post-Titanic inquiries, the last
Congress gave us Dodd-Frank. This bill included the formation
of the Office of Financial Research. I am profoundly confused
by the logic behind all of this when the threats to our economy
leading up to 2008 were so clear and so transparent. You didn't
need an army of Ph.D.s to tell you that Fannie and Freddie were
out of control or that even a meager drop in home prices would
wipe out their capital and the capital of hundreds of other
financial institutions, and I remain deeply concerned about
this agency with its threat to sensitive information and its
misguided mission. That is why I have introduced a bill to
repeal it, which was adopted in amendment form by voice vote in
this committee yesterday.
We know what our iceberg was and what caused it to get so
big, and we know more than ever that all the information in the
world can't compete with a lack of will on behalf of
politicians and regulators alike. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman, and now the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized for 2
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
organizing this very important hearing to discuss the Office of
Financial Research. I believe that OFR will serve as a vital
role in supplying our regulators with critical data and
analysis that will help them monitor systemic risk and ensure
that our financial markets are sound.
The OFR was created by Title 1 of Dodd-Frank for the
purpose of collecting information for the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (FSOC), developing tools for risk management,
and monitoring and conducting research using complex data to
inform how we can make our financial system more resilient and
robust. Essentially, the Office of Financial Research is just
like the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA): monitoring gathering storms; assessing threats; and
trying to coordinate actions that would minimize any collateral
damage.
Likewise, it is similar to the intelligence gathering
agencies which attempt to aggregate and analyze data for the
purpose of protecting the country. I think the OFR was a
critical accomplishment under Dodd-Frank, and I hope that all
my colleagues agree that consolidating and understanding this
complex financial data will be a key to preventing another
systemic risk like the one we experienced 4 years ago. Having
this data is all the more important, in fact, given the
lingering economic instability in the euro zone.
So with that said, I was frankly dismayed by some of the
activity in our budget reconciliation markup yesterday,
including an amendment to repeal the Office of Financial
Research. While I understand that congressional oversight of
OFR is appropriate, I think that efforts to undermine it are
extremely dangerous. I thank you, and I yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairman Bachus. Would the gentlelady--I am hard of
hearing, you know. I have problems.
Ms. Waters. Me, too.
Chairman Bachus. But did you say that the Office of
Financial Research, you compared them collecting private data
of individual Americans that they have to file with
institutions when they get a loan or their stock portfolios,
that that is analogous to the Weather Bureau collecting
temperature and rainfall data?
Ms. Waters. I guess you do have a problem hearing. No, I
did not say that.
Chairman Bachus. Oh, okay.
Ms. Waters. What I said was essentially the Office of
Financial Research is just like the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration: monitoring gathering storms;
assessing threats; and trying to coordinate actions that would
minimize any collateral damage, and further, likewise, it is
similar to the intelligence gathering agencies we have in
national security which attempt to aggregate and analyze data
for the purpose of protecting the country. That statement you
interjected, collecting private data on individuals, etc., no,
I did not say that.
Chairman Bachus. So it is necessary to collect all this
private financial information on American citizens to protect
the country?
Ms. Waters. You are making that up. I didn't say that.
Chairman Bachus. Okay. All right. I don't want to
mischaracterize what you said.
Ms. Waters. Do you want me to read it again?
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman. At this time,
I am going to recess the subcommittee until after votes, at
which time we will hear Ms. Shannon's opening statement and
begin our question period. So we are standing in recess.
[recess]
Chairman Neugebauer. The hearing is called back to order.
Ms. Shannon, without objection, your written testimony will be
made a part of the record, and you will now be recognized for 5
minutes to summarize your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MICHELE SHANNON, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, OFFICE
OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Ms. Shannon. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano,
and other members of this subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today. Since this subcommittee's hearing
on the OFR 9 months ago, the Office has made substantial
progress in carrying out its statutory responsibilities. As we
move through Fiscal Year 2012 and look toward Fiscal Year 2013,
that progress is accelerating. My written testimony reports on
steps we have taken to achieve our goals and provides details
about the OFR's budget and financing. In my statement this
morning, I will give some examples of the headway we have made.
Last month, the OFR published the strategic framework that
will guide our way forward. This framework establishes five
goals. First, one of the primary responsibilities of the Office
of Financial Research is to serve the Financial Stability
Oversight Council and its member agencies. We have begun to
provide data and analytical input to the Council and are
implementing an inventory of data held by Council member
agencies. We are also collaborating on data-related issues
through the Council's data committee.
A second important goal is to promote stronger data-related
standards. The early centerpiece of this effort is our ongoing
work with policymakers, regulators, and the private sector to
establish a unique global standard for identifying parties to
financial transactions. This legal entity identifier, or LEI,
will allow for better understanding of true exposures and
counterparty risks across the financial system. It will also
create efficiencies for transactions and reporting.
A third focus involves work to create a collaborative
environment for research and analysis on risks to financial
stability and best practices and risk management. Results of
this initiative include publication of the first two entries in
the OFR's working paper series, announcement of the
establishment of a financial research advisory committee, and,
looking forward, publication of the OFR's first annual report
this summer.
Under the fourth goal of the OFR, we are required not only
to make nonsensitive data and information available to the
public, but also to protect sensitive information. The OFR is
committed to collecting data securely, safeguarding the data it
holds, and being very thoughtful and judicious in fulfilling
its data-related mandate. The OFR will collect data only when
necessary to assess threats to financial stability and only
when the data are not otherwise available.
Under our final goal, we are making substantial progress in
establishing the OFR as an efficient organization. We now have
69 employees and plan to reach a steady state staffing level of
275 to 300 employees in the next 2 to 3 years. To support good
stewardship of our resources, we are installing sound planning
and review protocols as well as rigorous controls. As we stand
up the OFR, a key objective is to put in place the information
technology and business systems needed to support the secure
delivery of our data and research mandates. The OFR has
established a foundational infrastructure to support the short-
term needs of researchers and analysts. We are taking all the
time needed for robust planning and testing to determine the
most secure, efficient, and cost-effective solutions for the
longer term.
The complex, highly specialized mission of the OFR and the
scope of the task to establish the Office from the ground up
both dictate that the OFR take a careful, prudent approach to
its budget and funding. We also recognize the importance of
moving forward as expeditiously as possible.
As my written testimony details, the pace of our spending
is projected to increase in the second half of this year, and
next year we will continue to ramp up our efforts. Thank you
again for the opportunity to be here today. I would be happy to
answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Shannon can be found on page
43 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Ms. Shannon. We will now go
to questions from Members. Ms. Shannon, I want to better
understand your role at OFR. OFR's Fiscal Year 2013 budget is
$157 million. Are you in charge of finalizing and approving
that budget?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, my role as the Chief Operating
Officer is to oversee the resources of the Office, both the
financial resources and the human capital resources of the
Office. I am responsible for the work to prepare the budget,
and ultimately, that budget is reviewed by the other parts of
the Treasury, including the management team in financial
management in Treasury, and ultimately approved by the
Secretary of the Treasury, currently. When we have a confirmed
Director of the OFR, it would also be approved by the Director.
Chairman Neugebauer. I didn't hear you use Dr. Berner's
name. So he is currently not required to--he didn't have
anything to do with this budget?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, as you know, we do not have a
confirmed Director of the OFR currently. Dr. Berner is the
Counselor to the Secretary of the Treasury, and in that role
has been asked by the Secretary to help support the stand-up of
the OFR. In that context, we worked with him and other members
of the Treasury to establish the budget and prepare the budget
for the approval.
Chairman Neugebauer. So you prepared the budget?
Ms. Shannon. I have responsibilities for helping to prepare
the budget. That process involves other members, other Treasury
officials, but ultimately is approved by the Secretary.
Chairman Neugebauer. And the Secretary of the Treasury
approved it?
Ms. Shannon. That is correct.
Chairman Neugebauer. So Dr. Berner is just kind of on the
sidelines right now until he is confirmed? He was not involved
in that process?
Ms. Shannon. Mr. Chairman, again, without a confirmed
Director, the authorities of that Office sit with the Secretary
of the Treasury, and the Counselor, Dr. Berner, is supporting
the day-to-day stand-up of the Office, and in that context, he
has been involved in the budgeting process.
Chairman Neugebauer. I also noticed that you expect to have
284 FTEs by next fall. Did you decide that was how many people
the agency needed?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, in order to prepare our budget
and our strategic plan, looking at issues such as the level of
staffing that we would need, we, working with, again, members
of Treasury's financial management team, looked at the specific
mission of the OFR, what the specific needs would be to meet
both the research mission and the data-related mission. We
worked with managers that we brought into the OFR to look at
what the specific needs would be and the particular functions,
and from that basis, built up to the--
Chairman Neugebauer. Okay. So who is hiring a number of
senior members? Somebody hired you. Who is making those
decisions?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, again, the OFR doesn't currently
have a confirmed Director.
Chairman Neugebauer. Okay, I see where we are going with
that answer. So, you mentioned the strategic framework.
Ms. Shannon. Yes.
Chairman Neugebauer. I have reviewed that, and I didn't see
anything to lead me to believe that there was anything
strategic about the framework. It was pretty general. And yet
you are going to have a budget of $157 million, you are going
to have 284 full-time employees, but it really didn't give a
lot of indication of the direction the agency was headed and
how it was going to operate.
When I look at some of the other documents that other
agencies--this is the CFTC's and this is the SEC's submissions
of their plans and budgets, and then I look at the budget for
your agency, and obviously when you look at the difference
between, these agencies have gone into much more detail about
being strategic about how they are going to spend money, what
these people are going to do. Would you say yours is adequate?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, as you know, the budget of the
OFR was published as part of the President's budget. We are a
start-up. We are--we did prepare information consistent with
this stage of our stand-up. Of course, over time, as the
institution continues to grow, we are going to be elaborating
further details in the preparation of our budget and the
publication of our budget.
One thing I would emphasize, and I think it is a very
important point that you raise, is that we do need to be very
transparent about our operations. We are starting to do that,
with the publication of our strategic framework, with the
publication of our budget as part of the President's budget,
and we are going to continue to do that, we are going to
continue to be transparent about what we are doing. We want to
be accountable for the way that we are spending money, and we
are going to continue to elaborate those plans going forward.
Chairman Neugebauer. My last question is, you are an
independent agency, and so your budget for 2013 was projected
to be at $157 million, 284 full-time employment units. Could
that number have been $350 million?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we, in preparing the budget, look
to the needs of the organization as relates to--
Chairman Neugebauer. This is a very simple question. Yes or
no, could the budget have been $350 million?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, in preparing the budget--
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, I know that they have
coached you very well, and you are doing a great job, but we
are here to get facts, and so the question is, could that
budget have been $350 million, yes or no?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I would like to give you a full
answer to your question.
Chairman Neugebauer. No. I want a yes-or-no answer because
my time has expired. So it is yes, it could have been, or no,
it couldn't have been. It is either one or the other. Could
that budget have been $350 million?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, in preparing the budget--
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, I want a yes-or-no
answer, please. It is either yes, it could have been $350
million, or no, it couldn't have. Does the agency have the
authority to have a $350 million budget?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman--
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, I want a yes-or-no
answer, please, ma'am. Yes, it could, or no, it couldn't. This
is not rocket science.
Mr. Ellison. Mr. Chairman, I have an objection.
Ms. Waters. Regular order, please.
Mr. Ellison. I think the witness is entitled to be treated
with respect.
Chairman Neugebauer. I am treating her with--
Mr. Ellison. No, I believe this hearing is not proper
respect.
Chairman Neugebauer. I have the time, please.
Ms. Waters. Regular order.
Mr. Ellison. I want to interpose an objection to the manner
in which you are conducting this hearing with this witness.
This is disrespectful.
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, I am looking for a yes-
or-no answer.
Ms. Waters. Regular order, please. Regular order, please.
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, yes or no?
Mr. Ellison. Also, the red light is on; I think the
chairman is beyond his time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I am not yielding my time until Ms.
Shannon answers my question. Ms. Shannon?
Mr. Ellison. And I want to register an objection to the
abusive nature of this hearing.
Chairman Neugebauer. So noted.
Ms. Waters. Regular order. The questioning time has passed.
Chairman Neugebauer. So, Ms. Shannon, we are going to get
back to the question. Could that budget have been $350 million?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I fear--I want to be very
responsive to your question.
Chairman Neugebauer. You are not being responsive. I have
asked for a yes-or-no answer.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I think you have
made your point, and I don't think that you can badger the
witness into saying yes or no. Let's move on.
Chairman Neugebauer. I am not trying to badger anybody. I
am just trying to get an answer. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Chairman, if you would yield for just a
question or comment. Pursuant to the law itself, it does say
that they can collect assessments equal to the total expenses
of the Office, that is all the law says. So they could collect
it to the total expenses of the Office, and it may or may not
be a yes-or-no answer, but that is the legislative requirement
regardless of whether Ms. Shannon knows that or not.
Chairman Neugebauer. And so, it could be $350 million if
they decide to spend $350 million.
Mr. Capuano. The expenses of the Office is the legislation.
Chairman Neugebauer. With that, I yield to the gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. I yield to Ms. Waters.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Ms. Shannon, earlier today
one of my colleagues on the opposite side of the aisle I think
attempted to ask me a question about whether or not information
that is collected is protected, or whether or not this
information could be used against some of the entities that I
suppose you are doing research on or individuals, and I, even
though he did not frame the question quite that way, I think
that is what he was trying to get at, and I would like you to
help us to understand, given the nature of what you will be
doing and the research that you will be doing, how can you
assure us that all of these entities that you will be
interacting with and doing research on will be protected?
Ms. Shannon. Congresswoman, thank you, this is a very
important question. This is something that we are very focused
on across the organization, protecting the data that we take
in-house and making sure that it is available only to those who
absolutely need to have it.
First, the OFR has been established within the Treasury,
and therefore, it inherits the security structures within the
Treasury, the IT infrastructure of the Treasury, but also the
security protocols and policies of the Treasury Department, and
these are policies to which we are adhering closely.
At the same time, we recognize that the OFR has a
particular mission, and that in the context of that mission, we
need to look at what additional policies and procedures we need
to put in place within the OFR itself to make sure that we are
protecting data, and so we are looking at that now. We are
looking at how our data gathering mandate, what additional
protections are required in that context, and also in the
context of data sharing between agencies, what we need to do.
One thing, again, that I want to emphasize is that we are
only going to be collecting the data that we absolutely need to
fulfill our mission. We are trying to fill data gaps. We are
not going to be collecting for collections sake. We are going
to be making sure that only those people who absolutely need to
have access to sensitive data have that access through access
control, both systems and in policies.
Ms. Waters. But what concerns me a bit is that you will be
collecting data and interacting with two other newly-
established entities, the Orderly Liquidation Authority you
will be working with also; is that correct?
Ms. Shannon. Congresswoman, we will be working with the--
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Chairman, could you have the witness kind
of pull the microphone over, she is talking to this side, and
the microphone is on the other side.
Ms. Shannon. Sure. Is this better?
Congresswoman, we will be working with members across the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Ms. Waters. Oh, I see, so you don't have any direct
interaction with the Orderly Liquidation Authority, either? You
will not be supplying research at all for the Orderly
Liquidation Authority?
Ms. Shannon. Congresswoman, we will be working with
regulators across the FSOC, and so in that context, we will be
responding to requests from various parts of the system.
Ms. Waters. I see. But there are no regulations that have
been established for these particular new interactions that you
will be having? You talk about the Treasury, of course. We know
that there are established rules and regs, laws that relate to
confidentiality and other kinds of things. Do there need to be
new regs developed, new laws developed that would make sure
that the data you are collecting that will be available to
these new entities will be protected?
Ms. Shannon. Congresswoman, thank you, this is also an
important question in terms of how we go about sharing data
that we may have and also how we go about the process of data
dissemination that we may take in-house, and this is an issue
that we are working on with other members of the regulatory
community to set in place the kind of procedures and protocols,
controls that you are mentioning, and one of the aspects of
this that we are working on right now is looking at how to
classify data within the OFR, obviously building upon systems
that already exist for data classification, and how we can
mount that classification that we have in-house at the OFR with
the systems of other regulators so that we can make sure we are
talking the same language and that we are protecting the data
appropriately.
Ms. Waters. So what is the timeframe? How long is it going
to take you to put these protocols together?
Ms. Shannon. Congresswoman, we already do have a set of
protocols in place, again, as part of the Treasury
infrastructure. We are working to expand those protocols. We
are working on the classification system, that I mentioned, is
going to be in place in the coming months, and other aspects of
these enhancements should be coming online over the coming
months as well.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I was just reminded by the
staff that we are talking about process with the Orderly
Liquidation Authority rather than an agency. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you. Now, I recognize the vice
chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Fitzpatrick for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Shannon, I
appreciate your testimony. Dr. Berner was here before the
subcommittee on July 14th, over 9 months ago. At that point, I
requested a strategic plan with specific goals and metrics for
OFR's Fiscal Year 2012 be submitted to the subcommittee by fall
of 2011, and Dr. Berner agreed at that time, that it would be a
reasonable timeframe to submit it.
Looking at the testimony from July 14th, I said it would be
more comforting to hear a specific strategy plan with specific
goals and metrics. So when might we see that plan? Berner said,
``That is a good question, we are in the process of developing
that.'' I asked, ``Will we see the plan perhaps by the fall of
this year, 2011?'' He said, ``Perhaps by then; that seems like
a reasonable date.''
Thus far, Ms. Shannon, all we have received is a 9-page
Fiscal Year 2013 financial research fund. I think it was
released in February. As the chairman pointed out, we get
documents over 200 pages from organizations like the CFTC, they
are line-by-line budgets, they are specific, they have goals,
they have objectives, they have metrics. So we were promised we
would see something by the fall by Dr. Berner. When might we
see a comprehensive strategic plan forthcoming from your
agency?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, thank you for your question. As I
mentioned, the OFR--
Mr. Pearce. Ma'am, I hate to keep saying it, but you keep
talking away from the microphone.
Ms. Shannon. Better?
Mr. Pearce. Yes. I am trying to read and listen, too, and
that makes it much better.
Ms. Shannon. Absolutely. Congressman, we published the
strategic plan of the OFR in March of this year. Again, as I
mentioned, the OFR is a start-up organization. That is the
initial plan of the organization. We also have published our
budget as part of the President's budget, and we are expecting
over time, as the organization grows, as we bring on more
staff, that these--that we will be expanding this kind of
documentation.
The other thing I would mention is that we are currently
working on performance measures that we would include as part
of the Fiscal Year 2014 budget to help us better measure how we
are doing, how we are meeting our mission. Within the strategic
framework that we recently published, we did establish specific
goals for the organization, the work that we are doing to
support the FSOC, the work that we are doing to strengthen data
standards, to establish a research center and begin to publish
research and analysis, also to make data available to the
public, and to establish the organization as an effective--
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Ms. Shannon, would you agree that this
document you are referring to, the March document, contains no
strategic--there are goals, but there are no deadlines, there
are no performance measures at all in this document?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman--
Mr. Fitzpatrick. We are just wondering, how do you take a
document like this and budget to an aspiration as opposed to a
specific measurable outcome?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we prepared that as our initial
strategic plan to establish the goals of the organization, to
establish the mission of the organization. We also established
within that plan implementation priorities for the OFR, laying
out in those implementation priorities the priorities that we
saw for the current fiscal year as well as priorities looking
out into the future. Again, we will be establishing performance
measures, as we mentioned, in that strategic plan during the
current period, and plan to have them in place for the next
budgeting cycle.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. We understand that the agency has goals,
but we are just wondering about the measurable outcomes. I have
worked with chambers and small businesses in my private
practice. Small banks for small start-ups require greater
measures, more specific measurable outcomes than we are seeing
in a document for an agency that is spending over a hundred, a
couple hundred million dollars.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we published our budget. It is
part of the President's budget. And, again, we are working to
establish exactly the kind of measures that you are talking
about. We fully agree on the importance of accountability, the
importance of linking how we are spending money to achievement
of our mission and fulfilling our statutory requirements, so I
absolutely agree with you on the importance of this. This is
something that we are working on right now, and we expect to
have it in the next fiscal year cycle.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. So we won't receive that before September
30th of this year, is that what you are saying?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are working on it right now.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. When might we receive it?
Ms. Shannon. It is our intention to include those measures
in the next year's budget, and they would be published as part
of the President's budget.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Ellison is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I also thank the
ranking member. Yesterday, I believe action was taken in this
committee that would potentially defund OFR. Are you aware of
that?
Ms. Shannon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ellison. If that were to happen, would the FSOC, which
is tasked with monitoring the financial stability of the United
States financial industry, be able to discharge its duty?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, the OFR has a specific mission to
support the FSOC in the discharge of its duty. In particular,
related to the data and research analysis that it might need to
conduct its operations. And so that is the purpose of the OFR,
and we are working to fulfill that mission.
Mr. Ellison. So could the FSOC discharge its responsibility
without financial information and analysis?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I think in establishing the OFR
there was a recognition that this kind of data, this kind of
research would be important for understanding threats to
financial stability, and that the data gaps that existed during
the financial crisis had profound effects, and therefore that
an organization like the OFR, with the mission of the OFR to
collect data, to make that data available to the FSOC and its
member agencies served a critical purpose in ensuring that they
could carry out their function.
Mr. Ellison. You are using terms like ``important'' and
``critical purpose'' when the truth is that the OFR is
essential to the FSOC functioning; isn't that right?
Ms. Shannon. We do think that we have a very important
mission and that it is a critical mission to ensure that that
data and analysis is happening.
Mr. Ellison. Okay, fair enough. So since 1930, has there
ever been a financial crisis quite as bad as the one we just
went through a few years ago?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, this obviously has been a very
profound crisis, and it has had an effect obviously within the
financial system and across the economy.
Mr. Ellison. But I am asking for you to rank it in terms of
other financial crises. We have had recessions and stuff in the
last, since the 1930s. Has there been one as damaging to the
U.S. economy since the Great Depression?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, the profound effects of this
crisis, as you note, the effect--
Mr. Ellison. To your knowledge, has there been a worse one?
Ms. Shannon. No, sir.
Mr. Ellison. Okay. So we saw giants of the financial
services industry like Bear Stearns fall, Lehman Brothers fall,
Merrill Lynch had to be bought. We saw catastrophic harm, and
as a result, we did something to protect our economy from
systemic damage, and what just happened yesterday is this
committee voted to deprive the committee that is charged with
watching systemic risks be deprived of their eyes basically.
Can you respond to that if you choose?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, the OFR has an important mission
to fill these data gaps, to perform the research and analysis
functions that were established under statute. We are
continuing to work to build the organization to fulfill that
mission. We think it is an important mission, and we are going
to continue to work to move forward.
Mr. Ellison. There has been some focus today on your
submission, and I think some might have expressed their
personal opinion that it could be a little bit more robust, a
little bit more detailed. In comparison, there has been some
lavish praise heaped on the CFTC structure. However, the
Majority underfunded this agency and ignored the warning of the
impending fiscal crisis of former Commissioner Brooksley Born
and slashed a number of the examiners.
So I just find it quite remarkable that today CFTC is being
looked upon as some sort of model agency when this very
committee has underfunded that very agency.
Do you feel that at the stage the OFR is at in its
evolution since its founding, that the submission your office
has provided to this committee is adequate to the moment under
the conditions that you are in?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we absolutely are doing our best
to be transparent. We are dedicated to making sure that this
committee and the public has the information that they need,
that we can be held accountable for what we are doing, and that
there is a good understanding of how we see our mission, and we
think that initial strategic framework--
Mr. Ellison. I just have to ask you a quick question about
my own district if I have time. Minneapolis, my town, is a
magnet for immigrants who actively participate and contribute
to our local economy, and the vitality and security of other
nations' financial markets is of deep concern to us. Could you
tell me how the OFR effort to establish the global legal entity
identifier, that is the LEI, for parties in financial
transactions, what is the status on the proposals you hope to
deliver to the G20 at the June 2012 summit?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, again, as I mentioned in my
opening statement, this legal entity identifier is a very
important initiative of the OFR and part of our broader mission
to support better data standards. The LEI itself would create a
specific identifier for every financial entity, and what this
does is it lets us understand and lets data be collected to
understand the position of institutions, the exposures of
institutions. It will give us better understanding of
counterparty risk, it will increase the ability of analysts,
both regulators and in academia and in the markets themselves,
to understand the interconnections within the system and better
assess risks.
It also is going to create important efficiencies for
market participants, and having this identifier, it will
improve data management, improve efficiencies in trading and in
operations, and we think it is going to lead to important cost
savings.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, ma'am. I yield back the balance of
my time, and I thank the chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank you. And now, we recognize the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just as an edification
of a question you asked a little while ago to Ms. Shannon, you
asked about their budget. And I think you asked that same
question in July to her boss, Dr. Berner, and he said, ``I am
not aware that there is a statutory limit in the statute
itself.'' So just for the record, your boss knows that there is
not or apparently thinks there is not.
Ms. Shannon, you seem like a very nice person, and I
certainly hope you don't take personally the frustration
expressed by members of this committee, and there is a lot of
frustration over a lot of wrongdoing that has resulted in no
consequences and no accountability. It says that one of the top
five goals of your agency is to build a world-class workplace.
Can you give me an example of an existing world-class workplace
that you would like to emulate?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, what we are trying to do is make
sure that we have in place the kind of HR policies, the kind of
communication infrastructure--
Mr. Posey. I know, but is there a model? We want to build--
are we going to reinvent the wheel or is there already another
world-class workplace you could just emulate?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are trying to look at best
practices across government and other organizations.
Mr. Posey. Do you know that another one exists? Is there
another one that you consider a world-class workplace that
exists now?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am happy to get back to you on
this. I don't have one currently.
Mr. Posey. Okay. It sounds like we are going to build a
world-class waste of taxpayers' money, quite frankly. What
concerns a lot of us is that so many agencies now have just
turned into lobbyist manufacturing machines, and with the
information that your employees are going to have, the power
that they are going to have to do good and do bad, we are
really concerned about that. I have read the rules that you
have laid out for your employees, that they shouldn't do this
because it would be improper, but there are no consequences or
accountability for that behavior, and that kind of concerns us.
We know with Madoff, the SEC, hey, they did a great job,
they had great intel, and they knew what Madoff was doing wrong
for 10 years; they just refused to take any action. So, of
course, we wonder, your agency, which seems to think it can
outsmart Wall Street if they have enough extra people and
enough software that they can see where the next problem is
going to be, but everyone with half a brain in this country saw
the last problem way before it burst.
We knew there was a subprime crisis. It was just a matter
of how long it would be before it burst. It was identified
years in advance. But nobody took any action, just like
Madoff--identified for 10 years, but nobody took any action. So
I don't think we really have a problem finding out what goes
wrong. The problem we have is holding people accountable for
it. Madoff basically had to almost turn himself in. I don't
know if he was scared of the other people that he scammed and
felt he was safer in prison. So far, I am told Corzine hasn't
even been interviewed yet by the Justice Department. Maybe he
has since the last time I got an update. But we don't see
anybody going to jail for this bad behavior, and that is the
only thing that is going to fix the bad behavior.
I just don't think we are ever going to have anybody who is
smart enough to dream up the next wave of criminal behavior and
prevent it from happening if there are not consequences for
that bad behavior, and that is the frustration we all have.
Can you identify what you might be able to point out to be
the next type of crisis, give us an example of what that might
look like?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, what we are trying to do is to
gather data to fill gaps that existed in things like the shadow
banking market in order to help regulators across the system to
analyze what threats may exist. Now, this is a very complex
mission, this is an issue that requires a certain amount of
humility. It is a mission that requires that we continue to
look forward because this is a dynamic market, and it is a
dynamic system, and so what we are trying to do is to build the
tools to allow for that analysis to happen, to build the
process that will allow for both better analysis to help reduce
the risk of a crisis but also--
Mr. Posey. Okay. A lot of people are concerned with the
proprietary information you will have, even the trade secrets
to which you will have access. They are concerned about the
security of it. We know some of our national defense agencies
have been hacked, and I wonder whether or not you will be able
to have a safer process than some of them did. We have people
who are concerned. They knew people who had Chrysler
dealerships that the government took away and gave it to
somebody else that they liked better.
We know people who had Jeep dealerships that the government
took away and gave to somebody else that they liked better. And
so virtually, you are empowering a bunch of bureaucrats with
the absolute confidential total information of every business
in the United States of America, and I think some of them are
concerned with the ability to abuse that power, again
notwithstanding the fact you have some guidelines set up for
your employees of how they must behave, but there is absolutely
no penalty, no prescription for what happens if they violate
the law, like so many other people have. Again, our biggest
fear it that it is going to be another lobbyist manufacturing
machine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman
from Delaware, Mr. Carney, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today, and thank you, Ms. Shannon, for coming in. I
just really want to try to understand how you are going to
achieve the objectives, which I think having an arm like yours,
an agency like yours is an important thing. Clearly, there were
things that were missed in the lead-up to 2008. I disagree a
little bit with my colleague from the other side of the aisle
that everybody saw this coming. I think if people saw it
coming, there would have been a lot more people shorting the
market, and that didn't happen to the extent that you would
have expected.
So tell me how you, as the Chief Operating Officer of this
new agency, are going about putting together a work plan in
terms of identifying data needs? You mentioned establishing
data standards. What kind of data are we talking about and how
are you going to use that to help identify these risks?
And then, I would like to have you talk about what you
might have done with some of the mortgage data and information
and the concentration of risk at AIG and the derivatives
markets, CDSs in particular. So tell me how you are going to
approach this problem, what you are doing now, maybe what data
you will be collecting this year and next, just so I have a
better idea of how you are going to accomplish the charge that
you have been given?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, thank you very much. Again, the
purpose of the OFR, the mission of the OFR is to collect data
and conduct research, and in that data collection, only the
data that is necessary to assess threats to financial
stability, only the data that is necessary to fill gaps--
Mr. Carney. So what does that look like for me, who doesn't
know the particulars that you are dealing with every day?
Ms. Shannon. So going to the example that you mentioned, in
the crisis there was not a very good understanding of some of
the interconnections within the market, some of the risks in
the market that were created through the securitization and
through the use of CDS. The data that were available at the
time to assess these risks and to see how those risks may be
transmitted through different markets, from one financial
institution to another, that data was not available in a form
that was most effectively useful to policymakers, to market
participants themselves to truly understand their own exposures
and the exposures of their counterparties, and the work of the
OFR, the work of the FSOC to try and better understand risks
across the entire system. Individual regulators are looking at
one part of the system. The FSOC is charged with making sure
they are looking across the entire system, and the OFR has been
established to help in that mission.
Mr. Carney. My time is ticking off, so what are the top two
or three priorities with respect to what you need to do between
now and next year?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, let me point to two initiatives
that we have under way. Right now, we are working with other
FSOC agencies to conduct an inventory of the data that they
have already. So, again, we see our mission only as filling
gaps. We don't intend to collect data for datas sake. The first
thing that we need--
Mr. Carney. Does that mean you don't know what the gaps are
yet or you are just identifying them?
Ms. Shannon. We are working to find out what those gaps
are, and the data inventory is going to help us do that. If we
understand what information already exists within the
regulatory community, make that information available to others
within the regulatory community, within the FSOC, we are going
to be better able to utilize the data that already exists, and
we are also going to be able to understand where the data gaps
exist that need to be addressed.
Mr. Carney. So are you doing anything or have you done
anything with respect to the risk associated with European
sovereign debt issues?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are working with the FSOC, and
this is obviously a very important issue in terms of the
financial system. The OFR is supporting the FSOC on this and
other issues. One issue or one example I would just point to,
the OFR has money market fund data, and is looking at that data
to look at the exposures of U.S. entities to Europe. So that is
one way that we are helping the FSOC in its analysis of those
threats.
Mr. Carney. Those principal agencies, I guess, are the ones
that transmit those findings or make those findings and then
share them with us?
Ms. Shannon. The analysis that might be conducted by the
FSOC using those data--
Mr. Carney. Would be done by you, but then the agencies
themselves would issue those findings?
Ms. Shannon. We would support the FSOC and the member
agencies. We also are working to publish some of our research.
That research is obviously informed by the work that we are
doing to support the FSOC. Let me just point to one example.
Mr. Carney. I see my time has expired, so unless I am given
the okay from the Chair, you probably should--
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. And now,
someone who is doing a lot of good work on this issue of the
OFR, Mr. Canseco from Texas. Thank you for the work you are
doing.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Shannon, thank
you for being here today. The Office of Financial Research was
created by Dodd-Frank more than 20 months ago. Has the OFR
helped to prevent a financial crisis since that time? And, if
so, what was the nature of that potential crisis?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are working to stand up the
OFR, and the mission of the OFR obviously is to help assess
threats to financial stability.
Mr. Canseco. But let me interrupt you a second, please. Has
it prevented any crisis or any potential crisis in those 20
months?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, it is very hard for me to answer
the counterfactual. I think what we are doing is putting in
place the tools that we need to achieve our mission, and we are
already--
Mr. Canseco. So then, your answer is no?
Let me ask you this, how will the OFR know and, more
importantly, how will the public know when the agency has
played a hand in the prevention of an ongoing crisis? In other
words, what is the measure of success for this agency?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we have established the mission
of the OFR to support the FSOC and to provide research and
analysis on threats to financial stability. Our function is to
provide information, to provide data, to provide analysis to
support policymakers, to support market participants in
understanding and addressing the public--
Mr. Canseco. In other words, forgive me for interrupting
you, but in other words, you are only a data-gathering
institution, is that what I am hearing?
Ms. Shannon. The mission of the OFR is to--
Mr. Canseco. Gather data.
Ms. Shannon. Gather data, provide that data to FSOC
agencies, also to publish data and to perform research and
analysis. So we are a research organization. We provide data
services. Those are the key functions of the OFR.
Mr. Canseco. Dr. Berner is not here with us today. So do
you know if Dr. Berner has created any kind of performance
goals for the OFR?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are working right now on
establishing performance measures. As we mentioned in the
strategic framework that was published last month, the OFR, in
that strategic framework, established goals, established
implementation priorities for the organization for this year
and for the period ahead, and one of the things that we
mentioned in that strategic framework that we are working on
right now is performance measures.
Mr. Canseco. Good.
Ms. Shannon. We plan to have--
Mr. Canseco. Would you please ask if you and Dr. Berner can
directly report to my office--1339 Longworth--on how the OFR
plans to measure its success, and if you could provide it to us
in writing, please. And I would also like to offer it as part
of the record, if I may, once it is provided.
Chairman Neugebauer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you. Ms. Shannon, at the last hearing, I
asked Dr. Berner about what the OFR is doing to implement a
robust cost-benefit analysis on their proposed methods for
collecting data. Unfortunately, he did not provide specifics,
and as we have noted, the Treasury Department has refused to
provide him as a witness today for me to question him further.
So can you please elaborate on what specific methods are being
implemented for data collection to ensure cost-effectiveness?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I think the first priority is
that the OFR will only collect data when it is absolutely
necessary. The OFR recognizes and fully agrees with the
principle that we need to focus that data collection on our
mission. The only data that are necessary to assess threats to
financial stability and only the data that is not otherwise
available. And, again, I mentioned earlier that we are
currently focused on establishing a data inventory of data
available in FSOC agencies, purchased data, we have already
completed this portion, collected data, and also derived data.
And the intention there is to make sure that we don't
collect data that is not absolutely necessary. We are also very
focused on ensuring that whatever data we collect is tied to
the analytical needs related to threats to financial stability.
So I would just note that we agree fully with the notion that
we have to be very parsimonious in our data collection and that
that data collection needs to have a high benefit.
Mr. Canseco. What kind of benefits have you identified as a
result of these things that you just mentioned?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are still in the process of
putting together the data inventory. What we are doing is
making sure that we know what data exists. Another benefit of
this is that it is allowing us to work with other FSOC member
agencies so that they also are aware of what data is available.
I would mention that in the FSOC's data committee, the OFR has
been very actively working with other FSOC member agencies on
what data needs they have.
Mr. Canseco. I have one more question. My time is about to
run out, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. Okay.
Mr. Canseco. I want to know if the OFR has issued any
subpoenas to compel a financial institution to give data to the
OFR?
Ms. Shannon. I don't believe so.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now recognize the ranking member,
Mr. Capuano, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Shannon, do you
drive a car? Do you drive?
Ms. Shannon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. The last time you drove, did you put your seat
belt on?
Ms. Shannon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. Did it prevent you from having an accident?
Did it prevent you from dying that day?
Ms. Shannon. I can't answer that.
Mr. Capuano. You don't know, right? But you put the seat
belt on?
Ms. Shannon. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. Because you weren't sure you were going to get
in an accident? The last time you flew, did you go through
those metal detectors?
Ms. Shannon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. Did everybody go through those metal detectors
on that flight? Did it absolutely stop a terrorist attack on
that flight that day? You don't know, do you?
Ms. Shannon. That is correct.
Mr. Capuano. So what you do, you may never know. No one may
ever know if you actually prevent a bad occurrence. No one can
ever know if anybody ever prevents a bad occurrence; no police
officer, no firefighter, no emergency technician. When you get
asked an impossible question, it is impossible to answer it
except with ridiculous analogies like I just did.
I also wanted to submit for the record the strategic
framework of the Office of Financial Research that is online. I
know everybody has it, it has been referred to a bunch of
times, but I would like to put it in the official record,
without objection.
Chairman Neugebauer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Capuano. I have read it--well, I didn't read it; I
looked through it. It was very nice. I don't know, Ms. Shannon,
next time you do one of these updates, maybe you would be
better off putting more pages in, making it thicker, and
putting a glossy cover on it. Maybe that would make some people
satisfied. Maybe not. You would probably then get criticized
for spending too much time and wasting too much paper, I am not
sure of that, either.
I will tell you, though, I agree with one of my colleagues
when he said people who commit bad behavior should be jailed,
and that I actually think in this instance I totally agree with
his assessment, that not enough people have paid enough
consequences for the actions that they participated in in 2008
and other years. Do you have the authority under the statute to
place anybody in jail?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, the OFR does not have that
authority.
Mr. Capuano. No, I didn't think so. That is the Justice
Department that does that and others, and I would agree, I
totally agree, that I don't think that they have been strong
enough on their actions. I totally agree with that, but you are
not the right agency to ask that question. I would hope that as
you find, if you find wrongdoing, that you would submit it to
the appropriate agencies for their review. Is that a fair
assessment? Would that be in your responsibilities?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, absolutely, the OFR, as I said,
we are very dedicated to the objective of protecting data, we
think this is essential to achieving our mission, and we will
do whatever it takes to--
Mr. Capuano. So if you uncovered wrongdoing, you would send
it along to the appropriate investigative agency?
Ms. Shannon. Absolutely.
Mr. Capuano. That is what I thought. I will tell you that--
look, you are a new agency, you are just getting started, I
share the frustration of some that a lot of the things from
Dodd-Frank have taken so long to get going, I share that
frustration. Yet at the same time, it is impossible to blame
you specifically because I actually think it is along the line
and I would like to be further down the road as well. I am
looking forward to you being up and running. I happen to think
the collection and analysis of data is an important thing that
we should be doing. I really don't care if it is OFR or
somebody else doing it, but I do care deeply about the
potential for excessive data collection.
I think that is a very reasonable concern. I think that
many--I think everybody here shares that. I would like to know
from you, are you working on--do you already have a process if
some business gets a thousand requests for information from you
and more requests, the same requests from the Fed, and the same
requests from the OCC, and the same requests from OFR, again, I
think that is a very fair thing. I would like to know for a
minute, are you working together with other agencies to make
sure that the same questions, the same information is not
gathered by each of you independently, thereby causing
excessive cost and time to the private companies?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, thank you for asking. This is an
important question, and I am glad to have the opportunity to
address it. We do see an important part of our mission is to
help to support greater efficiencies in data collection across
FSOC agencies, including of the type that you mentioned. If we
do find in the data inventory that there are overlaps,
duplication of effort, this is something that we would work to
address.
Our work on data standards, I think, also is relevant to
this point. If there are specific data standards about how
certain items of data are reported, that would create
efficiencies, both for the regulatory community and also for
those reporting, and we are very focused on this, and we do
think that mission of helping to create efficiencies for
regulators, for financial market participants, is a crucial
part of what the OFR was set up to do.
Mr. Capuano. I thank you. As time goes on, I will tell you
that I think a lot of us will be keeping a close eye on that,
and we will be keeping a close eye on your budget, even though
we don't technically have any role in the matter. Let's be very
clear about it. But if you get to the point where we think you
are excessive, we will say so, and I will join them if I agree
with them even though I think your mission is important.
We are not there yet, obviously. I know you know that, but
I wanted to say it because so many people have been commenting
on the lack of some budgetary magic number, and I understand
that, but if you exceed some number that upsets us, that we
think is excessive, we will call you on it. If I am one of
them, I will join my colleagues in doing that. I know you know
that.
The same thing with the data collection. I guess I would
like to know, assuming I am a major company for which you are
seeking information, is there a process that I could follow to
say, hey, I just gave the same exact information to this other
agency, didn't you know that? And, by the way, I would like to
make a complaint because you are killing me on this data
request. Is there a process to follow by the companies or is it
simply left up to your judgment that you have asked too many
questions?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, this, again, is an important
question. It is something that we are working to build within
our organizational structure, resources within the OFR that are
dedicated to working with all of our stakeholders, with the
regulatory community, but also with the financial market
participants who are providing data to the FSOC and to the OFR
to help ensure that we understand their concerns, their needs,
and that the way that we are going about data collection is as
efficient as possible, and I think this is critical to what the
OFR was set up to do.
Mr. Capuano. I appreciate it, Ms. Shannon. When the time
comes, when you finalize this, I would really appreciate an
education, an update on it because I actually think it is
critically important. It is going to happen, there is no
question that somebody is going to say, we provided too much
data to too many people, the same data, and they are going to
come to us, and I would like to know that there is a process
whereby they should be following internally before they come to
us, and when that gets settled, not just your agency, it will
be other agencies as well, I would like to be updated on that
when it happens. Thank you very much, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for being reasonable on time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Renacci, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ms.
Shannon, for being here today. I have been listening to you. I
know you have said a couple things, and I am going to repeat
them. You said that the OFR's role is--you have an important
and critical mission. I have heard you say that 5 or 6 times.
The other thing I heard you say was there is an importance of
linking spending money to meet our goals, which are your goals,
and the strategic plan. You mentioned that to Mr. Fitzpatrick.
So I have a question for you, especially when it comes to
that, because I think when it comes to spending money, when it
is not your money it is a little easier, and one of our jobs up
here is really oversight of money being spent, and I think that
has to be a key to what we are talking about today. So you
would admit, though, that if you were giving somebody money,
you would want to know what it was being spent for, correct?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, it is absolutely essential that
the OFR is accountable for how it is spending money. We
completely agree with that.
Mr. Renacci. Okay. I have an email that is dated November
15th from Dr. Berner, and I wish he was here, although you were
copied on it, and you may have a copy of it, but it is where
your organization was asking for $29 million, and you basically
say that these amounts include a payment for the period July
10th through July 30th, we will continue to work with the board
to provide them detail. So you are asking for money. There is
not very much detail in that email.
Then I have another email dated November 23rd which says,
``Here is your $29 million.'' Now, it is kind of interesting
because as a taxpayer, which I am, you are, and everybody in
this room is, isn't it more important--shouldn't we know what
that $29 million is being spent for? And can you give me some
answers as to what--are we just asking for $29 million? Could
it be a trip to Vegas, what could it be? What are the things
that could be in that $29 million, and wouldn't it be better to
have the detail for that? Can you kind of give me some details
on that?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, thank you. The emails that you
reference were part of the materials, or a discussion between
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve about the transfer of
funds from the Fed. As you know, under the statute, the OFR is
financed through the Federal Reserve for--
Mr. Renacci. I understand. I don't want to go into the
details. I understand that. What are the details of the $29
million? That is what I want to know. And are they expenditures
you already made? Are they expenditures you are planning? Are
they contractual obligations? Just tell me what the details are
and how the process works to get $29 million because this
seems--if I am a taxpayer, I am not very happy with just the
process of asking without the details.
Ms. Shannon. That is right, Congressman, and I absolutely
agree, we need to have clear documentation on these requests,
and we do. These emails are part of a discussion, but there is
other documentation related to that request. There were also
meetings between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve about
these requests.
Mr. Renacci. My time is running out. Is there any detail
that supports the $29 million request?
Ms. Shannon. There are details.
Mr. Renacci. Specifically in writing?
Ms. Shannon. There are details, and we would be happy to
work with your office to provide you the information you need.
We also did provide in the testimony some background details on
this.
Mr. Renacci. Would you be willing to send me in the next--
as soon as possible, the details of the $29 million and
something that shows what the request was for?
Ms. Shannon. Absolutely. And I should mention that the
transfers are linked to the budget of the OFR, the published
budget of the OFR and--
Mr. Renacci. Look, I have been a business guy for 28 years,
I understand what you are saying, but really, if you are going
to ask for $29 million, that is not a drop in the bucket. We
need to know what it is, and that is what this oversight panel
is all about. We are trying to figure out what you are asking
for. The concern I have is you asked--you told Mr. Fitzpatrick
that you didn't even have a strategic plan. I understand you
have goals and missions, but you have to have a plan, and then
after you have a plan, you have a request for dollars to
implement that plan. I hear you don't have the plan to
implement, but yet you are asking for the dollars. It is
problematic.
Ms. Shannon. I just want to note that we do have a budget
in place, and that is the basis for this request. We do have a
strategic framework in place, and we are continuing to work to
elaborate on that further.
Mr. Renacci. All right. A number of us up here have talked
about this financial research fund report that was put out. You
are showing on October 1, 2012, that you are going to have 94
million, 374 dollars of unobligated balances, so the start of
the new year. Can you tell me a couple of answers to that?
Where is that coming from? I also know that 2 years after the
enactment of Dodd-Frank, you were supposed to refund the Fed
and fund yourself through assessments. So let's talk a little
bit about that. Where is the $94 million coming from in the
report? Is it going to be refunded to the Fed? Did it come from
assessments? There are a couple of questions there, if you
could answer.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am happy to explain the process
and how those numbers relate to the process. The OFR is funded
by the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Renacci. I understand the process. I am talking about
the $94 million, where did it come from? It is a document. Is
it Fed money that you are going to refund or is it assessments?
These are pretty simple questions.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are collecting money from the
Fed. We will utilize the funding that we have requested. Any
funding that is not utilized by July will be returned to the
Fed. Beginning in July we will be financed through
assessments--
Mr. Renacci. I understand that. How about the $94 million?
The question is really simple, what are you going to do with
the $94 million of, as you call it, unobligated balances?
Ms. Shannon. At the end of this fiscal year?
Mr. Renacci. End of this year, start of next year.
Ms. Shannon. One important point I should make is that the
fiscal year, the budget for the fiscal year does not align with
the period for the assessments. The assessment period will
begin in July of this year and cover a period--
Mr. Renacci. I understand that. I do understand the
process. I am just asking a really simple question about $94
million and what are you going to do with the $94 million. Are
there contractual obligations for it? You have not answered one
of those questions. Is there a contractual obligation? Is it an
amount you are going to refund? These are pretty simple
questions.
Ms. Shannon. The money that we collect through assessments
that is not obligated in Fiscal Year 2012 will be going towards
funding expenditures in Fiscal Year 2013. In that assessment
period, if we don't utilize any of those resources, they would
go to reduce the assessment in the period that follows. So in
each period, we are collecting the funding that we think we
need to cover, that we estimate we need to cover the expenses
for that assessment period, and if we--
Mr. Renacci. I have run so much out of time, and you are
going in--it would have been a really simple answer to say, we
know we have $94 million, we anticipate that so much is going
to be given back to the Fed. Those are the kind of answers I
think we are looking for. This is an oversight hearing. Tell us
where you are spending the money. The taxpayers in this country
want to hear those answers. They don't want to hear all the
policy and issues you are talking about. Thank you. I yield
back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. And now the
gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Pearce, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Shannon, I know
you feel like we are all kind of a little scratchy, and maybe
we are. Some of that scratchiness comes--I am reading an email
from Scott Alvarez. Do you know Scott Alvarez? It doesn't
matter if you know him or not. To George Madison from Scott
Alvarez: ``George, as we discussed the other day I have
authorized our payment folks to transfer $29 million to OFR to
cover expenses OFR and FSOC incur with the next quarter, so in
response to your request--it goes on down later--I appreciate
and will take you up on your offer to assemble the OFR folks
next week or so to help us get a better handle on it.''
Mr. Capuano. Will the gentleman yield for one second? I
apologize for interrupting.
Mr. Pearce. No, I won't yield. I appreciate and will take
you up on your offer to assemble OFR folks in the next week or
so to help us get a better handle on what amount--
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman won't yield, I
would like to have a point of order.
Mr. Pearce. No, I won't yield.
Mr. Capuano. I am just curious as to what has shown up on
the screen here. Is this something, is this a headline? It has
nothing to do with Mr. Pearce's time.
Mr. Pearce. This is a document that I have that I just want
it to be advertised that the Treasury has refused to make Dr.
Berner available. They refused to make him available. He is the
one who ought to be at this hearing today.
Mr. Capuano. So this is a commentary we can--
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Chairman, it is my time. I feel if the
gentleman will stand down, he can ask for his own time.
Mr. Capuano. This is a point of information. This is not--
this is a point of information. I am trying to figure out how
we use this.
Mr. Pearce. No, I am asking for that document to be up
here. It is one I had prepared, so I thank the gentleman, and I
will take my time back.
Mr. Capuano. This is a statement.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Chairman, if it is his time, let him speak.
If it is not his time, then I would ask you to--
Mr. Capuano. Point of information, Mr. Chairman. I am just
curious about the rules of the committee.
Chairman Neugebauer. I would ask both gentlemen to suspend
a minute. This is an exhibit that Mr. Pearce has. The rules of
the committee require that we distribute that.
Mr. Capuano. And it has not been distributed.
Chairman Neugebauer. It has not been distributed, but it is
being displayed for the members of the committee via obviously
the two screens there. So I guess in the spirit that we--
Mr. Capuano. I don't mind, Mr. Chairman, that is all I was
asking. I don't mind the gentleman making a point. I do mind,
when I see something on the screen and I have no idea what it
is, I do mind not having notice of it. I think that is fair and
reasonable. That is all. Actually, I think the gentleman has--
Mr. Pearce. I have no control of the screen.
Mr. Capuano. I know you don't.
Mr. Pearce. We asked for it to be displayed. I have no
control of the screen.
Mr. Capuano. That is why this wasn't directed at you.
Mr. Pearce. If you are going to run an instant replay, we
should put 4:07 back on the clock, that is when the gentleman's
objection started.
Chairman Neugebauer. I will give the gentleman time.
Mr. Pearce. All right. If I may resume, I appreciate and
will take you up on your offer to assemble the OFR folks in the
next week or so to help us get a better handle on what the
amount of those expenses are expected to be.
So we have this nice little buddy relationship between
George and Scott. By the way, enjoy the Thanksgiving holiday.
We have George and Scott just talking over an email, and we are
shifting taxpayer money around, you are able to tax
corporations without any oversight by the U.S. Congress. Our
Constitution is pretty clear, and so if we are a little
scratchy on our side, just understand it is because you are
conducting things that we feel like are completely
unconstitutional, I feel like they are completely
unconstitutional, and with a guy who has been parading around,
GSA all around the world the last few years, taking his wife
along at taxpayer expense, our constituents, you don't have to
answer those questions, ma'am, because you don't run for
office. You are sitting up here in this kind of isolated little
space requesting 29 million bucks for the next quarter, and,
yes, we will get everybody together and we will kind of run
those expenses up here some day, and we are going to want to
look at the way our Founding Fathers intended this to occur is
this body to appropriate, and they would bring you in here and
they would grill you across, and you would have to really prove
up on those.
Instead, we get about a quarter of a page email to transfer
29 million bucks, and that is offensive to the American people
because they see our Secret Service, GSA, they see the waste of
the taxpayer dollars; they see it.
So you ran a $122 million budget last year and then your
budget is roughly $60 million for contract services. What if we
are going to look at those, Ms. Shannon, what are those for?
What are you contracting $60 million out for?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, thank you. First, we absolutely
agree on the importance of accountability.
Mr. Pearce. Can you pull the microphone up a little closer?
We have a lot of people who would like to hear.
Ms. Shannon. Absolutely. Can you hear me?
Mr. Pearce. I just want to make sure everyone can hear you.
Ms. Shannon. Absolutely. We absolutely agree on the
importance of accountability.
Mr. Pearce. So that is $60 million?
Ms. Shannon. And just to clarify, the email exchange that
you pointed to--
Mr. Pearce. No, no, I am not asking about the email
exchange, you can come back next week and talk about the email.
I am asking about the $60 million that is in your budget for
contract services.
Ms. Shannon. And I am happy to answer that. The contracting
that we are doing right now falls into two categories, two main
categories. First, the OFR receives certain services from the
Treasury, from the Bureau of Public Debt, and also from the
OCC.
Mr. Pearce. What kind of services?
Ms. Shannon. On the implementation of our operational
activities, human resources, financial management, procurement.
These are obviously crucial issues for our stand-up. These are
things that we expect to continue. We are using the efficiency
of operations that are--
Mr. Pearce. So you are contracting back with the
government?
Ms. Shannon. So we are contracting--
Mr. Pearce. I really do need to move on if you don't mind.
So you are assessing, you had said in your document in your
presentation, that you are trying to assess the threats to
financial stability. If you were going to give me the greatest
threat to financial security, stability, I am sorry, what would
you--you are the COO. What would you say the greatest threat
is?
Ms. Shannon. So, Congressman--
Mr. Pearce. Yes, to the financial stability. You are the
COO, you are the one who calls the plays. What is the greatest
threat to financial stability that we face?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, in my position as COO, just to
clarify, I am in charge of--
Mr. Pearce. No, just give me a one-word answer. What is the
greatest threat we face?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I don't--I think it--
Mr. Pearce. Okay, so we hired a COO who can't put it into
one word. I think one of the greatest threats, for instance, if
you had me drawing your salary and pulling your job, I think
one of the greatest threats is that we have allowed some of the
financial institutions to build up a 40-to-1 leverage ratio.
That sunk Lehman Brothers, and it should have sunk several
others. But we have a COO who can't call the plays.
You can't tell me in one word what you think the greatest
financial risk is, and you are hiring all the people who are
supposed to be putting this in place. So you spent $122 million
last year with no performance measure in place, and you are
assembling a team without knowing exactly what the goal is. If
a coach wants to have a team that is a passing team, he
obviously needs a passer and some people to catch the ball. And
if he hires all running backs, then he probably isn't going to
do that, and you have--you can't tell me where the goal line
is.
I will guarantee you one of the greatest threats is that
leverage ratio, and I wonder how we are building a team without
a COO who can state in one word what she believes is the
greatest risk to financial stability that we face.
If you find a little bit of testiness coming from this side
of the committee, understand it is because we think you are
walking past the Constitution, whistling past the graveyard,
and you are also putting a team in place without any
understanding of where you want to go and without any
performance measures in place, and you also, in your own words,
you can't state, in your view, what the greatest risk to
financial stability in the country is, and you are tasked with
that job. That maybe is why some of us are just a little bit
testy on this side. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman, and now the
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Fincher, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ms.
Shannon, for being here today. How long have you worked for the
OFR? How long have you been with the Office?
Ms. Shannon. I have been with the Office since July of last
year.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. What is your salary?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am paid within the pay bands of
the OFR, I am in a management position within the OFR. I am
paid within the pay band 8 of the OFR.
Mr. Fincher. And what is that?
Ms. Shannon. The band extends from $136,000 to $247,000.
The bands in the OFR were established consistent with the
statute to be FIRREA comparable, and so the way that the OFR
set up its salary structure was to look at the salary
structures within other organizations that are part of the
FIRREA, the OCC specifically, and we worked on establishing
bands that were consistent with the legislative requirements.
Mr. Fincher. So it was $136,000 to $247,000. Would you be
on the lower end or the higher end of that scale?
Ms. Shannon. I am within that band, and, again, this is
consistent with what the statute establishes for the way that
the OFR is required to set its pay.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. During the July 14th hearing of last
year, I asked whether there is a cap on salaries within the
OFR. Dr. Berner testified that OFR has set a salary guideline,
a set of salary guidelines that are consistent with the pay
scale for other Federal financial regulators, and he would
provide the salary cap to the subcommittee. We haven't received
that yet. And so, do you have the cap for the employees?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are happy to make that
information available about the pay bands within the OFR and
the pay scales within the OFR. I had understood that we had
provided that information, but we would be happy to provide
that information if you don't have it.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. Following up with my colleague Mr.
Pearce, when he was talking about the contractual services,
have the contracts been subject to competitive bidding?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we do follow Federal regulation,
and in general, yes, the contracts have been subject to
competitive bidding.
Mr. Fincher. All of them?
Ms. Shannon. There has been, I think, and I can check this,
I think on some of the data procurement, we have done some sole
source contracting, and in all cases, have been doing so
consistent with Federal regulations for that kind of
contracting.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. Can you get us a detailed copy, the
subcommittee, on all the contracts that have been bid, if all
of them have?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are happy to provide you the
information you need.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you. And then another question: Have you
ever owned your own business?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, no, I haven't.
Mr. Fincher. Okay, all right. That is all. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. Are there any
other Members who would like a follow-up? Just Mr. Posey?
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, just momentarily. Ms.
Shannon, I am a little bit chagrined that when the Congressman
asked you what your salary was, you refused to tell him.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I didn't refuse. I am paid within
the OFR salary band.
Mr. Posey. He didn't ask you what your salary range or band
was, he asked you how much you made. It is no big deal. It
ought to be a matter of public record. I just think you would
be straightforward enough to tell him exactly what it is.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am within the bands of the OFR,
the band-aid of the OFR.
Mr. Posey. I can understand dodging a lot of questions, but
I don't see what the harm is in telling a Member of Congress
who asks you how much you are paid just a straight answer. Do
you not know how much you are paid?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am paid within that band, and--
Mr. Posey. That is like the Fifth Amendment.
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, would you be prepared to
furnish that to--rather than doing it in a public space here--
Mr. Posey?
Mr. Posey. Mr. Chairman, I don't even care about it. I just
care that she refused to answer the gentleman's question.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I believe I have answered the
question. I am happy to provide any additional information
about how we set salary structures within the OFR.
Chairman Neugebauer. I think he asked you a direct
question, and I think the pinch is that you didn't answer the
question.
Mr. Ellison?
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a follow-up on
the point raised by the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, not
this last round but the one before, and I agree that there must
be consequences for bad behavior, and some people should go to
jail if that rises to the level of criminal conduct for the
subprime fraudulent activity. Today, there are about 325 FBI
agents pursuing almost 100,000 cases of mortgage fraud, and
that is why I am sort of wondering why--I am actually at a loss
to see how the OFR can be defunded by this committee. It can be
seen as just creating, I guess the term ``lobbying machine''
was used in connection with OFR. I can't really see that if our
goal is to protect people.
Here is my question: To assess the risk gaps you
identified, do you have the appropriate level of independence
to achieve your goals?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, under the statute, the OFR has
certain authorities and certain responsibilities, a confirmed
Director of the OFR will have certain authorities to conduct
the mission of the Office. We are working very hard to build
the operations of the Office, and we think that we have the
tools we need to meet that mission, and we are continuing to
make progress in doing so.
Mr. Ellison. Just a quick follow-up. And I also just want
to say that I can't escape the fact that our Nation was brought
to the brink of financial collapse in October 2008. That is
what brought us to the moment where we had to legislate to
create your agency, and the fact that so much of the
questioning has to do with how much you are paid, I am curious
to know, I was waiting for somebody to ask you what kind of car
you drive or what kind of seats you have on your bathroom
toilets.
It gets crazy after a point. The real issue is, how are we
going to protect the American financial system and does the
FSOC need accurate data or not, and is your agency positioning
itself to provide the data and the analysis that is needed?
That is the issue for me. I guess that is not really a
question, it is just my reaction to some of the things that
were offered in the hearing today.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Fincher?
Mr. Fincher. Yes, let me just say something in response to
my colleague, Mr. Ellison. I don't mean to offend you, Ms.
Shannon, or my colleagues on the other side of the aisle, but
this is taxpayer money, and when people back home see that this
is happening and see that, with all due respect, you won't
answer the question about how much money you make,
specifically. When is the last time you had a pay raise, would
you answer that?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I have been in the OFR for 9
months, and I haven't received a pay raise since I have been in
the OFR.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. The perception from the general public
when they see this, it just upsets them, and with all due
respect, I don't work for the President, for the Speaker, or
for the Chairman. I work for my district back home, and they
are really sick and tired of this, and so it is just
frustrating. I don't understand why you won't just tell me how
much money you make, but at the same time you see, no offense
to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle, but this is
their money, it is not ours. I yield back.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Neugebauer. Just a minute, I think Mr. Pearce--
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I could kind of
follow along on that. The Treasury Secretary claims there is
going to be transparency in accountability and transparency and
says that we post all the salaries--you are government workers,
aren't you? Are you a government agency?
Ms. Shannon. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Pearce. That is what it comes down to. It has little to
do with what you actually make; it has to do with the
transparency. I know my friend from Minnesota really doesn't
think that is a part of transparency, but maybe we do, and
maybe it is just a different point of view there. Are you
familiar with--let me go to another question. I will come to
the familiarity with--
So you said that you want to fill in the gaps of
information. Isn't that kind of what you said, gaps of data?
Ms. Shannon. Data gaps related to assessing--
Mr. Pearce. Yes, data gaps related, that is your function,
right? You have some data available and some gaps in the data.
So what--can you identify those gaps in the data, what is not
available?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are working now to--
Mr. Pearce. So, again, you tell me the answer is no. It
says in your first paragraph, we are beginning to deliver on
our data- and research-related mandates, and yet you can't give
me one specific. You can't tell me what the risks to financial
security are, and you can't tell me what the gaps are, and you
are building a team to measure stuff that you can't tell either
component of, and we just sit up here and say we have no
control, it is supposed to come through an appropriating
committee who could defund you if you can't provide these
things. So it does get a little bit scratchy.
Are you familiar with long-term capital?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, to answer your question, we are
beginning to deliver on our--
Mr. Pearce. No, no, but you can't give me any of those
specifics today. Could you provide them sometime in the next
week or so?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are happy to answer your
questions. I would be happy to answer your question as well if
you would permit me.
Mr. Pearce. So just itemize the data gaps that you see that
we ought to be filling up. I don't want to hear that we are
getting around to it, and I don't want to hear that because I
have already heard that in every other answer, but if you have
1, 2, 3, these are the data gaps that we are trying to figure
out how to assess, that would be something I would consider
significant, but if you can't answer 1, 2, 3, and fill in the
blanks, then I am not much interested in hearing the circuitous
discussion that you are having on every other question, ma'am.
So if you have the 1, 2, 3, go. If you don't, then don't go.
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, we are inventorying the data that
is in the FSOC now, we are going to be looking at that data,
and we are going to be looking at what additional data we need
to assess threats to financial stability.
Mr. Pearce. But I don't hear any gaps there, I don't hear
you identifying any gaps. So thank you very much on that.
Now I will go back to my other question, the last question
is are you familiar with long-term capital?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I am familiar with--
Mr. Pearce. So long-term capital--Mr. Ellison says that we
are trying to fill a gap that was created by 2008. Long-term
capital almost broke our financial system about 5 years before,
and so we didn't respond to long-term capital at all. We just
bailed them out. Mr. Greenspan went and took a billion dollars
from several of the different corporations and bought the
assets up. So it is not like the government didn't know we were
in deep distress long before 2008.
And so, again, part of the friction from this side is that
we see a bureaucracy that is created out of thin air to do
something that really can't tell us much about what it is
doing, it spent $122 million last year building a team without
any performance specifics and without any taxpayer control and
without any transparency, and people get a little frustrated
with it. That is all that is going on here today.
From my point, I am watching that seething anger toward the
GSA people and towards the people who are running agencies who
won't answer questions in front of committees, and I want that
seething anger to continue because they are getting frustrated
with agencies that are totally unresponsive and are killing
businesses that are close to them, and they see no purpose in
it. And so that is the reason I ask questions. I don't think I
am going to get an answer when I come here, but I ask it so
that the people out there watching feed that understanding of
just how convoluted Washington has become. I will yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Capuano is
recognized.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe I have
something I want to put up on the screen. There it is. That is
my political statement for the week, Mr. Chairman. I only put
that up because, look, I want to be very clear. I believe that
our offices have worked very cooperatively together for the
last year and a half, and I enjoy working with you. I think
today's hearing asks some serious questions. I think most of
the questions that have been asked are reasonable and fair,
some tough, some not. I think some of them are kind of
ridiculous, but in general, I think it is a good thing that we
are having this hearing and keeping an eye on what they are
doing.
However--whoever is the technology can take that nonsense
down because the truth is I only did it to make the point. The
point is when you put something up on the screen that is
unattributed, it looks like official policy of this committee,
and all I want is if somebody wants to make a statement and
publicize it, go ahead and do it, put your name on it so
everybody knows it is your opinion, not the opinion of this
committee. So that is point number one.
Point number two, as far as your salary, Ms. Shannon, look,
I don't really mind one way or the other. What I do mind is
the, and I don't think it happened until later on, whenever we
talk about our salaries in public life, nobody likes whatever
we get paid, if you get paid 30 cents, some people think it is
too much. If you don't-- I hope you do provide the information
later on, the specific detail because, fine, if somebody wants
to publicize your information, they can get it anyway, they can
get mine. I don't like putting mine out there, either. I file a
document every year to tell them my whole family's income, more
stuff about me than my proctologist knows, but so be it.
I chose to be here. It is public rule, and here we are. You
have to do the same thing. At the same time in a public
hearing, I do think it is inappropriate to necessarily ask that
question.
I guess what I am saying is, I want to be clear, the
differences I have had with today's hearing are not a general
thing. I actually think it is good. I share 95 percent of the
questions that are here and the concerns about them. I do share
the concerns about how much money you are spending, I do share
the concerns about public disclosure of them, and I do think
that that time will come, and if it is appropriate I may join
my colleagues in saying it is too much.
I might join them if I knew your salary saying you get paid
too much. I don't know. But the bottom line is here, we are
here today, and I think most of us have done it, to be
responsible to our constituents, and our job in Congress is to
oversee the things we have created. OFR is one of them. And I
think that today has been a good opportunity to ask questions.
There will be more as you go along, and you know that, I know
that, we all know that, and I am looking forward to having a
more thoughtful discussion in the future when we have more to
ask, when Dr. Berner is confirmed, when you file the first
annual report, when you have a more thorough strategic plan,
and, again, I don't mind differences of opinion. I know some
people don't like the creation of your agency, and as I said
from the beginning, I don't think the creation of your agency
was good, bad or indifferent, but somebody had to do it. If it
wasn't going to be you, it could have been somebody else, but
the way Congress decided in our convoluted way, and it is not
newly convoluted, it has been convoluted since day one, so in
our convoluted way, we came up with a new agency because
whatever the thousand reasons were. So be it.
You have an important job to do, you know it. I hope that
your agency does it. I believe, I hope that you will take the
job seriously, and as time goes forward, we will have you or
Dr. Berner or whoever back at a later time to ask more
detailed, thoughtful information, and I thank you for today,
and I thank the chairman for his indulgences.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Neugebauer. One minute.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When I got here, a
senior Member told me, ``The thing that is going to frustrate
you the most in committee is when the bureaucrats come in here
and they will prove that they are smarter than you are and that
they run this institution and you don't, they will refuse to
give you a yes-or-no answer, they will dodge.'' And, you know,
it is absolutely true; that has been my biggest disappointment.
When the gentleman from Massachusetts asked the 10 biggest
bankers in this country how much they made a year and what
their bonuses were, they didn't have to tell him.
Mr. Capuano. I didn't ask that question.
Mr. Posey. But they did. They weren't under oath. They
didn't have to tell him, but they did. A condescending attitude
of evasiveness and arrogance and defiance is what fuels the
public distrust in this process. Sure, Congress does a lot of
things to prove they shouldn't be trusted, and so do others,
but a blatant, arrogant, defiant, evasive attitude makes it
even worse, and given the times that we are in, when we are
seeing the excesses of the GSA, we are seeing the taxpayers'
money squandered, I just don't think it is wise to refuse to
answer the gentleman's simple question when the agency flag-
waving statement is, ``We recognize the need for
transparency.''
The President said something to the effect of on a YouTube
video I saw recently that the only people who don't want
transparency are people who have something to hide, and so when
you refuse to answer a simple question, everybody up here has
to immediately wonder why. We will have constituents say, why
wouldn't that lady tell you how much she made? She is a Federal
employee. We know how much you make, we know how much the
President makes. Why would somebody refuse to answer the
gentleman's simple question? We know how much members of the
private sector who come in here make, and they are not that
defiant, that arrogant, and that evasive, and so I am kind of
at a loss as to what to tell them, and if any of the Members
have any advice on how you would respond to something like
that, I would kind of like to know it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. I just have a
quick follow-up. Ms. Shannon, you and I had a dialogue when I
was asking questions, and then I believe Mr. Posey pointed out
that Dr. Berner said when he testified in July, ``I am not
aware that there is a statutory limit.'' Do you believe there
is a statutory limit on how much the agency can spend? Dr.
Berner said there wasn't. Do you agree with his statement?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, I understand there are controls
established within the statute for the spending of the OFR. We
are--under the budget of the OFR, it must be tied to achieving
the mission, it has to be, we are accountable to oversight.
Chairman Neugebauer. But basically, Dr. Berner said that
there is no statutory limit. Do you agree with that statement,
yes or no?
Ms. Shannon. Congressman, again, I think there are controls
within the statute.
Chairman Neugebauer. Ms. Shannon, I want to say that your
answer is no, that you don't agree with Dr. Berner's statement,
then, all right? That is my assumption. I am going to assume
that you disagree with Dr. Berner, that you don't believe there
is, because obviously you are not answering the question, so I
am going to assume it is no.
I know you are going to be disappointed, but we are going
to close out the hearing. We very much appreciate you coming
and testifying. Again, I think we were extremely disappointed,
obviously, that Dr. Berner did not come.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to this
witness and to place her responses in the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:38 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 19, 2012

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


