- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO ADDRESS THE NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES OF THE DODD-FRANK WHISTLEBLOWER PROVISIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO ADDRESS

THE NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES OF THE

DODD-FRANK WHISTLEBLOWER PROVISIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS AND

GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 11, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-29

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-867                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises

SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey, Chairman

DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona, Vice      MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
PETER T. KING, New York              GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              AL GREEN, Texas
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 11, 2011.................................................     1
Appendix:
May 11, 2011.................................................    31

WITNESSES
Wednesday, May 11, 2011

Daly, Ken, President and CEO, National Association of Corporate
Directors (NACD)...............................................     9
Kueppers, Robert J., Deputy Chief Executive Officer, Deloitte LLP     5
Narine, Marcia, on behalf of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce........     6
Rapp, Geoffrey Christopher, Professor of Law, University of
Toledo College of Law..........................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Daly, Kenneth................................................    32
Kueppers, Robert J...........................................    42
Narine, Marcia...............................................    50
Rapp, Geoffrey Christopher...................................    57

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Garrett, Hon. Scott:
Written statement of Darla C. Stuckey, Senior Vice President-
Policy & Advocacy, Society of Corporate Secretaries and
Governance Professionals...................................    64
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Grimm legislative proposal (discussion draft)................    72

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO ADDRESS

THE NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES OF THE

DODD-FRANK WHISTLEBLOWER PROVISIONS

----------

Wednesday, May 11, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and
Government Sponsored Enterprises,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:24 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Scott Garrett
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Garrett, Schweikert,
Royce, Biggert, Posey, Hayworth, Hurt, Grimm, Stivers; Waters,
Ackerman, Sherman, Maloney, and Green.
Chairman Garrett. Good afternoon. The Capital Markets
Subcommittee will come to order.
Thank you to the panel for waiting through our votes and
what have you that we had before. We will begin today with our
opening statements.
I will yield myself 3 minutes. And then, after opening
statements, we will hear from the panel.
So, first of all, I want to thank the panel of witnesses
for joining us all today to offer their thoughts and input on
the whistleblower provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, as well as
the SEC's proposed rulemaking to implement some of those
provisions.
It is appropriate that we convene this hearing today to
have a discussion about the whistleblower provisions,
appropriate in a better-late-than-never kind of way.
What would have been more appropriate is if this
subcommittee, and actually the full House Financial Services
Committee, had prior to this a full and robust discussion about
the potential adjustments to the SEC whistleblower program. And
if they had done that before the provisions were signed into
law.
Unfortunately, too much of the Dodd-Frank Act was
implemented in a way that we have here today: rushed to meet a
political deadline; passed to check off a long-standing agenda
of a certain constituency, rather than to address issues that
actually contributed to the cause of the financial crisis; and
not enough of a thoughtful analysis on some of the unintended
consequences that might arise from certain policies in that
bill.
So, the goal of providing an environment where
whistleblowers can be most effective in helping to right the
wrongs and where they have proper safeguards is a laudable one.
The details of writing into law the proper incentives and rules
to create such an environment, however, are very important.
We must be careful not to do more harm than good. It is
always the rule.
Several of our witnesses here today, as well as scores of
others who have participated in the comment letter process to
the SEC, have raised concerns about the unintended consequences
of the Dodd-Frank whistleblower rules.
Foremost among those concerns are the following:
First, will the incentive structure created by the Dodd-
Frank provisions exacerbate violations by encouraging them to
fester and become more serious problems over time?
Second, does the legislation and the proposed rulemaking
allow those complicit in violations to not only--this is
important--escape punishment, but potentially receive massive
rewards in spite of their own malfeasance?
Third, if internal compliance programs are bypassed, isn't
good corporate citizenship discouraged, and won't there be
greater likelihood that companies will have less accurate
financial statements and that companies will need to restate
those financials upon which investors had already made reliance
upon?
So, I am pleased that one of our freshmen here, Congressman
Michael Grimm, has put forward a discussion draft of
legislative proposals meant to address some of these concerns.
Having this proposal in front of the subcommittee today will
basically enhance the discussion and lead to a more positive
outcome to the efforts of this Congress and to the SEC and to
their whistleblower issues.
So once again, I would say thank you to the witnesses for
the testimony we are going to receive, and I look forward to a
full discussion on this issue.
And with that, I yield to the ranking member of the
subcommittee.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
Under the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress recognized that robust
whistleblower protection is critical to preventing another
financial crisis.
Prior to Dodd-Frank, the inducements for whistleblowers to
step forward were inadequate when balanced against the
tremendous countervailing social and economic disincentives.
Contrary to some of my colleagues on the opposite side of
the aisle, I don't believe that whistleblowers are eager to run
to the SEC and put their jobs, their 401(k)s, and sometimes
even their friendships on the line. Significant evidence
suggests that whistleblowers are often fired, quit under
duress, or are demoted.
Additionally, whistleblowers are often blacklisted from
working in the industry and experience severe social ostracism
and personal hardship.
The bounties and systems were set up on the Dodd-Frank
legislature precisely to combat these tremendous disincentives.
And it is important to note that we did not set up these
systems merely to provide payout to whistleblowers for the sake
they were examined. In fact, we set up these systems to help
empower the SEC.
Wall Street's problem would be to recover money owed to
taxpayers.
Additionally, this bill would further weaken Dodd-Frank by
making bounties paid by the SEC to whistleblowers discretionary
rather than mandatory. I think that would amount to a step
backward.
Between 1988 and 2000, the SEC had the authority to pay
bounties under the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Act and
paid just $160,000 to 5 whistleblowers over that entire period.
And ironically, I should note that one of the criticisms of the
whistleblower award provisions in Dodd-Frank is that it will
cause the SEC to be overwhelmed with debts from individuals
trying to collect big rewards.
I would have great sympathy for this argument if the same
folks who are making it were also trying to cut the funding the
Commission needs to do its job.
I would also say that I am deeply concerned with corporate
crimes being treated less seriously than street crimes. For
instance, when in comes to street crime, investigators are
required to first alert the subject of the investigation. Why
should corporate crime be held to a lower standard?
Lastly, I would point out that yesterday, Senator Charles
Grassley of Iowa issued a press release saying that the SEC's
proposed rule of whistle-blowing is too weak. He is deeply
concerned that House Republicans will try to weaken Dodd-Frank
further in this legislative draft.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Garrett. And the gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from California?
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. For 2 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
We have had many failures at the SEC over the years. And
despite hearing from people like Harry Markopolos about what he
called the ``overlawyered culture,'' the investigative
ineptitude that was part of the culture at the SEC, despite
this, last year we had a Dodd-Frank bill that rewarded the SEC
with additional authority without looking at the fundamental
problems within that agency.
And for nearly a decade--I am just thinking about the
conversations we had here with Mr. Markopolos, actually over a
decade--he tried to bring the Madoff case to the attention of
the SEC, but he was repeatedly turned away. Clearly, something
needs to change.
And while not nearly enough to solve the SEC's problems,
the Office of the Whistleblower was simply a small step
developed, by the way, by Mr. Markopolos, pushed by us here in
an effort to hold the SEC more accountable. It is unfortunate
that a broader effort to reform this agency was not undertaken,
but I hope that Congress can take up this cause of reforming
the SEC.
Now, the focus of this hearing is with respect to the other
provisions within the whistleblower section of Dodd-Frank, most
notably, the whistleblower reward program.
Because of the skewed incentives, greater wrongdoing and
less timely reporting by whistleblowers may be the end result
of the way that thing is set up. So I commend Mr. Grimm and the
chairman here for their work to correct this provision and make
it efficient and workable.
And I look forward to today's hearing.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from New York for 2 minutes.
Mr. Ackerman. I don't know a lot of things about a lot of
things. Maybe it is just because I am from New York.
Chairman Garrett. That is true.
Mr. Ackerman. But what I do know is that if you are going
to turn on the mob, you shouldn't first tell the mob.
Chairman Garrett. And the gentleman yields back the
remainder of his time.
The other gentleman from New York for 2 minutes.
Mr. Grimm. First of all, I want to thank Chairman Garrett
for holding this hearing, and thank our witnesses for
testifying about ways to improve the whistleblower provisions
of Dodd-Frank.
In response to accounting scandals, early in the last
decade, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. The Act
required, among other things, a robust internal reporting
system for whistleblowers to anonymously report suspected
misconduct occurring in their company.
These systems were set up at considerable cost. Internal
reporting systems serve the valuable purpose of assisting the
firm in detecting fraud early and putting a stop to it before
it can spiral out of control.
The whistleblower provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act put
these internal reporting systems in jeopardy of becoming
obsolete.
By creating a system where whistleblowers can get a
guaranteed reward by bypassing internal reporting systems and
going directly to the SEC, the Dodd-Frank Act disincentivizes
employees from reporting suspected fraud internally. This could
lead to long delays in fraud detection that will result in the
cost of fraud increasing and depleting shareholder value.
While we all recognize the important role whistleblowers
can play in helping to protect investors from fraud, we must
ensure that we do not allow the pendulum to swing too far, that
laws and regulations inhibit the ability of the honest firms to
quickly weed out a dishonest employee.
That is why I present the draft legislation for
consideration today that I believe will bring balance back to
the process of fraud detection.
I look forward to hearing the witnesses' comments on this
important topic and I yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. And with that, we now can turn to our
panel. Each member of the panel will have 5 minutes. Their
complete statements have been made a part of the record and we
appreciate the panelists' indulgence for having to wait a
little bit.
Mr. Kueppers, for 5 minutes?

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. KUEPPERS, DEPUTY CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, DELOITTE LLP

Mr. Kueppers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. And as always, pull your microphone as
close as you can so it doesn't mess up your papers.
Mr. Kueppers. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. And you are all set.
Mr. Kueppers. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to
share my views on the whistleblower provisions of the Dodd-
Frank Act.
I am appearing on behalf of Deloitte LLP, one of the
largest accounting and professional services firms, as well as,
more broadly, a member of the public company auditing
profession.
I have 35 years experience in the auditing profession, all
with Deloitte or its predecessors, with two breaks in service:
one time when I worked at the SEC; and another time when I
served as CFO of an SEC reporting company.
First, I would like to emphasize that, because we value the
integrity of financial reporting and are committed to investor
protection through the provision of high-quality audits, we
support efforts to help ensure strong controls are in place,
both to deter and to detect any wrongdoing. We also respect the
important role that a robust system of enforcement plays in
maintaining public and investor confidence in the financial
markets.
My comments support implementation of a whistleblower
program in a way that will help maintain, rather than
circumvent, the robust systems in place at most public
companies.
Congress and the SEC have appropriately fostered these
systems in recent years, principally, as a result of Section
301 of Sarbanes-Oxley almost 10 years ago.
I will address the potential impact of the proposed
whistleblower rules on the efficacy of public companies'
internal compliance procedures. There is a risk that investors
could be harmed if reporting companies are unaware that a
whistleblower has come forward.
We are concerned that the rules proposed by the SEC could
create a monetary incentive for whistleblowers to bypass
companies established in effect of internal compliance
mechanisms.
A rule that rewards whistleblowers who disregard internal
compliance procedures might result in the unintended
consequences of less accurate financial statements.
In this proposed rule, the SEC appropriately seeks to
reassure whistleblowers that they will not lose their first-in-
line status if they report to the company. While that is
helpful, we believe that these measures will not be sufficient.
And, if whistleblowers report their information directly and
only to the SEC, the opportunity for management, audit
committees, and external auditors to ensure accurate financial
reporting may be delayed or even lost unless allocations are
promptly communicated to companies as they become known.
Let me give you an example. Consider a situation where an
employee sees a problem late in the fourth quarter of the year
but chooses to go around internal channels and report his or
her concerns only to the SEC. That creates a risk that the
report would not be timely reviewed by the SEC staff or even
brought to the attention of company management before year-end
results are announced or before financial statements are
released. As a result, the company may have to restate those
errant financials after investors have already relied upon
them.
In this example, the proposed rules would not serve the
interest of the very investors that the rules are intended to
protect.
Even if the SEC's intent is to notify companies of
whistleblower allegations promptly, the potential increase in
volume of reports may make choosing that objective difficult
for the SEC staff.
I note that if a whistleblower does fear retaliation, the
Dodd-Frank Act has already taken that into consideration by
including very strong anti-retaliation provisions. Companys'
whistleblower hotlines and another means of confidential
reporting are designed to detect and deter securities fraud and
other violations.
Such controls are considered what we call entity-level
controls and are among the very few controls that can be
effective in reducing the risk that management could override
these other internal controls.
So if the new whistleblower program resulted in a shift,
that is if employees no longer reported internally, management
and external auditors may not be able to conclude that such
controls are effective.
In light of these concerns, we believe that the SEC's
whistleblower program should require as a condition of
eligibility to receive a monetary award that whistleblowers
first report their concerns through company-sponsored complaint
and reporting procedures.
If the SEC determines that it will not make internal
reporting a requirement for eligibility, we think that at a
minimum, it should require what I will call concurrence of
mission to the company and to the SEC.
And finally, we appreciate the fact that the SEC has
indicated its willingness to consider the existence and expense
of a whistleblower's internal reporting as one of several
permissible considerations in making an award. However, we
don't believe that the standard which does not even require
that the SEC do this will be strong enough to countervail the
motivation through reports of the SEC first.
Thank you for allowing me to make my statement here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kueppers can be found on
page 42 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Narine?

STATEMENT OF MARCIA NARINE, ON BEHALF OF THE U.S. CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE

Ms. Narine. Good afternoon, Chairman Garrett, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the subcommittee. My name is
Marcia Narine, and I am here on behalf of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce.
Until May 1, 2011, I served as the vice president of global
compliance and business standards, deputy general counsel, and
chief privacy officer of Ryder, a Fortune 500 global
transportation and supply chain management solutions company
serving 28,000 employees worldwide. Prior to that role, I spent
almost 18 months as the group director of human resources for
Ryder's supply chain solutions division. I began my career at
Ryder in 1999.
Before joining Ryder, I worked at two law firms, and prior
to that I worked for Supreme Court New Jersey Justice
Garibaldi.
I left Ryder to pursue my career as an academic, where I
plan to write on corporate governance and compliance issues.
And the basis of my testimony stems in large part from my
experience at Ryder establishing its global compliance program
under the direction of its board, CEO, and two general
counsels.
I have also deposed and prepared a number of witnesses,
spoken to people who consider themselves to be whistleblowers,
and developed training programs and policies.
The views expressed are entirely my own and should not be
attributed to any of my former employers.
There are at least five ways in which this legislation will
adversely affect compliance programs.
First, the bill creates a presumption that all companies
operate at the lowest possible level of ethical and illegal
behavior and provides every incentive for the whistleblower to
bypass existing compliance programs.
Treating all companies like criminals and assuming that we
will all retaliate and that we will all destroy documents or
shred documents if a whistleblower brings us a tip is wrong and
unfair.
Under the current legislation, employees can go straight to
the SEC to report their suspicions without even alleging that
the existing company reporting mechanism is not a viable,
functioning, credible or legitimate option.
Law-abiding companies which have spent years and millions
of dollars investing in compliance programs and building strong
ethical cultures since the Federal sentencing guidelines were
enacted are being penalized because the SEC failed to do its
job and failed to pay attention to the whistleblower who
repeatedly brought information to them regarding--the
sentencing guidelines have steps for an effective compliance
program. That is what boards of directors look at when they
assess compliance programs under their responsibilities.
I have oversight over compliance programs. And as a
compliance officer, my role is to conduct risk assessments,
develop policies, travel the world conducting training,
interviewing employees, and interviewing our agents to make
sure that our liability is not going to be affected, and
raising awareness.
When I first started traveling the world, we were told in
many countries that no employee would ever call a hotline. They
prefer to go to regulators.
So after years when we started getting calls in the
hotlines from Brazil, China, and Asia, we started to know that
our compliance program was working. That is an effective
compliance program.
Programs like Dodd-Frank which tell people you don't need
to call the hotline erodes the hard work that companies have
been doing.
Not every company does this or companies that follow the
sentencing guidelines. This is the kind of work that we do
every day. Dodd-Frank is assuming that no company does this.
Those companies that retaliate against employees or shred
documents need to be punished because those are the companies
that we use as examples to tell our executive employees you
will go to jail, you are penalized under Sarbanes-Oxley, you
are penalized under the law if you retaliate against employees
or if you shred documents.
Those are the examples that we point to, but you should not
assume that all companies are bad and all companies break the
law.
And the 2010 revisions of the sentencing guidelines provide
important clarifications and important direction for companies
which Dodd-Frank now turns on its head. The 2010 sentencing
guidelines tell companies that you will continue to get credit
from the Department of Justice sentencing judges if you
voluntarily disclose to the government after you find out
yourself internally that there has been malfeasance and
wrongdoing. What the SEC is doing with Dodd-Frank is saying,
``Don't bother to use internal compliance program; come
directly to us.''
So how will companies be able to follow the guidance under
the 2010 revisions in the sentencing guidelines if the internal
people don't have the incentive to come to us?
And the irresponsible or smaller companies that aren't
doing the new compliance programs will have no incentive to do
so because they will assume that the whistleblowers will go
external anyway.
The SEC has indicated that they do not plan to
automatically share information with the company. Publicly
traded companies and the SEC have this same goal to protect the
shareholder. If the SEC wants to protect the shareholder, the
presumption should be, the whistleblower should report
internally first, but if not, the SEC informs the company at
the same time so that the company and the SEC can work together
to get to the bottom of the issue.
There are--or capable individuals have the ability to get
the balance sheet. This means that if an agent or someone is
terminated or fired because they have done something wrong,
they actually have the ability to collect on the bounty. This
is bizarre--although that cannot be intended by the legislation
as written.
The anti-retaliation provisions aren't clear so if someone
is a whistleblower, under the law as written, if they commit an
act of workplace violence, they steal from the company, they
don't show up to work, it is not true that under a consistently
followed clearly written policy, that whistleblower can never
be fired. Of course, they should not be fired for coming
forward and bringing forth wrongdoings, but if they commit a
violation of company policy, they should be fired.
So, again, there are a number of issues, a number of tweaks
of the law.
We are not saying that a whistleblower who has no viable
option, no viable legitimate complaint mechanism within the
company should not be able to get a bounty. That is not what we
are saying.
So to be clear, if there is clear malfeasance at the top of
the organization, if there is no credible reporting mechanism,
if there is no general counsel, internal auditor, or board of
directors that the whistleblower can go to, they should be able
to go directly to the SEC and collect their bounty.
But if there is a viable reporting mechanism that is
functioning, that is using the sentencing guideline, that a
board of directors has oversight, we believe that the
whistleblower should go internally first, and that if they go
to the SEC, the SEC should let the company know so that the
company can work in good faith to ferret out the problem and
remedy it.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Narine can be found on page
50 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Daly?

STATEMENT OF KEN DALY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF CORPORATE DIRECTORS (NACD)

Mr. Daly. Good afternoon.
Thank you, Mr. Garrett, and members of the subcommittee for
giving us this opportunity.
I am Ken Daly, president and chief executive officer of the
National Association of Corporate Directors.
The NACD, with more than 11,000 members, is the membership
organization of America's boards of directors.
We believe that capitalism is premised on decency, honesty,
and trust. And consequently, it is no surprise that we support
and encourage internal systems aimed at enhancing business
functions.
In 2002, Sarbanes-Oxley encouraged effective internal
compliance systems with the key provisions of required
whistleblower systems and protocol, up-the-ladder reporting for
attorneys, and prohibiting companies from retaliating against
whistleblowers. These systems were built at great cost,
reportedly millions of dollars.
And much has been learned over the past decade about how
these systems work and how these systems don't work.
Today, we believe these systems are working. We have
several concerns about the Dodd-Frank whistleblower legislation
and the implementing rules.
One of our primary concerns is that Dodd-Frank
whistleblower bounties do not encourage the use of these
systems, as has been pointed out by many other folks. Arguably,
the perverse incentive systems actually conspired a cause of
delay in fixing problems.
We have three additional concerns.
First, the definition of independent knowledge. We think it
shouldn't exclude not only external auditors but also
government employees, attorneys, internal auditors, and other
professionals like those assisting in audits and those
assisting directors as envisioned by Sarbanes-Oxley.
Second, companies should be allowed time to cure reported
violations prior to government enforcement action. A reasonable
time should be a minimum of 90 days.
Third, employers should have the ability to use existing
disciplinary measures to respond to employees who circumvent
company compliance systems or make false allegations against a
company.
We believe there are significant unintended consequences as
already noted today in this incentive program and the more
important ones are, as already noted, the existing
whistleblower systems that were recently established at
substantial cost will probably not be used.
During a time when expectations of directors and the
complexity of business is greater than ever, the records may be
in fact disincentive for using outside resources to gain
additional perspective on corporate issues. Sarbanes-Oxley was
really meant to encourage the use of such resources.
By setting up the SEC as a central repository and processor
of claims, thousands if not tens of thousands of claims both
valid and otherwise will result in a near and possible test we
are trying to separate the important matter.
Finally, corporate culture depends upon shared values from
the top down. In our view, a wildcard has been inserted in the
culture. It changes the emphasis from problems solving--the
culture of American business--to getting paid for problem
identification.
The proposed Grimm bill helps correct some but not all of
these issues.
We are particularly pleased with those matters requiring
internal reporting and in following up with reporting to the
SEC no later than 180 days, the preventing of awards to
whistleblowers who at certain exceptions do not first report
internally, removing the minimum reward requirement of 10
percent of monetary sanctions collected, and finally,
clarifying the provisions or retaliations against
whistleblowers, providing employers with the ability to remove
employees who violate a established employment agreements,
workplace policies and codes of conduct.
However well-intentioned, we question a need for the entire
Dodd-Frank whistleblower incentive program. We understand there
are strong opinions for and against the inclusion of
incentives, but there has been insufficient study in our view
to determine if cash incentives and a centralized repository of
claims are needed or if the existing systems are working well.
We propose to delay the effectiveness of Dodd-Frank
whistleblower incentive provisions for 1 year. This would allow
time for a comprehensive study of the effectiveness of existing
whistleblower processes pursuant to Sarbanes-Oxley.
Thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Daly can be found on page 32
of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you for your testimony.
Professor Rapp? You have to push the little button and pull
the plastic.
You got it.

STATEMENT OF GEOFFREY CHRISTOPHER RAPP, PROFESSOR OF LAW,
UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO COLLEGE OF LAW

Mr. Rapp. Good afternoon, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the proposed
legislation modifying the whistleblower provisions of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
Whistle-blowing is the single most effective method of
detecting corporate and financial fraud. In recognition of this
fact, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 for the first time created
a uniform Federal protection for financial fraud
whistleblowers.
The central idea was to motivate employees to blow the
whistle by protecting them from retaliation in the workplace.
Unfortunately, Sarbanes-Oxley failed to offer any sort of
financial incentive for whistleblowers who bring fraud to
light.
Section 922 of the Dodd-Frank Act answered the glaring need
for a bounty provision for financial fraud whistleblowers.
In short, under Dodd-Frank, whistleblowers who voluntarily
provide original information on securities fraud violations
would be entitled to 10 to 30 percent of the sanctions obtained
by the Securities and Exchange Commission in a successful
enforcement action.
The legislation under discussion in today's hearing would
modify the Dodd-Frank approach.
First, the proposed legislation would require that employee
whistleblowers raise their concerns internally before going to
the SEC. Whistleblowers failing to do so would be denied a
bounty unless they demonstrate that their employer lacks an
internal reporting process or a policy prohibiting retaliation
or demonstrate that the fraud involved high-level managers or
bad faith.
The question of whether whistleblowers should be required
to report internally is one that the SEC considered in detail
in connection with its proposed rules. The SEC concluded in its
proposed rules that an internal reporting requirement was
unnecessary.
The main argument that has been advanced in favor of such a
requirement is that Dodd-Frank would damage existing internal
reporting structures adapted by corporations after the passage
of Sarbanes-Oxley.
In response to this argument, the SEC made several
observations.
First, it noted that not all employers have robust and
well-documented internal reporting procedures. Moreover, the
SEC expressed its view that even without imposing a requirement
of internal reporting, internal reporting structures are
unlikely to be bypassed.
The SEC noted that in most cases, upon receiving a
whistleblower tip, its staff would contact the corporation and
describe the allegations, giving the firm the chance to
investigate the matter itself. The SEC did not expect that
Dodd-Frank's structure would minimize the importance of
effective company processes for addressing allegations of
wrongful conduct.
In addition, even without a hard requirement of internal
reporting, many whistleblowers will likely report internally
anyway. Most whistleblowers see themselves as loyal employees
and they often blow the whistle out of a desire to help their
firms.
The proposed requirement for internal reporting would
complicate both the process and the expected benefit of
whistle-blowing for a potential tipster.
A potential whistleblower would have to make a judgment
call about whether the high level management or bad faith
exceptions apply before contacting the SEC or else risk losing
her eligibility for a bounty. This added uncertainty would dull
the incentives Dodd-Frank seeks to use to put more cops on the
beat.
A second aspect of the proposed legislation would eliminate
the mandatory nature of Dodd-Frank bounties. Again, this
proposal would likely dull the incentives Dodd-Frank was meant
to foster.
The primary concern that would arise if bounties were
purely discretionary is whether the SEC would in fact award
bounties on a regular basis. The SEC was given a purely
discretionary authority to pay bounties by the Insider Trading
and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988.
Between 1988 and 2010, the Commission reportedly paid just
$160,000 to only 5 whistleblowers. Similarly, when the payment
of bounties in the tax fraud setting by the Internal Revenue
Service was purely discretionary prior to the Tax Relief and
Health Care Act of 206, the IRS had a rather dismal record of
rewarding whistleblowers.
The reformed IRS program serves as a model for the Dodd-
Frank provision and made bounties mandatory at a certain level
of disputed tax liability.
In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act already involves a fair
amount of discretion. The SEC can deny bounties to
whistleblowers whose information is not original, who do not
provide such information voluntarily, or who fall in to one of
the categories excluded from claiming of bounty.
Making bounties discretionary in all cases as the proposed
legislation would do simply increases the likelihood that the
Commission will direct its energies to other priorities rather
than respond to and reward whistleblower tips.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Professor Rapp can be found on
page 57 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you Professor. And I thank the
entire panel.
So, at this time, I yield myself 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Narine, one of your opening comments was the fact
that--you said that the language in Dodd-Frank paints all
businesses as criminal going into it. I am not quoting you
exactly.
But I absolutely heard my colleague from New York when he
said, ``You do not tell the mob when you are doing an
investigation.'' And that is exactly the case. Not all
corporations are the mob; they are not all engaged in illegal
conduct. I got your point that we are doing a broad brush
approach with this language with the legislation.
Ms. Narine. That is correct.
Chairman Garrett. And I can probably even step back further
here.
And as we go into this discussion on this one particular
piece of Dodd-Frank, and I know we have heard this from the
other side already, a comment that we are trying to undo from
the good language that is in that legislation that anytime we
try to make any changes of what we would call improvements to
it--we were trying to totally undo a rollback in all, what have
you, the Dodd-Frank legislation--that basically has been the
rhetoric that we have heard no matter what we have had in this
committee so far to date.
We try to improve upon something, a 2,300 page bill where
we have not had a full and complete discussion and disclosures
and look at the unintended consequences and where we are charge
with being--trying to repel legislation.
And actually, you can comment on this, that is really not
what is--done here with the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Grimm's legislation, is it not? What we are trying to do is
trying to take both the existing whistleblower laws and the
requirements that we had first under SOX basically that are
already in place--on that and then what came through Dodd-Frank
and basically making it in a way that it actually gets to the
end result which is what they try to improve corporate culture
and to try to rectify, to end those bad conducts that are going
on within a particular company.
Mr. Kueppers. I think that is fairly stated.
One way to think about it, Mr. Chairman is there is some
tension between protecting whistleblowers which I think is very
important and whistleblowers themselves play an important role
in protecting the broader group of investors.
So, there are tradeoffs here. And my own experience is that
I happen to have had the pleasure and benefit of working with
clients who are quite well established in investigating any
wrongdoing that might come to their attention.
And I think Mr. Grimm's draft legislation--the part that I
focused on was this notion that you have to report first to the
SEC because I believe, whether it is first or concurrently,
then the company has the ability to have knowledge to get to
the bottom of what the issue is.
And, of course, if they don't do so there should be some
severe consequences for that company.
Chairman Garrett. Right.
And so, there is language in Dodd-Frank, I think it is a
90-day period of time in which they can go to their--go to the
corporation and say, I see such and such go on. If they all are
outside of that then, professor, I understand there, you are
beginning to listen to a couple of areas where then you would
as the whistleblower fail to comply with the provisions and say
you fail to be able to be compensated by the SEC. Is that
correct?
Mr. Rapp. Both the statute and the proposed rules do
provide certain conditions that a whistleblower must meet in
order to be eligible for a bounty.
Chairman Garrett. Is there something in Dodd-Frank that
says that is one of the conditions that could put you outside
of receiving compensation? Is there something in Dodd-Frank
that would say that a whistleblower who has engaged himself in
malfeasance would be prohibited from collecting?
Where is that? Is that in Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Rapp. I would have to look back at the statute.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Even better yet, how about within the proposed rule from
the SEC?
Mr. Daly. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that there is nothing
that would stop that person from being rewarded.
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
So, if that is the case, there is nothing in Dodd-Frank and
there is nothing in the rule, I appreciate the fact that they
tried to set some parameters within how many days you have--90
days, 3 months--to comply.
That seems to be a glaring problem, why the sponsor of the
underlying legislation and also the SEC did not grab on that to
say that if you have someone engaged in illegal activity, they
may have been the one who actually started it, but now it is a
year down the road and I realized this thing has spun out of
control or something like that and now it is the time to rein
it in.
But under the way that it is currently written and under
the rules, Mr. Daly, that individual is not prohibited by
statute or the proposed rule from the receiving end of this--
Mr. Daly. That is correct.
Chairman Garrett. --Dodd-Frank. Yes.
Professor, is that just a glitch in the legislation that
should probably have been addressed in some way, shape or form?
Mr. Rapp. My own view is that it is very unlikely that such
a person would be deemed eligible for a bounty because of the
other structures that are built into the proposed rules.
Chairman Garrett. And what would they be based on--what are
the other structures in it that would prevent them from getting
it?
I am going to say my time is up. So I close on this.
Mr. Rapp. I believe the proposed rules do cover something
about individuals who are convicted in connection with a fraud.
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Rapp. In addition to common law obligations that such
an employee would have to their employer--
Chairman Garrett. Right.
Mr. Rapp. --would likely make them liable to the employer
for any damages--
Chairman Garrett. So basically, they have to have a
conviction on--in essence, but if the person is not convicted
by it then they could still--thank you.
The gentlelady from California.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
To Professor Rapp, my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle seem to think that now that Dodd-Frank is law, employees
of financial companies will be racing to the SEC to blow the
whistle hoping to win the lottery with a claim.
Based on your research on whistle-blowing programs then,
incentives historically, is this an accurate expectation? And
can you elaborate on what your research says about the
disincentives whistleblowers face when considering whether or
not to step forward?
Mr. Rapp. In response to the first question, I think it is
unlikely that whistleblowers will race to the SEC in search of
a bounty. The way that the bounty provision in Dodd-Frank is
structured, a whistleblower is only entitled to a bounty if
their information leads to a successful enforcement action
producing over $1 million in monetary sanctions.
And the bottom line is that the SEC often pursues
enforcement actions that do not produce that minimum threshold
as required for the Dodd-Frank bounty provision to be
triggered.
Between 1978 and 2002, by one study, the SEC imposed
monetary penalties in only 8 percent of the enforcement actions
that it pursued. And in those where monetary sanctions were
imposed, the median sanction was below $1 million.
What that means is that in less than 10 percent of the SEC
enforcement actions, only half of the time would the
whistleblower potentially be eligible for a bounty.
So I don't think that it is likely to lead to a rush to the
SEC because only in the most serious instances of fraud would a
bounty actually be triggered.
As far as the disincentives to whistle-blowing, I think
that the fear of retaliation is obviously the foremost one that
has been covered in the media.
Various studies have found that between 80 and 90 percent
of whistleblowers are either fired, demoted, or forced to quit
under duress. In addition, in one study, more than 60 percent
reported being blacklisted by their industry. But I think the
social costs of whistle-blowing are often the most significant.
A whistleblower will inevitably become distant from friends
and colleagues. And these water-cooler effects, the social
effects, I think, can provide a strong disincentive, a
disincentive which bounty programs are meant to overcome.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
To be clear, I would like more clarity on one provision of
the Grimm draft discussion that perhaps won't get a lot of
attention but could have a chilling effect on the ability of
legitimate whistleblowers to step forward.
The Grimm draft legislation will prohibit whistleblowers
from paying their counsel via contingency fee arrangement. Can
you explain to me the practical impact of this provision? Would
an average employee be able to afford counsel if no contingency
fees were allowed? What would be the impact of this provision
on the SEC's ability to screen and develop potential cases?
Mr. Rapp. I think that aspect of the proposal would
virtually guarantee that no whistleblowers were represented by
talented counsel in the application for an SEC bounty. And I
think that would be particularly problematic in light of two
aspects of the Dodd-Frank statute.
First, it authorizes whistleblowers to report anonymously
to the SEC and requires that they be represented by counsel if
pursuing anonymous submission.
And the alternative to a contingency fee, whistleblowers
will be paying attorney's hourly rates. Bearing in mind that
many of these people will have been terminated and not have any
income, paying hundreds of dollars an hour is simply
unrealistic and I can't see that happening.
The Dodd-Frank statute also has an appellate right where a
whistleblower who is denied a bounty can appeal to the U.S.
Court of Appeals.
I don't think talented lawyers are likely to take on such
time-consuming representation without the prospect of a
contingency fee. The fact is, contingency fees are regular part
of practice in other areas of Federal bounty reward programs
and there is no evidence of widespread abuse of contingency
fees.
Ms. Waters. Do you know any place else in the law where
contingency fees are absolutely denied to someone seeking legal
assistance?
Mr. Rapp. My understanding of the American Bar
Association's Model Rules of Professional Responsibility is
that they are denied in criminal defense matters but that
wouldn't seem to be a very strong parallel.
The ABA model rules on contingency fees require that like
all attorney fees, they be reasonable at three points in time:
when they are agreed to; when they are charged; and when they
are collected. So, if an attorney signs a contingency fee
arrangement for a Dodd-Frank whistleblower, but doesn't end up
doing any work on the matter and a bounty is paid, that fee
would have to be renegotiated.
Ms. Waters. But, would you conclude that it is a
disincentive? For someone that information--important
information that would benefit the taxpayers and would like to
share that, if they could not get an attorney based on
contingency fees, that would be a disincentive that this person
probably would not come out of their own pocket to hire an
attorney to do this?
Mr. Rapp. The idea of paying an attorney tens of thousands
or more in attorney's fees to pursue a bounty would to me be
unrealistic for most whistleblowers.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Arizona.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And actually, the ranking member just started a whole line
of thoughts in my head.
My understanding is that a--we call it a bounty, is now
mandatory within the Dodd-Frank. Am I correct about that?
Ms. Narine. That is correct.
Mr. Schweikert. What is the law of unintended consequences
here? Are we heading down the path where I have just created
the whole new legal industry that I do my best even to collect
data or put up things on the boards or e-mail, saying, ``Have
you been fired, have you been removed from your position, would
you like to get back at your former organization? Excuse me,
would you like to catch your former organization?''
It is always my concern. Look, I am new here, but I keep
looking at pieces of legislation, and people keep saying, ``We
didn't mean for that to happen.'' And there seems to be this
repeated cascading effect around here of the law of unintended
consequences.
And I heard the professor's comments which I appreciate. Is
it pronounced ``Narine?''
Ms. Narine. ``Narine.''
Mr. Schweikert. Narine.
Ms. Narine. I can address that. I actually--a few weeks ago
I sat on a panel addressing whistleblowers. And so, in the
audience, what would be your response? Would you ask a--when
they walk in the door if they had used the company's internal
reporting requirement? If there was a viable compliance option,
would you ask them to use them?
He said, ``I might or I might not, but that is really not
my problem. My role is to maximize their award because I am
going to use my other contingency plan.'' That was actually his
response: ``It is not my role to make sure that they use their
internal reporting response.''
And there is--that is his job and that is how he sees his
role.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman, and this is also for anyone
who wants to answer, but wouldn't you be now queuing up a
scenario where I am dismantled or I see something that I don't
understand, whatever the reason be.
And that the threat is, we are going to go on to the step
of filing at the SEC unless we receive certain compensation? Or
is it, you hire a legal counsel and immediately go?
I am thinking through the number of steps here. This has
almost become a new legal paper practice.
Ms. Narine. The follow-up question I have, I posted a
series of questions. I said, what if your whistleblower is
wrong? Because, in many instances, companies rely on people to
come forward internally. Sometimes your whistleblower in good
faith believes he or she has information.
They may not have the complete story. They could be wrong.
And once the company says, ``Here is the actual situation,''
they realize, ``You know, something, I was wrong. I am sorry. I
am glad you cleared that up.'' And then they are wrong and they
go away.
But sometimes they are right and you say, ``I am glad you
brought that information. We have now remedied the issue.'' You
won't know that if they don't come internally.
I raised that issue with the--and, again, he said, ``That
is not my issue. I go to the SEC and I take care of my
client.''
And I said, ``Would there be a situation where you come to
the company first and say, `I am coming to you first, how about
a settlement before I go to the SEC'?''
He said, ``I could see that happening.''
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. So we are--
Ms. Narine. So could there be--is that an extortion issue
if I wouldn't call it that? I am coming in to settle with the--
of the company before going to the SEC.
So these are the kinds of things that companies would have
to deal with which again is that the best interest of a
shareholder? I am not sure.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. Ms. Narine, we try not to use the
extortion word but functionally--so it is not only just at the
company level or at the bureaucracy level. There may be that
midpoint.
I need to also get myself educated a little bit. This is
for all publicly held companies? Any types? So not just
financial companies. It is all publicly held companies?
Is it also for other types of organizations out there that
have to share a relationships and up and down the chain?
No?
Ms. Narine. We are not trading on the exchange.
Mr. Schweikert. They would know. I do not believe it.
Would it be for pension plans?
Mr. Daly. Probably not, but there is one side of this that
I think you should not miss. You don't have to be an employee
in this particular company to file a claim against some other
company.
Mr. Schweikert. But--okay. I want to close on that. And I
have like 26 seconds.
And it wouldn't be for a very large charity. This is only
for a publicly held company?
Mr. Daly. Correct.
Mr. Schweikert. Not just financial companies, all publicly
held companies?
Mr. Daly. All publicly held companies.
Mr. Schweikert. And from--my other thing--and you have just
heard a touch on it. And it didn't have to be an employee in
that organization or--I could be the filer of any publicly,
filing the complaint on any publicly held--
Mr. Schweikert. --company?
Ms. Narine. You could be a filer. A client officer at
Ryder--I learned that we had an agent in Bangladesh who was
bringing people unauthorized which could expose Ryder to--
practice at that liability.
I terminated that agent. That agent could call the
Department of Justice and the SEC and say, ``For 10 years I
have been bribing people--and that person conceivably under the
law--
Mr. Schweikert. --and thank you for being so gracious. I
know we are going over time, but the other side, towards Mr.
Daly. Does it have to be--it was part of that organization?
Could it be, for instance, the housekeeper who overheard
something?
Mr. Daly. It could be literally anyone.
Mr. Schweikert. So, back to my scenario again. If you had a
new legal profession, you could just shop for professional--
Mr. Daly. Possibly.
Mr. Schweikert. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from New York.
Mr. Ackerman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It seems to me we have a tremendous difference in point of
view based on philosophy and based on whose interest we are
interested in protecting. It is not surprising to me that all
three expert witnesses who agree with each other represent
corporate interests who have a need to be protected against
people who might want to expose them to things that they are
doing wrong.
We have one witness who doesn't necessarily have a vested
interest and I appreciate his point of view because--not just
because I agree with it, but I think it makes more sense.
Whose interest do we represent? Who are we trying to
protect? Are we trying to protect corporate interest because on
investors, because of people who are putting up their money or
are we trying to protect the system and innocent people?
If there is one thing that--if not worse than, but it is
bad as blaming the victim, it is blaming the witness and trying
to discourage people who are witnesses from coming forward.
Nobody is saying that everybody in the corporate world is
part of the mob, but there are people in the corporate world as
there are else who do things that are wrong. And there is
nothing wrong with having encouragement and disincentive from
people who call them on that in every walk of life.
And if you are interested in protecting the public, you
call them whistleblowers. If you are part of the system that
needs protection against being exposed, you call them snitches,
whether it is a corporation that is doing something wrong or a
criminal venture that is doing something wrong.
The point I was trying to make before is that you really
don't go to the bad guys to report the bad guys hoping that
they are going to change their ways because there is a price to
be paid for that.
The incentives and disincentives seem to work. It works for
the FBI. They were offered a $27 million reward for legitimate
evidence to find Bin Laden. Now, there were a lot of people who
knew who Bin Laden was and where he was and they didn't get the
reward.
I know probably a lot of innocent people who retired six-
foot, seven footer to some basketball team who looked like Bin
Laden who were looked at but nothing ever happened, but they
still have to reward Mr. Moore.
In major cities, mine included, they have a cops program.
If you report that you are a witness and saw somebody killing a
cop, you would go and report it to the police and there is a
minimum $10,000 reward if you are right. If you are wrong,
nothing happens.
Decision as far as invention of incentives and
disincentives and rewards goes all the way back to when
religion was invented or God created heaven and hell. It
doesn't mean everybody is evil but the FBI said that the IRS
has a system where you turn someone in for income tax fraud
whether it is the individual or corporate, you get 10 percent
of what they can recoup. It doesn't mean every taxpayer is a
cheat. We have a program where if you see something, say
something. We want people to participate and to report.
I don't think we should reduce whistleblowers to the status
of bounty hunters and I would be shocked if there weren't a
large number, if not a majority of people who work for
corporations who think the corporation is violating their own
rules or some standards who doesn't report it to somebody
within the corporation seeking no reward.
And maybe like the essence that Mr. Kueppers, in Deloitte
where you have considerable experience, other people who come
and say, ``Hey, I think we are doing this wrong. We shouldn't
be doing this. This is wrong to violate the company rules.''
Mr. Kueppers. Yes, indeed. In fact, in my experience with
clients, this is not an everyday occurrence. But I have
experienced several pretty serious situations where somebody in
the organization called the financial management of the company
and comes forward. They are uncomfortable and it goes up the
chain and--
Mr. Ackerman. I would suspect that.
Mr. Kueppers. Yes.
Mr. Ackerman. And I think that is a good thing, but there
are people who legitimately say--I am not pointing the finger
at your company--but I am sure that there are people in other
companies who think that people are deliberately doing things
wrong.
I am not as worried about the lure of unintended
consequences as I am about the deliberate intended consequences
of actions that some people do, that people know if they blow
the whistle will turn them in, that they are going to--and I
would think that is a legitimate concern, and to try to
penalize those people, to try to discourage them, to try to
cause not to report to a legitimate authority, it is something
that we really have to view through dispassionate eye.
And as policymakers, those of us on this side of the table
should be looking at this as to how to protect not just our
company and investors, not just one guy or gal who may be a
shakedown artist within a company, I am sure we can find one or
two of those as well, but we have to be seriously talking about
protecting the public, Mr. Chairman. I know I have not--but I
wanted to make that statement.
Chairman Garrett. I appreciate that. And the gentleman
yields back.
Mr. Hurt, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you all for
appearing this afternoon on this important subject.
And yes, my comments would begin with saying, I think that
one of the important hallmarks of our civil justice system is
ensuring fairness and ensuring accountability and offering a
way in which the government allows for the enforcement of
contracts and making sure that the people in the marketplace
act honestly.
It is my view that most do, and that those who represent
shareholders, those are the corporate--the people who are
elected to be the corporate structure certainly have a purer
interest in seeing and taking care of shareholders, certainly a
greater interest than even the SEC or any government entity.
And I guess it strikes me that coming to Washington, you
find again and again examples where the Federal Government
seems to believe that it knows better how to take care of its
customers or its employees than those who have the greatest
interest and that is in running a successful business for the
shareholders, and I can't help but be struck by that as we have
listened to this testimony and consider what I think is a good
bill.
But my question--my first question--and I would ask that
all of the witnesses maybe address this, but my question is
with respect to uncovering illegal activity within the
corporate structure, I would think there is a big difference
between having an organization that is corrupt throughout or in
a significant way at the higher end of the management versus
having one rogue employee.
It seems to me as a pretty big difference in terms--and it
has some implications here, and I was wondering if not having
that much of a background in this area, if each of you could
maybe just address that issue, how are you able to quantify or
qualify the number of times that you have just a rogue employee
who needs to be stopped immediately? And when you stop them
early, it saves shareholders' money, saves the company money as
opposed to these larger conspiracies that may require a longer
time of investigation. Perhaps you can just speak to that.
Mr. Kueppers. Sure, let me start, Congressman.
I have on several occasions witnessed client situations
where one or two handfuls of people were engaged in improper
behavior. Uncovering that, you would hope there is a function
of the regular sort of management processes but there is not.
For example, as outside auditors, if we uncover it, it is
our duty to take that to management and to insist that they
investigate and take action. If they don't, we go to the audit
committee. If they don't act, we go to the board. If they don't
act, we go to the SEC under Section 10A of the Exchange Act.
I take those responsibilities very seriously because I have
never--the reason I have so many of these 10A reports must not
be working, we don't get these reports.
The threat of going to the SEC, and I have done it twice,
is pretty much all it takes for people to get serious about
solving the problem and doing it quickly.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you.
Ms. Narine. I think--and just to be very clear about some
things there, from a corporate perspective, if the management
team is corrupt, no one would expect the employee to use
anything within the corporation. That doesn't make sense.
The fear of reporting anything, whether it is, ``My manager
is mean to me, please investigate,'' or ``The CEO is stealing
the pension funds,'' it is very real. There is a rational
normal fear of reporting anything and the compliance officers
are sensitive to that. So it is not an insensitivity to that
issue. But every company whether you have 100 employees or
28,000 employees, you are going to have some rogue employees
somewhere.
So for those kinds of things, you would hope that if there
is a viable functioning compliance program, you use that. If
you believe that there is a corruption that is coming from the
top or that the independent auditor is really not independent
or the board member is in bed with a CEO and you really can't
trust them, there is no way and no reason that anybody would
expect you because that is not legitimate, that is not a
legitimate function and compliance program.
In the seven steps, the sentencing guidelines set out are
very clear as to what it is. And the revised guidelines in
2010, the first thing that they recommend is that the
compliance officer report to the board, and if not reporting
directly to the board, have access to the board of directors,
but there is a level of independence because they recognize
that those kinds of issues can come up.
So again, if there is no way, if the person legitimately
believed, it will have to be right, that they legitimately
believe that there is no way, not just rumor, speculation, ``I
think if I go, I am going to be retaliated against.''
If they have a legitimate reason to believe no one is going
to reasonably believe that they shouldn't go directly to the
SEC and collect their bounty of that is due to them.
So there is a difference between, ``I think I am going to
be retaliated against,'' and I am dealing with one rogue
employee versus, ``It is dirty at the top and I shouldn't have
to go.''
Mr. Hurt. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Daly. I can report that in a prior life before I
arrived at the NACD, I audited dozens and dozens of companies.
And I cannot remember one instance where I would report that
the entire company, to your point, was corrupt from the top
down.
Essentially, what happens is you have rogue employees. You
have someone who does something nefarious for an evaluation or
for a bonus or for something of that nature.
I think to the chairman's point at the beginning, at the
top of this discussion today, I think we are wrestling with the
issue of whether additional assistance is required and whether
to have Sarbanes Oxley as originally envisioned work.
Unfortunately, I don't think that there has been sufficient
work to make the decision with that. That is to my point that I
think we want to delay this for a while until we have an
opportunity to determine whether or not the systems are
working. If in fact the systems are not working, then they
should be corrected. If in fact the systems are working, then I
suspect we should allow them to continue.
And I can tell you from spending lots of times with lots of
audit committees and my current role with the NACD, there is
consistent talk, robust discussion about how the systems work,
what kind of issues are being found and what the companies are
doing about it. So this is very much on the minds of corporate
America.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
The gentleman from California.
Mr. Sherman. I see that there are two controversies here.
One is whether the whistleblower gets a bonus, the other one is
would the SEC keep the investigation confidential at certain
stages.
Ms. Narine, do you have any objection to a whistleblower
who helps society and comes forward and blows the whistle and
takes those risks, getting a bonus or payment? Is there
something the matter with that?
Ms. Narine. No.
Mr. Sherman. Now, the next issue is how confidential the
whole investigation is. Mr. Kueppers, what would be the
advantage if when the SEC opens a file, they also notify the
auditor of the company under question?
Mr. Kueppers. I think there would be an advantage to
notifying the auditor and we would obviously put that
information directly to the board or the audit committee of the
company plus the resources to perform their own investigation.
Today, most problems with financial reporting, indeed with
the SEC, violations of SEC law investigated by the companies
who spent the money, the resources, do whatever needs to be
done and they report immediately back to the SEC.
Mr. Sherman. So there is really no way to notify the
auditor without notifying the company as well?
Mr. Kueppers. That is the optimal--
Mr. Sherman. In other words, if the auditor--if there was a
situation in which it was not best to notify the company, then
it is probably not best to notify the auditors as well?
Mr. Kueppers. It would--out of necessity because we
couldn't investigate without the cooperation of the company--
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. Kueppers. --it probably wouldn't achieve much.
Mr. Sherman. Section 301 of Sarbanes Oxley requires the
independent audit committee at every public company to
establish a system for managing whistleblower concerns related
to accounting and auditing. Section 806 of Sarbanes Oxley
provides protections for the whistleblowers. Does any provision
of Dodd-Frank undermine those two provisions of Sarbanes Oxley?
Mr. Kueppers. I think the tension here comes when--in
applying or operationalizing the Dodd-Frank elements which is
what the SEC is in the process of doing, the worry is that it
would render the company systems under 301 of SOX in effect
because people would bypass those systems and go to the SEC. So
it is more in the--and sort of how it would work where the
issue arise.
Mr. Sherman. So SOX envisions a company investigation,
Dodd-Frank envisions a company not notified, SEC investigation,
and those are two rival as anything that matter with having
those two items be separate and both available or--
Mr. Kueppers. I am not sure what the intent of the statute
was, but if the SEC is investigating itself through its
enforcement division--
Mr. Sherman. Yes, the company is going to get notified
there too.
Mr. Kueppers. Absolutely, because of the need to produce
documents, witnesses, and so forth.
Mr. Sherman. Professor Rapp, is there any reason for the
SEC to not share with the company the fact that there has been
a complaint filed, perhaps not identifying who filed it and if
they are investigating a particular matter? And how would they
possibly investigate without the company knowing?
Mr. Rapp. Their usual practice of reporting to the SEC, and
I don't speak for the Commission, but I see what they have
announced publicly, their usual practice would be to contact
the corporation.
It might not make sense to do that in the early stages of
investigation insider trading, for example. And the Dodd-Frank
bounty scheme subsumes the insider trading bounties that were
formerly part of the law if we were concerned that a wrongdoer
facing significant criminal sanction might destroy a document,
you might try to get preliminary safety case together before
you reach out in that way.
Mr. Sherman. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from New York.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to take a step back because you just mentioned the
destroying documents. Here is the reality. Sometimes it is just
so frustrating because what sounds great and looks good and it
is an honest, fair theory to have, doesn't marry up with
reality.
When the SEC does these investigations, who do you think
they contact? They contact the company because that is how they
get all their information, and it may not be that day but it is
very, very soon thereafter, so does the FBI. That is how it
works. That is how it has always worked. That is how it is
always going to work.
So this idea that you just go to the SEC and the company is
not going to find out, it is simply not based in the way things
are done and there is the distortion of what really happened.
The idea that someone is going to destroy documents, that
is why since 2004, the penalty for doing such a thing is up to
20 years in prison, and that is a big hammer and that is why
the vast majority of players out there are not going to destroy
documents, and that is better than anything we could be talking
about today, is that 20 years of imprisonment is a lot more of
disincentive than Dodd-Frank is going to address. So I think
that is already handled.
But I wanted to just strongly disagree with my colleague
from New York that it has left in--this idea that the
whistleblower that we are protecting is the public and that
corporate America is not.
That is a fundamental problem that we have of ideology.
These corporations, a lot of the plumbers and all the different
unions and teachers and every other person in America, they are
invested in these companies. Their pensions are invested in
these companies.
Corporate America is providing all the jobs that we all
talked about creating. Who do you think is creating these jobs?
This is where America works. This is where America invests.
These corporations are the heart and soul of our public.
So to think that pitting corporations against the public is
just--is this demonization that has to stop. The idea that we
want these companies to succeed not at the expense of a
whistleblower, that is just drawing the divide that is not
there.
The reality is that Congress created Sarbanes Oxley, and
asked all of these corporations to spend a lot of time and
effort to get it right, and they are right in doing so and
corporate America did that.
And now, a few years later, we want to come back when they
are just about finished and say, ``Oops, it is not necessary.''
Because the idea that you can go straight to the SEC and not
have to go to any internal controls really does obviate the
need for those internal controls.
If I owned a big corporation, I would no longer spend
hundreds of thousands and millions of dollars on my internal
controls knowing that you can just go to the SEC anyway. And I
think that is very, very important.
My colleague from New York also mentioned the way FBI
awards work. Let me tell you, I can tell you for a fact people
came in all day with bogus information seeking a reward, and
what did it do, it tied up agents on wild goose chases for
days, for weeks, for months.
Our SEC is already overburdened. They cannot afford to have
people coming in, in the hope that they are going to get an
award because they have an attorney out there who just went for
the CLE class. The new CLE class has been telling everyone,
``Hey, this new rule is coming out. We can help you build your
legal business.''
So it is going to be another legal frenzy and yes, it can
lead to frivolous lawsuits, but more importantly, it is not
just the frivolous lawsuits. It is the SEC being bogged down
with all these claims while the burning--is not being worked
at.
And lastly, again, it is just a dose of reality. Think
about this. I discover a Ponzi scheme and I am an employee and
I go to the SEC. Guess what? The SEC, they have 200 allegations
of Ponzi schemes, 300 allegations of illegal insider trading,
400 pump and dump schemes, and so on and so forth.
Do you really think the SEC is going to look at my Ponzi
scheme allegation today or tomorrow? Maybe not for 8 months. So
what do we tell the public who is being scammed for 8 months
until the SEC gets to it?
When, if we went through the internal controls and
compliance of the company, they would stop that then and there
that day. That employee who was doing all these schemes would
have been looked at and cut off from trading right there.
So the SEC cannot handle everything. They certainly can't
handle it as efficiently as the company there. I do believe
that we should not penalize in any way the whistleblower and
they should be protected if they blow the whistle but not at
the cost of obviating what Sarbanes Oxley did, all the controls
we have in place now and the unrealistic expectation that is
not based in reality that the company is not going to find out
about the investigation anyway. That is just a--sorry, I didn't
get to ask you a question. I had to address all the
misinformation out there.
I yield back with time that I don't have left.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you very much.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Thank you. I may not need all of my time and I
will be honored to yield, so you may ask a question. I thank
the witnesses for appearing. And I would like to move quickly
to the area of legal fees--contingency fees for legal
representation.
There was something known as ``voir dire'' or ``voir dire''
depending on where you are from. It is a French term and it
means to speak the truth. For our purposes, this will become
the truth telling portion. It always has been but for us moving
forward.
And in ``voir dire'' or ``voir dire,'' we tend to have
people who are responding raise their hands so please don't be
offended by my asking that you raise your hand.
Do you believe that a person who is a millionaire who
desires to report as a whistleblower should be allowed to hire
a lawyer to represent himself or herself? If you do believe
that this is appropriate, kindly raise your hand.
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all of the witnesses
have raised their hands.
For my edification, should a person who is poor, who cannot
afford a lawyer, not be permitted to have a similar
opportunity? That would lead in a contingency fee such that a
poor person, not an indigent but a person who is not of need,
why would this person not have the same opportunity to have
legal counsel that the millionaire had?
What is wrong with a contingency fee for people who cannot
afford legal counsel? That is a rhetorical question. My
suspicion is that most of you would think that it would be fair
to allow this, but my suspicions are not always correct, so let
me just ask.
Is it fair for a poor person to have legal counsel just as
a millionaire will have legal counsel? If you think it is fair
for the poor person to have legal counsel, would you kindly
extend a hand into the air?
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all persons believed
that poor people are entitled to legal counsel.
Now, contingency contracts allow poor people to acquire
that which they cannot afford contingent upon a lawyer taking a
certain amount of risk and moving forward to aid and assist a
person who has an agreement. Anybody kindly raise your hand
because that is a basic premise that I think we have to build
upon.
If this is the case, why would we not allow a contingency
fee for people who cannot afford a lawyer who have a legitimate
complaint? Before you respond, I need to say this. No one
assumes corporate executives are dishonest. As a matter of
fact, they are honest, honorable people. Shareholders are
honest, honorable people. People who blow whistles are honest,
honorable people--some make mistakes, some do not.
Some corporate executives are able to do some things that
are inappropriate and unlawful, and they are the person that we
are talking about.
So the question of these jobs and who creates the jobs, I
am coming back to my point, but to the questions of jobs, your
friend, yes, corporations may be the vehicle. But if the
consumer--if the consumer spending that calls as a job to be
there. So while we want to thank the corporations for what they
do and the businesses, let's not forget that the consumers play
a vital role in this process.
Now, back to where I was. I have to get back commercially.
Who among you believe that a person who cannot afford counsel
should not have the opportunity to have counsel by way of a
contingency fee? If so, raise your hand please.
Let the record reflect that no hands were raised and that
this panel believes that a contingency fee arrangement appears
to be appropriate.
And to my friend, I have some time left. I would allow you
to ask a question if you so choose.
Nothing left?
Chairman Garrett. Nothing left.
Mr. Green. I owe you one.
Chairman Garrett. There you go.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Stivers, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I know a lot of folks have talked about the
contingency fee arrangements and there have been a lot of
discussions. Do any of the panelists have any concern about
where our contingency fee might encourage the wrong behavior?
I know that at least one of the panelists talked about it
earlier, but again, just to follow up on my colleague's
question, is there any one on the panel who would have some
concern about the behavior of--that an attorney would give
their client or tell their client to do because of a
contingency fee as opposed to just a discretionary award
without a contingency fee?
Ms. Narine. I am happy to address that. In my prepared
remarks, I did not address the contingency issue directly
because it is not a focus of my main area of concern.
Where I would have a concern, however, so for the record, I
do believe that people should have the right and the ability to
get counsel. My concern would be, again, protecting the
interests of the shareholders, many of whom are company
employees, from secretaries all the way up to the CEO. So those
people have a vested interest in the company succeeding.
My concern would be whether the incentive of the larger
contingency fee could cause the attorney consciously or
subconsciously to want the award to be larger, which could
thereby allow the alleged fraud to perpetuate longer so--
Mr. Stivers. I would like to follow up on that with the
couple other members of the panel.
Ms. Narine. And so that would be the concern that--
Mr. Stivers. Because that was what I assumed, that if I had
a concern, it would be if there is a financial incentive based
on the award as a contingency, how much the attorney is going
to get.
The attorney is going to have every incentive to make the
award as large as possible, therefore telling their client if
they know something, ``Well, let's wait a little bit because it
is not quite big enough yet and we might not--you might now
profit enough from it and we might not profit enough from it.
Let's just give it a little while and see what happens.''
Ms. Narine. Exactly.
Mr. Stivers. Yes, go ahead--
Mr. Kueppers. Congressman--
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Mr. Kueppers. --I, too, believe that a contingency
arrangement per se is no problem particularly if the individual
who needs counsel on the SEC rule cannot otherwise afford
counsel of contingency from misrepresentation.
Here is my worry. If--just a word to work in a way that
what actually create more claims as opposed to giving good
counsel to those who already had legitimate claims,
solicitation of large numbers of clients, I worry about the
system getting clogged to the point where the real
whistleblower, I will call it, is not heard because of the
volume issue.
So soliciting large groups of people who have just been
recently laid off and so forth. By outside counsel, I would
worry about that because it is going to create a problem with
getting the legitimate whistleblowers heard as they should be.
Mr. Stivers. All right. And I guess my follow up to
Professor Rapp--by the way, it is great to see you here from
Ohio; I am from Columbus--is, how do we do exactly what Mr.
Kueppers just talked about, encourage focus on the legitimate
claims as opposed to just creating incentive for more volume
which may or may not be legitimate and does a contingency fee
really help us in that vein?
Mr. Rapp. The theory behind a contingency fee is that the
lawyer takes some of the risks and should therefore get some of
the reward. I don't see there being a major likelihood that
attorneys will encourage clients to save up fraud. That same
argument has been made about the Civil False Claims Act and
there is no evidence that occurs in False Claims Act practice.
And the reason why I don't think it occurs there and why I
don't think there will be a problem with Dodd-Frank is because
bounties are only permitted to the original source in False
Claims Act practice or whistleblower here to provide original
information.
If you try to save up fraud hoping it will get bigger,
there is a very good chance that some other individual who
knows about the fraud will be the first to report it to the SEC
and you will no longer be the original source or the person
with the original information eligible for a bounty.
Mr. Stivers. Okay. And I do want to follow up on Mr.
Rapp's--I think it was third concern about--maybe it was your
first concern about the percent of the--the difference in the
mandatory award, I believe is 10 percent or a completely
discretionary award.
It seems to me that a discretionary award would certainly
would empower some folks but I guess my concern on the
mandatory award is that it really doesn't seem to be
appropriate based on--it should matter what the information is
and how important it is, shouldn't it, as opposed to, you gave
us information therefore you are entitled to 10 percent of the
award regardless?
Mr. Rapp. I think that is absolutely right, and that is why
the SEC rules only make the awards mandatory where the
information provided by a whistleblower leads to a successful
enforcement action.
So if someone calls the SEC and gives them information and
the SEC starts digging and finds a legitimate instance of fraud
that is separate from what the whistleblower brought to their
attention, that whistleblower gets nothing because the
information they have provided didn't directly lead to a
successful enforcement action.
Mr. Stivers. But you believe that a mandatory award as
opposed to a discretionary award, I saw you talked about the
IRS. It sounds like--it works better when people--and can you
help me understand either psychology or profit motive behind
that? Do you think people needs certainty on what the award is
or--I just don't follow if there is a possibility of an award
and it is 0 to 30 percent as opposed to between 10 and 30
percent. Why are they guaranteed 10 percent, that big of a
deal?
Mr. Rapp. I think it just makes the cost benefit analysis
for a potential whistleblower easier to run, so to speak.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady looks like she--
Ms. Waters. If you would grant me a minute to raise a
question before you close the committee?
Chairman Garrett. For a witness?
Ms. Waters. No, to you.
Chairman Garrett. Sure.
Ms. Waters. It is not parliamentary.
Chairman Garrett. Yes, okay.
Ms. Waters. On the whistleblower question, I am trying to
find out what the Financial Services Committee intended placing
a request for whistleblowers to report to members of the
financial services committee. Are you aware of that on your
work site? What are you trying to do with this--
Chairman Garrett. I am informed that is on the committee's
Web site. There is a provision not with regard to what we are
talking about here per se which is whistleblowers, but it is
just a more general idea of waste, fraud and abuse and wasteful
programs and for the public to come forward with those.
Ms. Waters. So that means you do believe in whistleblowers?
Chairman Garrett. Exactly. We do believe that there is a
need for whistleblowers both in the corporate world, as we
heard from this panel--I think all four of them would agree
that there is a need for whistleblowers in the corporate world
because there are bad actors, sometimes individual actors and
sometimes more than one actor.
And we certainly know that there is a need for
whistleblowers when it comes to government programs because
there is certainly a need to point out waste, fraud and abuse
in the Federal Government. So absolutely, we need to do so.
But on our Web site, we are not saying that there will be a
payback to them specifically as far as the contingency fee and
otherwise where they are saying as the American citizens to
come forward that information and let us know, and I am sure
you will join with us when those come forward to try to root
out that waste, fraud, and abuse on the Federal level.
And with that--
Ms. Waters. As you asked me to join with you, allow me to
indicate that yes, I do absolutely support the whistleblowers.
I am more concerned with the testimony from Mr. Rapp that talks
about a lot of whistleblowers coming forward.
And as we have discussed Mr. Grimm's legislation here, we
can see where there are disincentives to whistleblowers coming
forward. So I would like to join with you to see what we can do
to encourage whistleblowers, to compensate whistleblowers with
fair compensation, and to make sure that as he has indicated,
they have representation even if they don't have the money to
have legal counsel or a counsel rather.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back. And I am glad
that the lady agreed that there is a need to do what we are
doing here today and that is to examine Dodd-Frank, to realize
that there is a possibility for re-examining it to see how it
could be made to work better.
The gentleman from New York has a draft--I don't think it
is in final form yet. This is for draft discussion to try to
address some of the concerns that the gentlelady from
California has, how we can work to make sure that it does
exactly what I think everyone in the room wants it to do--
identify who the whistleblowers are, have an incentive for
those cases that are appropriate cases to come forth. Not
overwhelm the situation with fraudulent cases or cases without
any merit, if you will, but for the rightful cases to come to
the top of the list and make sure that the SEC can investigate
those and also to do something else. He is no longer sitting in
this chair, but the former chairman, Mr. Oxley, who was
instrumental in passing the bill by his name, Sarbanes Oxley,
to make sure that law also can be seen to provision as well to
make sure that the internal controls and the corporations can
be properly implemented, administered, and used as SOX--
Sarbanes Oxley--was intended.
Some of which--for some of us who thought that it might
have been unnecessary in other areas, but this is one area that
I think we have an agreement on and that was right for
addressing in SOX, and also in Dodd-Frank as far as to the
extent of this.
I am looking forward to--
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman, I have a unanimous consent
request to insert into the record the project on government
oversight on the Grimm discussion..
Chairman Garrett. It is all yours--
Ms. Waters. And--
Chairman Garrett. --without objection.
Ms. Waters. --we would like to--without objection, you are
saying? Yes, I would like to enter the project on government
oversight document into the record.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
And does Mr. Grimm have the copy? It might be something you
want to just take a look at as well?
Okay, great.
And also, without objection, we will be entering into the
record: a May 11th letter of the Association of Corporate
Counsels; testimony of David Baris, executive director of the
American Association of Bank Directors; the statement of the
Investment Company Institute with regard to the hearing today;
and written testimony of Darla C. Stuckey, senior vice
president, policy & advocacy, for the Society of Corporate
Secretaries and Governance Professionals.
And with that, again, as I did at the very beginning of the
hearing, I thank this panel very much for their testimony, for
their insights and their study on these issues as well and with
that, your full testimony as indicated earlier will be made a
part of the record.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for these witnesse that they wish to submit in
writing. The record will remain open for 30 days so members can
submit written questions to these witnesses and place their
responses in the record.
[Whereupon, at 4:55 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

May 11, 2011
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6867.054


