- THE IMPACT OF DODD-FRANK ON CUSTOMERS, CREDIT, AND JOB CREATORS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPACT OF DODD-FRANK ON CUSTOMERS,
CREDIT, AND JOB CREATORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS AND

GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 10, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-143

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-114 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises

SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey, Chairman

DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona, Vice      MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
PETER T. KING, New York              GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              AL GREEN, Texas
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 10, 2012................................................     1
Appendix:
July 10, 2012................................................    53

WITNESSES
Tuesday, July 10, 2012

Bentsen, Hon. Kenneth E., Jr., Executive Vice President, Public
Policy and Advocacy, the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association (SIFMA)....................................     8
Deas, Thomas C., Jr., Vice President and Treasurer, FMC
Corporation, and Chairman, the National Association of
Corporate Treasurers, on behalf of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce    10
Deutsch, Tom, Executive Director, the American Securitization
Forum (ASF)....................................................    12
Kelleher, Dennis M., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Better Markets, Inc............................................    14
Lemke, Thomas P., General Counsel and Executive Vice President,
Legg Mason & Co., LLC, on behalf of the Investment Company
Institute (ICI)................................................    15
Simpson, Anne, Senior Portfolio Manager, Investments, and
Director, Corporate Goverance, the California Public Employees'
Retirement System (CalPERS)....................................    17
Vanderslice, Paul, President, the Commercial Real Estate (CRE)
Finance Council (CREFC)........................................    20

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bentsen, Hon. Kenneth E. Jr..................................    54
Deas, Thomas C., Jr..........................................    70
Deutsch, Tom.................................................    82
Kelleher, Dennis M...........................................   102
Lemke, Thomas P..............................................   120
Simpson, Anne,...............................................   151
Vanderslice, Paul............................................   168

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Bachus, Hon. Spencer:
New York Times article by Azam Ahmed entitled, ``After MF
Global, Another Brokerage Firm Collapses With $200 Million
Missing,'' dated July 9, 2012..............................   184
Reuters article by Carrick Mollenkamp entitled, ``RPT-
INSIGHT-Fed knew of Libor issue in 2007-08, proposed
reforms,'' dated July 10, 2012.............................   187
Schweikert, Hon. David:
Written statement of the Bond Dealers of America (BDA).......   189
Written statement of the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA)..   192

THE IMPACT OF DODD-FRANK
ON CUSTOMERS, CREDIT,
AND JOB CREATORS

----------

Tuesday, July 10, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and
Government Sponsored Enterprises,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Scott Garrett
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Garrett, Schweikert,
Royce, Manzullo, Biggert, Hensarling, Neugebauer, Pearce,
Posey, Fitzpatrick, Hayworth, Hurt, Stivers, Dold; Waters,
Sherman, Hinojosa, Lynch, Maloney, Moore, Himes, and Green.
Ex officio present: Representative Bachus.
Chairman Garrett. Good morning, everyone. Today's hearing
of the Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored
Enterprises is called to order. Today's hearing is entitled,
``The Impact of Dodd-Frank on Customers, Credit, and Job
Creators.'' I thank the witnesses on the panel for being with
us this morning.
But before we get to the panel, we will begin with opening
statements. I yield myself 3 minutes.
It has been 2 years since the passage of the 2,300-page
Dodd-Frank Act. And since that time, the economy is stagnant,
the unemployment rate is above 8 percent, wages are declining,
and credit, unless it is being supplied by the government, is
frozen.
I not only believe that these things are interrelated, I
believe that the passage of Dodd-Frank is actually one of the
main reasons that there has been such a tepid economic growth
over the last several years.
We have some charts that are going to be up on the screen,
and here they come right now. If you look at these charts, you
can see that GDP growth was at 4 percent in the three quarters
preceding the passage of Dodd-Frank, and the quarter after the
legislation was signed into law, GDP did what? It dropped, and
it dropped continuously until it was almost negative. And it
has continued to stay around 2 percent.
If you look up at the next chart, this chart examines the
impact on house prices. Prior to the passage of Dodd-Frank,
house prices were basically beginning to normalize and maybe
even rebound, as you see. But in the 2 years after Dodd-Frank,
what happened? We have unfortunately seen home values go back
on their downward slide once again, all due to Dodd-Frank.
And finally, let us examine the manufacturing sector in our
third chart. As the chart indicates, manufacturing production
was also, just like the other two, regaining momentum in early
2010. Then, Dodd-Frank came along. It was signed into law, and
average production was almost cut in half.
The reason that these impacts have been so severe is beyond
the breadth and scope of this legislation. It literally makes
wholesale changes in every facet of our financial markets,
whether that is banking, mortgage lending, securities, trading,
risk managing, or others.
Each one of the titles of Dodd-Frank taken individually
could have been a multi-Congress undertaking and should have
been given much more thought than it was. Unfortunately, as you
all know, Dodd-Frank was rushed through the process with really
extreme partisanship. And the derivatives title and Volcker
pieces were literally added in the dead of night, in the back
room of the Senate Dirksen Building, as many of you recall. No
one knew exactly how the pieces of the bill would work, or in
this case not work together cumulatively. There was absolutely
no consideration given to the possible combined costs that all
these cumulative changes would have.
Let me just give you an example in regards to the cost of
credit. When the CFTC is finalizing its margin rules for
interest rate swap, is it considering what new servicing
requirements that the FTC is considering, adding to the risk
retention requirements? In turn, when the FTC is considering
these new servicing requirements, are they thinking about the
CFPB, including a rebuttable presumption to the Qualified
Mortgage (QM) definition? And likewise, when the CFPB is making
their decisions, are they contemplating the possible impact of
the Fed finalizing a Volcker Rule that could significantly
curtail market making?
All four of these actions alone will have an impact on the
cost of credit in this country for consumers. It is important
that we identify these costs individually and have rules that
effectively balance the costs with the benefits provided.
What is not being discussed or identified is what is the
combined impact all of these rules and other rules will
ultimately have on the cost of credit for borrowers in the
country. When taken individually, the cost might be tolerable.
But when taken all together, cumulatively, it will prove
extremely onerous.
So the purpose of today's hearing is to highlight the
economic impact and the cost of these rules for businesses,
consumers, and the economy, not viewed through the single
vacuum of each regulator writing their own rule, but viewed
through a more comprehensive and holistic manner. And I am
afraid that the results we will find will not be pretty.
This is one of the weakest economic recoveries that this
country has ever experienced, especially given the depth of the
recession. Unfortunately, Dodd-Frank and its over 400 rules are
one of the main reasons that I am afraid it will be a lasting
legacy of the legislation.
And with that, I yield back, and I look to the chairman of
the full Financial Services Committee, who is recognized for 3
minutes.
Welcome, Chairman Bachus.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Chairman Garrett. Thank you for
convening this hearing, which will be the first of about seven
hearings this month on Dodd-Frank and its effect on job
creation and the economy and our financial institutions and
consumers.
Dodd-Frank was enacted in response to the financial crisis
of 2008. The law was not intended to hinder the ability of
American businesses to utilize the capital markets or to unduly
hamper the ability of consumers and businesses to obtain
credit, create jobs, mitigate risk, and thrive.
Yet 2 years after its passage, many argue that Dodd-Frank
is having precisely these negative effects. Main Street
businesses are now facing a constriction of both capital and
credit. The derivative rules, the Volcker Rule, and a host of
other Dodd-Frank rules are putting enormous pressure on
corporate balance sheets at a time when economic conditions are
already putting increased demands on the time and resources of
job creators and entrepreneurs.
This committee has tried to mitigate some of the potential
negative impacts of Dodd-Frank by moving bipartisan legislation
such as H.R. 2682, a bill that would ensure that regulators do
not force derivative end-users to post margin, which would
divert capital away from job creation.
Unfortunately, the Senate has failed to act on this
important bill, and some regulators continue to interpret Dodd-
Frank's Title VII as a grant of new authority to impose costly
margin requirements on end-users.
Similarly, an overly restrictive Volcker Rule has also had
a negative impact on Main Street businesses by creating
borrowing costs for consumers and companies, both large and
small, by increasing borrowing costs.
If businesses find it harder to borrow, it will be harder
for them to make capital investments and create jobs. If
consumers have less access to credit, it will be harder for
them to care for their families. And if the value of the assets
held by savers and investors declines, people will find it
harder to save for a new home, for college or for retirement.
Our witnesses today will be able to shed more light on the
cumulative effect these rules are having on our capital
markets, and our economy. And I thank them for being here.
Chairman Garrett, again, thank you for holding this
hearing. I look forward to the discussion.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Lynch is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank the witnesses for coming
before this committee and helping us with our work.
Today's hearing is somewhat benignly titled, ``The Impact
of Dodd-Frank on Customers, Credit, and Job Creators.'' But the
implication is that the financial reform is somehow damaging
the financial system.
Normally, there is a certain lag time between an attempt at
regulation and an assessment. But in this case, we haven't even
gotten through the existing financial crisis and we are already
planting the seeds for the next one. That is what is happening
here.
My friends, and I mean ``my friends'' on the other side of
the aisle want to do away with any reform that we put in place
because of this colossal historical financial debacle that we
have gone through beginning in 2008.
It appears my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
have come down with a case of collective and sudden amnesia,
forgetting that our financial industry is struggling because of
a loss of integrity, the loss of trust because of the last
financial crisis, the one we are still struggling with, because
of the recklessness on Wall Street, the exact behavior that
Dodd-Frank is intended to stop.
Whatever unintended effect Dodd-Frank may have on job
creators, it pales in comparison to the havoc Wall Street
wreaked on our economy during the financial crisis. Let me
recount that according to the Treasury Department, the
financial crisis that we are trying to deal with here cost
Americans $19.2 trillion in household wealth--$19.2 trillion.
Better Markets, whose representative is here today to
testify, believes even this staggeringly high number is too low
to accurately account for the cost of the crisis. They note
that we lost $2.6 trillion in unrealized potential GDP growth
since the crisis. We have 12.5 million unemployed Americans not
contributing to the economy and not putting away savings for
their retirement.
Americans have lost an enormous amount of household wealth,
including $7 trillion in home values, $11 trillion in
investments in the stock market, and $3.4 trillion in
retirement savings, not to mention the billions of dollars the
government has spent to prop up the same banks that caused all
of this damage in the first place. I want to note that I voted
against TARP.
These enormous losses which are the result of the crisis,
by the kind of reckless behavior on Wall Street that the Dodd-
Frank law is intended to prevent, have had a much greater
negative effect on customer credit and job creation than
anything in Dodd-Frank itself. I am happy to join my colleagues
in addressing any unintended consequences in the financial
reform bill. It is not perfect. I understand that.
But let us not forget what we are trying to prevent here:
another catastrophic financial crisis that has cost the
American people many trillions of dollars. The potential costs
of a regulatory framework riddled with loopholes are far
greater than those associated with a safe, stable financial
system.
I thank the gentleman for his courtesy, and his indulgence,
and I yield back my time.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Royce, for 1 minute.
Mr. Royce. Yes, if I could point out, one can support
financial reform without supporting Dodd-Frank. The problem we
have with Dodd-Frank is that it did not solve too-big-to-fail;
it compounded it. The banking sector is even more concentrated
than it was a few years ago.
You have a smaller and smaller number of organizations
holding the majority of the assets in that sector. That is
partly a result of the way this was done. It didn't consolidate
a fragmented regulatory structure. Other than eliminating the
OTS, we still have an alphabet soup of regulatory organizations
overseeing markets with a large amount of overlap.
And despite what was said at the time of its passage, it
did not increase investment in entrepreneurship or foster
robust growth in the economy. It did exactly the opposite.
So today's hearing will hopefully shed some light on what
it has done, namely increase uncertainty throughout the
economy; increase the cost of credit for consumers and
businesses; and most importantly, made it easier for smaller
firms to fall prey to larger ones gobbling up their competition
because of the lower cost of credit now for the largest firms
due to the way in which Dodd-Frank sent that message to the
market that they were too-big-to-fail.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from New York is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, I would like to welcome my
former colleague and very good friend, Ken Bentsen. It is very
good to see you and all of the panelists today. I look forward
to hearing your remarks.
And I would say that to even think about repealing Dodd-
Frank is the height of irresponsibility. You have to remember
why it was implemented in the first place. We put in financial
reform because we were on the brink of another Great
Depression. There was a run on the banks. There was a run on
the money markets. And it was not until this Congress came in
with the leadership of Nancy Pelosi and others that we stop-
gapped and saved from falling off a cliff that would have been
an even worse situation to respond to.
Dodd-Frank brought in huge swathes of the market that were
unregulated and regulated them. I don't think anyone in America
wants to go back to the subprime crisis or to a time when banks
were failing, and we had a number of banks that have failed.
And I know in some cases, there were forced marriages or
mergers just to save the FDIC deposit insurance of American
working families.
So Dodd-Frank came in and helped stabilize the markets. And
I would say that markets run more on trust than on capital, and
if people feel that there aren't rules of the game and
transparency--I am not saying that we shouldn't make
adjustments and refine it as we go forward in ways that reflect
the challenges of the markets and the 21st Century, but I
believe we will look back on Dodd-Frank as we did the great
reforms after the Great Depression.
After the Great Depression, Congress implemented Glass-
Steagall, the FDIC-insured accounts, the SEC. And it gave us 60
years of unparalleled economic prosperity in our great country.
I believe that many of the reforms--granted, nothing is perfect
and that is why we are here to hear from the panelists today on
ways they feel they might make the regulation better, but I
don't know anyone in my district who wants to go back to a
totally unregulated, huge swathe, no transparency, huge areas
not even on exchanges that led to really the worst economic
crisis in my lifetime and one I hope I never see again.
So my time is up. I look forward to hearing the remarks of
the panelists today.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Fitzpatrick is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, look forward to this hearing because strengthening
our Nation's economy and getting Americans back to work remains
our number one priority. And being able to raise capital, hedge
risks, and obtain credit are necessary activities in order for
businesses to grow and for businesses to create jobs and hire
again.
It is important for us to continue our oversight of Dodd-
Frank and to examine regulations because if businesses find it
harder to borrow, it will be harder for them to make
investments, to expand, and to hire workers. Moreover, if
consumers find it difficult to access credit, or the value of
their assets declines, it will make it harder for them to save
and will put further strain on families trying to live within
already strapped family budgets.
Today's hearing will shed further light on the unintended
consequences that Dodd-Frank is having on America's job
creators and consumers. Next week marks the 2-year anniversary
since this legislation imposed some 400 new rules on our
financial system. Certainly, the financial industry deserves
scrutiny after the meltdown of 2008. However, we must take care
to make our capital markets not only safer, but to make them
stronger and ensure that those far from Wall Street do not pay
the price for those who are truly responsible for the financial
crisis that did occur.
So I look forward to the hearing, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Chairman Garrett. And the gentleman yields back.
Mr. Hurt is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Hurt. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding today's
hearing on the effects of the Dodd-Frank Act on consumers,
investors, and job creators.
As we approach the 2-year anniversary of Dodd-Frank,
regulators are still working through the more than 400 new
rules and directives, with insufficient concern or
understanding of the cumulative impact of these regulations on
our economy. It is critical that this committee continue to
scrutinize the effects that these regulations will have on
consumers, small businesses, community banks, credit unions,
and other financial institutions.
As I travel across Virginia's 5th District, I am constantly
reminded by my constituents that Dodd-Frank has caused negative
effects on job creation and will lead to less access to credit
for consumers, higher costs for capital for small businesses,
and piles of Federal regulations to work through.
As our Nation struggles through high unemployment and
minimal economic growth, it is increasingly apparent that many
of the regulations prescribed by Dodd-Frank will continue to
act as a hindrance to our job creators and America's economic
recovery.
I would like to thank the distinguished guests and
witnesses for appearing before the subcommittee today, and I
look forward to their testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Dold now for, I guess, the last word
on this, 1 minute.
Mr. Dold. Thank you. I thank the chairman, and I thank you
for holding this hearing.
And I want to thank our witnesses for taking the time to
join us today.
To promote good public policy, Congress must regularly
review and revise existing laws and regulations. This process
should include thorough and objective cost-benefit reviews of
both intended and unintended consequences in light of
historical evidence and new information.
This is particularly true with bills like Dodd-Frank, which
in addition to containing over 2,000 legislative pages,
requires many thousands of additional pages of implementing
regulations, some of which are internally inconsistent,
ineffective, unworkable or counterproductive.
I am encouraged by this committee's bipartisan work to
address some of these issues. For example, with H.R. 4235, Ms.
Moore and I are working together on a bipartisan basis to
correct some of these problematic Dodd-Frank provisions.
But we must continue to accelerate these bipartisan
efforts. We must ensure that we understand the impact of the
proposed regulations as a whole. We must ensure that the
proposed or existing rules do not negatively affect risk
management, market liquidity, credit costs, and credit access.
Most importantly, we must ensure that unintended
consequences do not ultimately limit small business expansion,
job creation, and economic growth.
I look forward to the testimony, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
And seeing no other opening statements, I now turn to the
panel, and I welcome all seven members of today's panel. I very
much appreciate the testimony that you are about to present.
And I know that some of you have been with us before, and
others have not. For those who have not, and even for those who
have been here before, just a reminder that you will be yielded
5 minutes for your remarks, and your full written statements
will be made a part of the record.
And also just for your edification, in front of you of
course is the timing light--red, yellow, and green--to give you
an indication as to your time. When it turns red, your time is
up, and since we do have a fairly large panel here--also just
as a note, and I make this note not just to this panel, but to
other panels who may come and other people who may be in the
room, and so we are not casting dispersions on any one
particular individual, association, or otherwise.
But the rule of the committee is that statements should be
presented to the committee 48 hours prior to the testimony, and
of course we know we are coming in through a holiday weekend
and what have you coming into this, but just in general, that
is what the rule is, and so we would like to try to get back to
that so members and staff of the committee will have the
opportunity to review it in some detail.
With that said, Mr. Bentsen, you are recognized for 5
minutes, and once again, welcome to the committee.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE KENNETH E. BENTSEN, JR., EXECUTIVE
VICE PRESIDENT, PUBLIC POLICY AND ADVOCACY, THE SECURITIES
INDUSTRY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS ASSOCIATION (SIFMA)

Mr. Bentsen. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
share SIFMA's views.
There is much in the Dodd-Frank Act that SIFMA's members
supported, such as the establishment of a systemic risk
regulator, the Orderly Liquidation Authority, and a uniform
standard of care for retail brokers and advisers.
Properly crafted, these provisions can appropriately
increase supervision to mitigate systemic risk, improve
coordination among regulators, eliminate too-big-to-fail, and
improve protections in confidence for individual investors.
However, other provisions, if not properly crafted, and not
in coordination with foreign regulators, could have negative
consequences to the detriment to businesses, governments,
individuals, and institutional investors who rely on deep and
liquid U.S. capital markets.
We believe that Congress' goal in adopting the statutory
Volcker Rule was to focus banking entities on providing
liquidity to customers and to prohibit excessive risk-taking.
The rules as proposed defines congressionally-permitted
activities far too narrowly through an artificial distinction
between permitted activities and prohibited proprietary trading
based on a negative presumption using hard coded metrics on a
transaction by transaction basis that is unworkable, and will
cause market makers to pull back, to the detriment of U.S.
capital markets.
In the corporate bonds commission by SIFMA, Oliver Wyman
found that liquidity losses could cost investors between $90
billion and $315 billion in mark-to-market losses, corporate
issuers between $12 billion and $43 billion a year in borrowing
cost, and investors between $1 billion and $4 billion per year
in transaction cost that is a level and depth of liquidity
decreases.
Further, Stanford University Professor Darrell Duffie noted
in a paper commissioned by SIFMA that the direct and indirect
effects would increase trading cost for investors, reduce the
resiliency of markets, reduce the quality of information
revealed through security crisis, and increase the interest
expense in capital rates and costs for corporations,
individuals, and others.
Buy side market participants, commercial businesses,
foreign regulators, and central banks have commented that the
proposal would significantly harm financial markets, pointing
to the negative impacts of decreased liquidity, higher cost for
issuers, and reduced returns on investments.
They further commented that other market participants are
unlikely to be able to fill the critical market-making role
played by banking entities, indeed the rule would apply to 17
of the 21 primary dealers in the United States.
SIFMA believes that the premium capture reserve account
contained in the proposed risk retention rules will have
negative consequences for the securitization markets. Both our
buy side and sell side members believe that the requirements
proposed will present obstacles to the structure in
securitizations, including residential mortgage
securitizations.
As Moody's Analytics' special report stated, as a result of
the way the premium capture rule is stated, the mortgage rate
impact on borrowers would be significant on the order of an
increase of 1 to 4 percentage points, depending on the
parameters of the mortgages being originated, and discount
rates applied.
The consequences of the rule as written could significantly
impede the return of private securitization markets and
permanently cement the government's role in housing finance.
We are supportive of many of the goals of Title VII
derivatives regulation as with all regulation concerns focus on
making sure that requirements are workable, and that the
benefits outweigh the cost. Those costs after all are borne by
market participants who may find it more difficult and
expensive to hedge risk.
We have also urged regulators to avoid unintended
consequences and market impacts by carefully sequencing and
phasing in implementation of rules by category, type of
participant, asset class, and products within asset classes.
A particular concern is coordination. Regulators have
spoken of cooperation both at home and globally, but we see
very little real evidence of actual coordination.
An example of lack of coordination is the cross border
application of Title VII rulemaking. The recently proposed
guidance is complex, expansive in scope, and highly
prescriptive. A particular concern is to propose substituted
compliance, which theoretically should allow market
participants operating in other well-regulated markets to rely
on their home or host country regulation.
This substituted compliance process will be very different
than the mutual recognition model, and will require the CFTC to
individually review and approve the rules of foreign nations.
Further, we believe the CFTC's cross border application
approach is flawed and that the Commission chose not to do so
in the form of guidance as opposed to rule and apparently
without sufficient coordination with the SEC. SIFMA supported
the inclusion of single counterparty credit limits because our
members had been using internal models for many years to
measure and control such exposures. SIFMA, however, does not
support the Federal Reserve's proposal in its current form
because it exceeds congressional intent, and it would
needlessly reduce liquidity in the financial system.
The new method is a crude measure that overstates exposures
under any reasonable calculation methodology by a significant
multiple. The effect of the new methodology for measuring
credit exposure will be a reduction in market liquidity that
may have a significant effect on markets more broadly.
In conclusion, the United States has taken a more
comprehensive approach than any other country to address
regulatory reform. Although some countries have taken steps to
address components of topics covered by Dodd-Frank, no country
has adopted restrictions comparable to the Volcker Rule or
adopted legislation or regulators having the scope of Dodd-
Frank.
There can be no question that the subsequent regulation has
competitive consequences. It is essential that U.S. regulatory
agencies, in proposing regulations, consider and analyze both
the individual aspects and combined impact of proposed rules
that may place U.S. financial markets at an unwarranted
competitive disadvantage compared to those countries that have
not implemented a comparable approach.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bentsen can be found on page
54 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you, very much.
Mr. Deas, welcome to the panel. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS C. DEAS, JR., VICE PRESIDENT AND TREASURER,
FMC CORPORATION, AND CHAIRMAN, THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
CORPORATE TREASURERS, ON BEHALF OF THE U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Deas. Good morning, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Tom Deas, vice president and treasurer of FMC
Corporation, and the chairman of the National Association of
Corporate Treasurers. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
with you this morning, also on behalf of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce about the effects of Dodd-Frank on customers, credit,
and job creators.
The drafters and implementors of the Act and other
initiatives, such as proposed money market fund regulations,
have focused mainly on the financial services industry.
However, as the regulations roll out, we in Main Street
businesses are concerned about our continued ability to protect
day-to-day business risks with structured and cost-effective
derivatives, to manage business cash flows with continued
access to diversified short-term investment alternatives, and
to raise capital to build new factories, conduct R&D, expand
inventories, and ultimately to sustain and grow jobs.
I would like to outline our concerns about derivatives
regulations, the Volcker Rule, and money market fund
regulations.
On my company's use of derivatives, I can tell you that FMC
Corporation is a proud American company founded almost 130
years ago. Today, our 5,000 employees work hard to keep FMC a
leading manufacturer and marketer of a whole range of
agricultural, specialty, and industrial chemicals. Along with
many other U.S. manufacturers and agricultural producers, FMC
uses over-the-counter derivatives to hedge business risks in a
cost-effective way.
We use derivatives to manage the risk of foreign exchange
rate movements, changes in interest rates, and global energy
and commodity prices. Our banks did not require FMC to post
cash margin to secure periodic fluctuations in the value of our
derivatives.
This structure gives us certainty so that we never have to
post a fluctuating daily cash margin while the derivatives are
outstanding. However, regulators have now proposed that we will
have to divert cash to a margin account where it will sit
idle--unavailable for productive uses.
We still can't calculate exactly how much cash margin we
would have to set aside, but FMC and other members of the
Business Roundtable estimated that on average, a 3 percent
initial margin would amount to $269 million per company.
The study extrapolated the effects across the S&P 500, of
which FMC is also a member, to predict the consequent loss of
100,000 to 120,000 jobs. In our world of finite limits and
financial constraints, posting a fluctuating cash margin would
be a direct, dollar-for-dollar subtraction from funds that we
would otherwise invest in our business.
I want to assure you that FMC and other end-users employ
OTC derivatives to offset risks, not create new ones.
I thank the members for your bipartisan efforts to address
margining and the inter-affiliate issues through legislative
action.
On the Volcker Rule, proposed regulations coordinated among
five agencies have left its application confused, particularly
as to the critical distinction between exempt market-making
activities and prohibited proprietary trading. FMC's most
recent bond issue in November, $300 million of 10-year notes
was underwritten by a syndicate of our banks. As underwriters
of our bonds, these firms take on the responsibility to hold or
swap them if necessary to make an orderly market for our issue
as it is launched. However, the Volcker Rule could
significantly constrain this function through an ill-defined
line in the regulation blurring what constitutes banned
proprietary trading.
We estimate the added cost of this regulatory uncertainty
on our bond issue would have been $15 million. We are concerned
that the ambiguity could produce an opposite result from what
we all hope to achieve through undue burdens on the U.S.
capital markets where investors and issuers have come together
with an efficiency up until now unparalleled to the world and
to the benefit of American businesses.
Other impending financial regulations affect money market
funds. This $2.6 trillion financial-market segment not only
provides an alternative for investors who would otherwise be
limited to bank deposits, but also supports Main Street
companies' financing of working capital needs through purchases
of our commercial paper.
In 2010, the SEC, with our support, implemented a
significant strengthening of liquidity requirements. However,
another round of regulations would impose redemption
restrictions, float the net asset value, and impose
significantly higher capital requirements on fund sponsors. If
the SEC formally proposes these new rules, many treasurers
would begin immediate withdrawals from money market funds. We
fear the cumulative effect of the proposed changes will
eliminate this investing and financing alternative for Main
Street companies and make us wholly dependent on banks,
concentrating risk in a sector where over the past 40 years,
there have been 2,800 failures costing taxpayers $188 billion.
In summary, we are concerned about the lack of a clear end-
user margin exemption and other restrictions on derivatives
such as the inter-affiliate issues, and the application of an
overly complex Volcker Rule, combined with regulations that
could severely limit our access to money market funds. These
could burden American companies, limiting growth, harming
international competitiveness and ultimately hampering our
ability to sustain and grow American jobs. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on these important issues.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deas can be found on page 70
of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Deas.
Welcome, Mr. Deutsch.

STATEMENT OF TOM DEUTSCH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE AMERICAN
SECURITIZATION FORUM (ASF)

Mr. Deutsch. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, my name is Tom
Deutsch and I thank you for the opportunity to testify here
today on behalf of the 330 member institutions of the American
Securitization Forum. The securitization markets currently
supply well over $1 trillion annually in Main Street credit to
the economy each year for, among other things, consumers to buy
houses, motorcycles, and cars, and for their own education, for
farmers to buy tractors and other equipment, and for businesses
to expand both their franchise as well as their physical plant.
In effect, securitization is a delivery company that
delivers these trillions of dollars from long-term savers such
as mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies into
direct consumer and credit loans to America. In my oral
statement today, I would like to focus on some of the key macro
challenges facing the private securitization markets in the
face of the current regulatory headwinds. In my written
statement, you can find links to the thousands of pages of
comment letters that we alone have submitted to assist U.S. and
international regulators.
As an outgrowth of the financial crisis, many have focused
on securitization as an ailing patient that needs heavy doses
of regulatory medication to recuperate. ASF has strongly agreed
that some treatment has been necessary to make appropriate and
tailored reforms to the securitization market.
First, through ASF Project RESTART, we have spent
considerable effort ramping up transparency for investors and
better aligning incentives between issuers and investors
through various standardized market practices.
Second, we have supported appropriate and tailored
regulatory reform for risk retention, rating agency reform,
conflicts of interest, and regulatory capital standards that
would yield beneficial effects to the markets and the broader
economy. But we have passed the point where heavy prescriptions
of various regulatory medications have healing effects.
Instead, we strongly urge policymakers to examine closely the
aggregate and interactive effect of the myriad of treatments
being administered, as they are becoming poisonous by being
aggregated and injected in various doses, the interactive
effects of which have not been thoroughly thought through. In
effect, the poison to the market has become the dosage.
So in my testimony, I will briefly summarize seven
manifestations of this aggregate effect on the markets. First,
straightforward products like auto- and equipment-backed
securitizations whose performance was strong across-the-board
through the financial crisis, are now facing extraordinarily
complex challenges that were not designed or intended for those
markets.
Second, unintended interactions of various rules will
continue to be discovered for years to come, which is causing
immense cost in reworking various current structures as well as
eliminating products all together.
Third, market participants are not investing and building
business platforms. Rather, they are putting their skeletal
platforms in the deep freeze, particularly for residential
mortgages, because of the tremendous uncertainty of the outcome
of proposed rules that could very well make those business
lines loss centers.
This makes the Administration's and Congress' desire to
bring private capital back into mortgage securitizations more
difficult and more protracted. For the mortgage market, the
complete absence of policy direction in Dodd-Frank for Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, which currently lost the American taxpayer
nearly $200 billion, has also kept private industry left to
question when or if less than 95 percent of mortgages
originated in America will actually not be guaranteed by the
U.S. taxpayer.
Fourth, some rules like the Premium Capture Cash Reserve
Account or PCCRA are so lethal to the RMBS and CMBS markets,
that those markets are predicted to become relegated to history
books for many institutions if that rule were to be put in
place as proposed. The potential impact of such a rule on
borrowers would be substantial with interest rates rising up to
1 percent to 4 percent, depending on the various structures.
And rate locks would effectively be eliminated.
Fifth, nonbanks and banks are being subject to further
disparate rules causing competitive advantages and
disadvantages to develop that will inevitably cause exiting of
business lines based on regulation, rather than market
efficiency.
Sixth, although policy initiatives continue to evolve on a
country by country basis, the global issuance and purchase of
securitization is forced to comply with new and different
standards in each country and each jurisdiction.
And finally, seventh, many of the rules in Dodd-Frank, such
as the Volcker Rule, were not intended to affect the
securitization markets. But in fact, those rules have become
the biggest sources of concern for key segments of the market
such as the $300 billion asset-backed commercial paper market.
When all of these rulemakings are finalized, they will
inevitably result in increased costs for securitization and
lending markets, which will be passed on to consumers and
borrowers in the form of higher borrowing rates. Moreover, many
of these markets may ultimately or finally disappear, leaving
some consumers and business without access to credit at all.
These are not outcomes that will help the U.S. economy or the
unemployment rate decline. ASF greatly appreciates the
opportunity to appear today, and I thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deutsch can be found on page
82 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Kelleher, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS M. KELLEHER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, BETTER MARKETS, INC.

Mr. Kelleher. Good morning, Chairman Garrett, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the invitation to Better Markets to testify today. I am the
president and CEO of Better Markets, which is a nonprofit,
nonpartisan organization that promotes the public interest in
the domestic and global financial markets. It advocates for
transparency, oversight, and accountability with a goal of a
stronger, safer financial system that is less prone to crisis
and failure, thereby eliminating or minimizing the need for
more taxpayer funded bailouts. I have detailed my background
and what Better Markets does in my written testimony and it is
also available on our Web site. I won't repeat it here.
Let me begin my summary of my testimony by stating a fact:
Wall Street is not a job creator. Wall Street is a job killer
of historic proportion. As we sit here today, our country and
tens of millions of good, hardworking Americans are suffering
through the worst economy since the Great Depression of the
1930's. That is a direct result of the Wall Street-created
financial collapse of 2008, which was the worst financial
crisis since the stock market crash of 1929.
As we sit here today, I am sorry, tonight, many of our
neighbors will sit at their dinner table, look at their
children, and worry about their future: 21 million Americans
today can't find full-time work; 11 million Americans are
paying mortgages higher than the value of their homes; 5
million Americans have had to move out of their homes due to
foreclosures, and millions more are packing up as we speak
today; and the American family's net worth has plummeted almost
40 percent in 3 years, wiping out almost 2 decades of hard work
and prosperity. None of this happened because of the Dodd-Frank
financial reform law passed 2 years ago. None of this happened
because of the rules meant to implement the financial reform
law, almost none of which have even been put in place yet. None
of this happened because regulators who are the Wall Street
policeman are trying to make Wall Street follow the law like
everyone else in this country.
That economic disaster happened as a result of Wall Street
and the financial industry being deregulated in the 1990s and
virtually unregulated starting in 2000. This unleashed a
recklessness that took just 7 years to cause the biggest
financial collapse since 1929 and almost caused a second Great
Depression. Wall Street was able to do that because it and its
allies changed or eliminated the laws, rules, and regulations
put in place during the Great Depression of the 1930s, which
protected the American people from Wall Street and the
financial industry. After that, our country did not have a
financial or economic crisis on that scale for more than 70
years. And remember, even with the unprecedented degree of
government regulation of Wall Street and the U.S. capital
markets for 70 years, our country prospered. We built the
largest, most broad-based middle class in the history of the
world.
Wall Street, our financial industry, our nonfinancial
businesses, and our economy all thrived for 70 years.
Deregulation of the only industry in the country that threatens
our financial system and entire economy changed all that.
Financial predators were let loose. Doing anything and
everything to make as much money as fast as possible became the
Wall Street business model. And as the JPMorgan London Whale
bet of April and Barclay's rate rigging scandal of today shows,
little has changed.
That is why the Dodd-Frank financial reform law is more
properly understood as the Wall Street re-regulation law. It is
designed and intended to prevent Wall Street and the too-big-
to-fail banks from causing another financial collapse and
economic crisis. Nothing in that law could ever cause the
damage to jobs, our economy, our financial system, and our
country that Wall Street did when it caused the financial
collapse and worst economy since the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, Wall Street and its allies are engaged in a
campaign that attempts to deflect the public debate away from
that crisis, away from Wall Street's role in that crisis, away
from the cost of that crisis that they put on the American
people and to the new financial reform law, to the industry's
alleged burdens and to the rules being put in place to prevent
another crisis.
As detailed in my written testimony, for more than 100
years the industry has complained nonstop about regulation. But
history proves again and again that these complaints are
without merit. The industry has always adapted and that
industry and our country have prospered. In closing, the
important anniversary isn't the 2 years since the passage of
the financial reform law meant to protect the American people;
it is the almost 4 years since Wall Street created the crisis
and inflicted this economic wreckage on every corner of our
country. How long before we stop worrying about Wall Street's
profits and start worrying about taxpayer pockets and Main
Street families?
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelleher can be found on
page 102 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Lemke, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome to
the panel.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS P. LEMKE, GENERAL COUNSEL AND EXECUTIVE
VICE PRESIDENT, LEGG MASON & CO., LLC, ON BEHALF OF THE
INVESTMENT COMPANY INSTITUTE (ICI)

Mr. Lemke. Good morning, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the subcommittee. I am Thomas Lemke,
general counsel of Legg Mason & Co. We are a Baltimore-based
global asset management firm that manages more than $630
billion in mutual funds and other assets for our clients. I
very much appreciate the opportunity today to testify on behalf
of the Investment Company Institute on the impact of Dodd-
Frank.
ICI is a national association of mutual funds and other
SEC-registered investment companies. The members of ICI help
more than 90 million investors seeking to achieve their
financial goals.
It is important to note that Dodd-Frank is not directed at
SEC-registered mutual funds. These funds were not a cause of
the financial crisis. However, Dodd-Frank is very broad and
very technical in its scope, and in a number of areas it raises
important implications for mutual funds.
Our written statement addresses these matters in detail. In
some cases, we believe the impact of certain provisions on
mutual funds and their investors was not intended by Congress.
In other cases, we believe that new regulations designed to
achieve Dodd-Frank's protections should be implemented in a
manner that minimizes market disruptions and strikes the right
balance between cost and benefits.
I would briefly like to highlight four issues of particular
concern to ICI and its members.
First, is the Volcker Rule. Congress' clear purpose in this
area was to limit proprietary trading by banks and to prohibit
banks from sponsoring or investing in unregistered hedge fund
and private equity funds. Mutual funds and other SEC-registered
funds were not the rule's target. Under the proposed rule to
implement Volcker, however, some SEC-registered funds could be
treated the same as hedge funds or private equity funds, thus
barring banks from owning or sponsoring these funds. Virtually
all non-U.S. retail funds would get similar treatment. That is
not what Congress intended, and we believe the proposed rule
should be amended to explicitly exclude all these funds from
treatment as covered funds or banking entities.
We are also concerned that the Volcker proposal could
sharply reduce market liquidity by preventing banks from
exercising their historic role as market makers. For mutual
funds and their investors, less liquidity means higher spreads,
higher trading costs, and diminished returns.
In comments to regulators, ICI has offered recommendations
designed to avoid an adverse effect on market liquidity and
address other problems with the Volcker proposal. We and many
other commenters believe that significant changes are
necessary. As a result, we have called upon regulators to issue
a new proposal for public comment before adopting any final
rule.
Our second concern is the Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC) and its authority to designate Systemically
Important Nonbank Financial Institutions (SIFIs). These
provisions in Dodd-Frank did not target SEC-registered funds.
Indeed, Dodd-Frank includes criteria and other language
suggesting that these funds are not what Congress had in mind.
FSOC and its Office of Financial Research are conducting an
analysis of asset managers to see if these companies pose any
threats to financial stability. We believe this study should be
subject to formal public comment. ICI also believes the FSOC
will conclude at the very least that SIFI designation would not
be a proper tool to address any such risks.
Third is the regulation of derivatives and asset-based
securities. These instruments play an important role for many
institutional investors, including registered funds.
Funds use swaps, futures, and other derivatives to manage
risk, improve returns, and gain liquidity. ICI has supported
reforms that would increase transparency and reduce
counterparty risks in these markets, though we still have a
number of specific concerns with the regulatory proposals.
Broadly speaking, we urge the SEC and the CFTC to work
together, and with their global counterparts, to ensure that
new regulations achieve the protections sought by Dodd-Frank in
a coordinated and cost-effective manner while minimizing market
disruptions.
Fourth and finally, we could not discuss the impact of
Dodd-Frank without raising what we believe is a troubling
example of a regulator using Dodd-Frank as a pretext to expand
its authority through unjustified regulation.
In February, the CFTC vastly extended its reach over SEC-
registered funds, and only SEC-registered funds, by sharply
curtailing their ability to rely on a rule that has long
exempted otherwise regulated entities from CFTC registration.
The CFTC claims to have acted on these amendments under the
``more robust mandate'' it received under Dodd-Frank, but its
actions were neither required nor even contemplated by Dodd-
Frank.
The result of the CFTC's action is that SEC-registered
funds will be subject to unnecessary and redundant regulation,
the cost of which will be borne by funds and their
shareholders.
ICI and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have challenged the
CFTC's Rule 4.5 amendments in Federal court. If our case does
not succeed, not only will SEC-registered funds and their
shareholders suffer the consequences of this ill-advised rule,
but the CFTC will face a host of new registrants and further
demands on its limited resources at a time when the agency
itself says that its workload under Dodd-Frank ``creates risks
in its critical oversight roles.''
We believe this prospect should be of serious concern to
Congress.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, our written
statement contains additional detail on these and other
matters, and I will be happy to answer any questions you may
have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lemke can be found on page
120 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And we thank you.
Ms. Simpson, welcome, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANNE SIMPSON, SENIOR PORTFOLIO MANAGER,
INVESTMENTS, AND DIRECTOR, CORPORATE GOVERANCE, THE CALIFORNIA
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM (CALPERS)

Ms. Simpson. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Garrett,
Ranking Member Waters, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. My name is Anne Simpson. I am the senior
portfolio manager for investments and director of corporate
governance at CalPERS, the California Public Employees
Retirement System.
I would like to share our views this morning on the
positive impact of Dodd-Frank and to address the unfinished
business. Also, to highlight the importance of completing the
task of ensuring what we think of as smart regulations. This is
in order to protect investors like us, but also to protect the
markets upon which we and also the wider public relies.
CalPERS is the largest public pension fund in the United
States, with more than $230 billion in global assets, and we
are share owners in more than 9,000 companies. We pay out over
$14 billion annually in retirement benefits to more than 1.6
million public employees, retirees, and their families.
This is not only an important source of daily income for
our members; it also provides a positive economic multiplier to
the local economy.
CalPERS fundamentally relies upon the safety and soundness
of the financial markets. For every dollar that we pay in
benefits to our members, 66 cents are generated by investment
returns. We are a long-term investor with liabilities that are
measured in decades. We need stability in the capital markets
and sustainable economic growth to meet those liabilities now
and in the future.
We fully understand the virtuous circle between savings,
investment, financial markets, and economic growth.
The financial crisis hit us hard: $70 billion was wiped
from CalPERS' portfolio. We simply cannot afford another
crisis. This is why CalPERS is concerned with ensuring that
financial markets are regulated in a way which: is coordinated
and complete; is fully transparent; protects investors from
conflicts of interest; fosters responsible behavior by market
actors; and furthermore, does not prevent investors from taking
advantage of new opportunities and innovation.
For us, these are the hallmarks of smart regulation. But a
critical element is to ensure that regulation is proportionate.
For CalPERS, we weigh the additional costs that are required
and the balance with the protection that they provide to our
fund.
To those who question whether we can afford to invest in
smart regulation, we reply, ``How can we afford not to?'' The
impact of the financial crisis is still around us, and we
cannot be complacent about risks ahead and before us.
Those arguing that we cannot afford the cost of regulation
are in danger of being penny wise and pound foolish. We see
smart regulation as an investment in the safety and soundness
of financial markets which generate the vast bulk of the
returns to our fund. Smart regulation is an investment in the
effective functioning of capital markets, which is critical not
just to investors like CalPERS, but to the recovery of the
wider economy.
CalPERS believes that Dodd-Frank establishes an effective
framework for promoting that safety and soundness of capital
markets and providing investors the protections and the rights
to ensure those markets function well. However, unless
effectively implemented, the promise of Dodd-Frank will remain
largely unfulfilled.
Let me turn briefly to the critical elements of that
unfinished business, which we regard as vital to delivering on
that promise.
Derivatives: CalPERS fully supports regulation of the
trading of derivatives, which we use extensively in our own
portfolio. The legislation will bring oversight and
transparency, and a key part is ensuring that most swaps are
exchange traded or centrally cleared.
We are pleased the CFTC has adopted thoughtful rules to
implement the business conduct standards, but there is more to
be done. We will be glad to continue to engage with the
regulators to get those rules in the right place.
The Volcker Rule: We fully support the objectives of the
so-called Volcker Rule and would like to incorporate by
reference the attached comment letter previously submitted by
CalPERS to the relevant agencies. The principle here is simple:
to ensure that banks do not rely upon the window as a backstop
for proprietary trading or other risky activity. We realize
there is more work to be done to ensure clarity.
Alignment of interest: We want to ensure alignment of
interest between those making decisions in the financial market
and the providers of the long-term capital that they are
deploying. But alignment means sharing not just rewards, but
risks, and over the long term.
For that reason, we support the risk retention proposals
which would require those who issue asset-backed securities to
retain at least a 5 percent piece of the credit risk of any
asset.
As a purchaser of asset-backed securities, CalPERS wants to
see that its own long-term economic interest in these
securities is aligned with those originating the
securitizations and underlying debt obligations.
Credit ratings: CalPERS supports reform of the industry.
These entities played a troubling role in the financial crisis.
They provided many securitized products with investment grade
ratings, even though underlying debt instruments pose serious
risks of default.
In response, Dodd-Frank included some important provisions
intended to include transparency and accountability, and we
have more detail in our written testimony. We are hopeful the
SEC will act swiftly to issue final rules and also to withdraw
the no-action letter that allows credit rating agencies to
avoid liability for false ratings in securities filings.
Shareowner rights: Effective regulation also relies upon
market participants playing their proper role. For that reason,
shareowner rights, both to information and the ability to
follow through and take action, are vital. Investor protection
starts with shareholder rights. We see it as self-help.
A good example is the new rule known as ``say on pay.'' We
are pleased the SEC adopted final rules on executive
compensation last year, and we have just completed our second
proxy season under these rules. We see a positive impact.
Dialogue with companies has improved and many companies are
making sensible reforms in response to shareowner concerns.
There are some additional rules to complete the set, and we
look forward to their promulgation by the SEC.
Finally, regulation--
Chairman Garrett. You are 1 minute and 40 seconds over,
so--
Ms. Simpson. Oh, I apologize.
We would like to ensure that funding is secure and
adequate. There is work to be done. We are willing to continue
with our engagement with regulators. Difficult as the work is,
it must be put on track.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Simpson can be found on page
151 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, and I appreciate that.
And finally, Mr. Vanderslice, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL VANDERSLICE, PRESIDENT, THE COMMERCIAL REAL
ESTATE FINANCE COUNCIL (CREFC)

Mr. Vanderslice. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters,
and members of the subcommittee, my name is Paul Vanderslice. I
am a managing director at Citigroup Global Markets where I have
worked for the last 28 years.
I am here today in my capacity as president of the
Commercial Real Estate Finance Council, also known as the
CREFC. CREFC is the collective voice of the $3.5 trillion
commercial real estate finance industry. Its members are
portfolio lenders such as banks and insurance, commercial
mortgage-backed securities lenders, issuers and investors, as
well as a variety of firms that service these lenders and
investors.
We appreciate the opportunity to share our views on the
impact of the Dodd-Frank regulations on credit availability for
commercial real estate. CREFC recognizes the importance of many
aspects of Dodd-Frank, including risk retention, better
disclosure, and increased transparency.
However, we are concerned that some of the proposed
regulations go beyond congressional intent, and when analyzed
in the aggregate have a combined effect that hinders credit and
outweighs the benefits intended for investors and borrowers.
Therefore, CREFC believes it is imperative that regulators
abide by Executive Order 13563 which requires that regulators
take into account the overall costs of the regulations, adopt
regulations where the benefits justify the costs, and ensure
regulations impose the least burden on society. We appreciate
the subcommittee taking the opportunity to exercise its
oversight over this issue.
The U.S. commercial real estate market is funded by $3.5
trillion in commercial mortgages and has approximately $1.5
trillion in equity. Approximately $2 trillion of commercial
mortgage debt is scheduled to mature in the next 5 years,
almost $400 billion per year.
Traditional portfolio lenders simply lack the capacity to
fulfill the aggregate CRE financing need. This is so even after
you account for additional borrower equity, new valuations, and
tighter loan-to-value ratios. Therefore, the refinancing gap
could be in excess of $100 billion per year over the next 5
years and likely much larger. This shortfall is between what
portfolio lenders can provide and what is necessary to
refinance existing debt and fund those commercial real estate
loans necessary for economic growth.
Over the last 2 decades, CMBS has provided this gap
funding, much of it in non-CBD markets. Bloomfield, Michigan,
and Paramus, New Jersey, would be examples of these non-CBD
markets.
That said, the CMBS industry is in the midst of a fragile
recovery. There is only $30 billion to $35 billion of projected
issuance this year; 2012 will only be 18 percent of the 2006
volume of $200 billion, and 15 percent of the 2007 peak volume
of $230 billion. We have not seen issuance this low since 1997.
A few lenders in 2011, because of the volatility, left the
market, shuttered their entire CMBS businesses. And they did
not believe in the growth of the market. There are more loan
rollovers than new CMBS issues. So the market is actually
losing size and may begin to lose its relevance over time. This
is partially due to the headwinds facing the United States'
weak economic growth forecast, as well as the intensifying
European crisis.
However, the market also faces the pending implementation
of the Dodd-Frank regulations and their combined effects. While
the former cannot be controlled, the latter can be--as an
example, the premium capture cash reserve account, also known
as PCCRA, included in the proposed risk retention regulations,
but not contemplated by the Dodd-Frank Act itself,
In a survey of CMBS loan originators and issuers, 92
percent of the respondents said that the imposition of PCCRA
would decrease loan origination volume from current levels.
Almost 62 percent of those respondents said that the volume
decreases would be more than 50 percent.
Some indicated reductions would be as much as 90 percent to
100 percent. All respondents indicated that the cost of loans
to borrowers would increase; 92 percent said the cost increase
would be 50 basis points or more; 46 percent indicated the cost
increase would be more like 100 basis points.
As an example, on a $10 million loan request, the loan
would work today at a 5 percent rate. If the loan were 6
percent, the supportable debt would only be $9 million.
Extrapolate this to the $100 billion refinancing gap that I had
mentioned before, and that would be a $10 billion per year
shortfall. Therefore, this rule would constrain credit minimum
to the tune of $10 billion a year over the next 5 years.
Furthermore, in a separate survey of the CREFC board of
governors, 78 percent of our board and 73 percent of our
investment-grade investors that the PCCRA is purportedly
designed to protect believe that PCCRA implementation would
hinder CMBS. This is just one example from the 17 regulations
that would affect CMBS.
We believe PCCRA: one, is outside of the congressional
intent of risk retention; two, would limit CRE lending when it
is needed most; and three, would materially raise the cost of
debt, which would hurt the non-CBD markets the most, and that
is the very market that CMBS has historically served.
This is why we are urging Congress to ensure regulators
follow the congressional intent and Administration policy
through Executive Order 13563. Without a strong return of CMBS,
local businesses will be denied access to essential liquidity.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vanderslice can be found on
page 168 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I very much appreciate your testimony as
well.
And so, again, to the entire panel, I appreciate your
coming here and your testimony. You all indicated that you
welcome any questions, and so we have some. And I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelleher, I listened to Ms. Simpson, who indicated that
she saw some benefits to, and she listed them, with regard to
current law, Dodd-Frank, but she also saw some need for changes
or reform or what have you in certain areas, and you went
through some of those areas.
But in listening to your testimony, Mr. Kelleher, it seems
as though you are presenting us with an either-or situation, or
a false choice situation. That is to say, either we have Dodd-
Frank as it is and as it is being implemented by the
regulators, or we have no regulation whatsoever.
But I don't think there is anyone from either side of the
aisle who has ever suggested that we have no regulation. I know
it came as a surprise a week or so ago to Ranking Member Frank
when we indicated that we on this side of the aisle actually
put forth a proposal for regulation prior to Dodd-Frank being
presented. So there are alternatives to it.
Is it your position that the bill as written and as being
implemented is without flaw, does not need change, that we
should not be relying upon any empirical data, as Mr.
Vanderslice and others here have indicated?
Mr. Kelleher. Thank you for your question.
Chairman Garrett. Sure.
Mr. Kelleher. Nothing that comes out of a democratic
process, I believe, is flawless. That is the nature of a
democratic process. There are compromises that have to be made.
The other important part of the democratic process that
produced the Dodd-Frank law is that it was open to the public
and it was considered for about 2 years before it was passed.
In fairness, the industry had vast and multiple opportunities
to participate and they have vast and multiple opportunities to
participate in the rulemaking process.
But instead of listening to what people say when they say
they are for financial reform, let us look at what they do. Who
is supporting funding for the regulators? Who is burying the
regulators with paper? Who is saying, ``We are for financial
reform,'' and yet criticizing it. So you are right--
Chairman Garrett. So, reclaiming my time--
Mr. Kelleher. --that is a theoretical possibility, but--
Chairman Garrett. Right. Reclaiming my time, who is burying
with paper, I guess, is one of the questions that we are asking
here, is who is burying them with paper, in the sense that
maybe there is just so much that we are asking the regulators
to do that they can't find the proverbial needle in the
haystack, and then what are the actual outcomes of that?
Mr. Deutsch, in your testimony, you referenced a study by
Mark Zandi. And I believe you said--correct me if I am wrong--
that in his study, the impact of all this, of the
implementation of the regulations would raise mortgage costs
for me and you, the average person, by between 100 and 400
basis points, which means one to four points, basically. Right?
Is that what the Zandi report said?
Mr. Deutsch. The only technical clarification is that is
just one aspect of Dodd-Frank, is the premium capture reserve
account by itself--
Chairman Garrett. We have asked the regulators who are
inundated with all this: Is there anything that refutes the
Zandi report? We haven't gotten an answer from them. Have you
seen anything that refutes the Zandi report on this?
Mr. Deutsch. Everything we have seen and every canvassing
we have done with our members supports the analysis that
mortgage rates would increase substantially anywhere from one
to four--
Chairman Garrett. Okay, I appreciate that. All we go by is
what we ask the regulator--not all, but what we go by. And they
are not giving us anything to refute that.
Now, Mr. Vanderslice, you raised an interesting point, and
I have heard this before as far as on the commercial sector as
far as opposed to, I am thinking about the residential area.
And I have heard this before is that the market has shrunk and
that there is how many trillions of refinance rollover?
Mr. Vanderslice. In total debt, including CMBS, about $400
billion per year over the next 5 years.
Chairman Garrett. And without the securitization market
coming back in, we can't throw this all back on to the banks.
They can't pick it up.
Mr. Vanderslice. Just as an example, the life insurance
industry last year put out a record number of dollars, which
was about $45 billion. So that was a record year for them.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Vanderslice. So our point in this is that you need
everybody. You need portfolio lenders. You need securitizers.
But there is such a large number of rollovers coming that
without a functioning SMBS market, the impending rollovers are
adding up every day. The market today is relatively small.
Chairman Garrett. So this is one where the issue of Ms.
Simpson's comment, penny wise or pound foolish on this
situation--we want to be penny wise, but the implication of it
is that if we don't get it right, what you are telling us is
that you could see a dramatic downturn in the commercial
marketplace.
And that would do what to the economy, what to jobs, and
the rest?
Mr. Vanderslice. Yes, commercial real estate is a very
large part of the economy. Without building owners, they don't
have the ability to attract tenants, they can't do tenant
improvement--
Chairman Garrett. And since my time is over, can we simply
address this issue by making sure that the rule of Dodd-Frank
applies to the area where it is intended to apply, and in this
area it was not intended to apply--
Mr. Vanderslice. That is correct. PCCRA is a late addition
and it is the one big impediment. CREFC again, recognizes the
important of many of the aspects of Dodd-Frank, including risk
retention, increased disclosure, transparency--PCCRA is a
major, major bump in the road.
Chairman Garrett. I think I understand you on that. Great.
Thank you, everyone.
The gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to thank all of our presenters here today. I have listened very
carefully to all of the testimony. And first, I want to say to
Mr. Kelleher that I appreciate your defining what took place
with the economic crisis that was created in this country
basically initiated by Wall Street and all that was going on.
And I appreciate your passion as you describe the crisis.
As we all know, the fallout from that crisis continues. As
I travel throughout this country, with these boarded-up
neighborhoods, and these foreclosures, and families who have
been literally put at great risk because of all of this, what
you describe is absolutely true.
And I think no one on this panel can disagree with what you
described as the economic crisis that put this country at great
risk. Having said that, Dodd-Frank was a tremendous effort to
try and deal with this crisis that was created.
And Dodd-Frank was modified, some of the ideals in Dodd-
Frank were eliminated during the conference committee.
Everybody tried to do something about strengthening our
regulation and oversight without destroying the markets that so
many people are here to talk about have been negatively
impacted.
Having said that, in the 2 years since Dodd-Frank passed,
we have seen the robo-signing of foreclosure documents, the
implosion of MF Global, the losses of the London Whale, the
bungling of the Facebook initial public offering, the LIBOR
manipulation scandal, and we learned just yesterday about
another case of missing customer funds at a futures brokerage.
And this is to name just a few of the many episodes.
So, this continues. Some of us have tried very hard to
understand what is being said about the risk to the market that
supposedly are created by Dodd-Frank. To that end, I, against
my better judgment, supported the Republicans JOBS program
where we made it easier for companies to raise capital, these
IPOs.
I supported crowdfunding, in an effort to support the small
banks. And of course, I supported rolling back some of the
protections for investors in all of this in an attempt to try
and send a signal that we are cooperating in whatever way we
can to do modifications and innovations because we think that
perhaps there is some room to compromise.
However, what we see is a continued effort to undermine
Dodd-Frank, whether it is defunding the regulators, repealing
the Orderly Liquidation Authority, repealing the risk
retention, delaying derivatives regulations for 2 years,
repealing the liability for credit rating agencies, prohibiting
the SEC regulation of international swaps, and on and on and
on.
We continue to get complaints about how harmful it is going
to be to have transparency with the derivatives and on and on
and on. Having said that, Mr. Deas, you represent the Chamber,
and I guess you are also vice president and treasurer of the
FMC Corporation, et cetera. Okay, so the Chamber has a lot of
influences and power here. What is it you want us to do? Would
you like us to get rid of Dodd-Frank? Do you have some better
ideas about how to protect the investors and the customers?
What is it you want this Congress to do?
Mr. Deas. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member
Waters.
As I described in my testimony, I work for a leading
manufacturing company, a 130-year-old American company, and we,
like you, are very concerned about the disruptions that
occurred in the financial markets in 2008.
However, the regulations as they are being implemented are
affecting Main Street companies, end-users, for instance of
derivatives like FMC, and other members of the National
Association of Corporate Treasurers, and yet we comprise less
than 10 percent of the over-the-counter derivatives trading
that goes on, and we were not engaged in the systemically risky
activities that some of those who caused this problem were.
Main Street companies weren't writing naked credit default
swaps. We were using derivatives to hedge future purchases of
natural gas used in manufacturing, exposures to changes in
interest rates, hedging foreign exchange rates on our exports,
and other activities like that.
What we have said is that the effect of these regulations
is now coming to Main Street businesses and you yourself
supported the legislation to clarify the margining exemption
for end-user companies from having to post that margin, which
would be a direct subtraction from funds that we could
otherwise invest in our business.
And I believe you, yourself, also supported the bill to
correct the inter-affiliate issue where derivative transactions
between companies within the same group are being regulated as
though they are between two banks.
So, I thank you for those efforts, and that is what we
want, an exemption for end-user companies from the broad sweep
of these regulations that we believe will be to the detriment
of American business and job creation.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
So, I suppose what you are saying to me is that you do
recognize that there are companies that were reckless and who
put this country at risk and we should have tougher regulations
and Dodd-Frank does do some of that?
Is that what you agree to?
Mr. Schweikert [presiding]. You are way over time, so--
Ms. Waters. Okay.
Mr. Schweikert. I will give you time for a quick response,
and then I need to go on to my chairman, because I don't want
to make my chairman mad.
Mr. Deas. I agree there were problems in 2008, but the
concern for these problems as they affect American business and
Market Street companies like ours is that the cure is worse
than the problem, from our perspective.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay, with that, thank you, Ranking Member
Waters.
Chairman Bachus?
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, and you didn't make me mad. Ms.
Waters and Mr. Kelleher have given me a headache, but other
than that, I think I am okay.
Mr. Kelleher, listening to your opening statement, and
reading it last night, it kind of was deja vu, because you were
in Senate leadership when we were considering Dodd-Frank and we
were sort of having some of the same debates that we are having
now. And I noticed that you, I think, continued to paint all of
Wall Street as the cause of the greatest depression since--I
think it was a depression, probably still is a recession--but
Mr. Deas said that 90 percent of Dodd-Frank affects Main
Street, the operation of every community bank and credit union
in the country. But, let us consider--and I know this Mr.
Garrett, we were kind of having the same thought when you said
that the regulators were buried in paper. The three of us agree
on that. They are struggling to write rules. It is just a
daunting path. But I would submit to you that, that paper is a
result of Dodd-Frank. That is why it is there.
And I think you have to admit that even before Dodd-Frank,
they weren't enforcing the rules that they had. Now, Ms. Waters
has mentioned MF Global. She mentioned, I think it is PFGBest,
which failed yesterday. She mentioned LIBOR. None of that is
due to Dodd-Frank. That is just pure, out and out accounting
fraud. That is segregation of customer funds.
For 70 years, we have had rules against that. The most
basic rule in finance is you segregate funds, you don't mix
funds or do what PFGBest did, representing that they had $200
million in an account, and they only had $5 million. Now how in
the world did the CFPB miss that? How in the world did that go
over? It is like Madoff claiming all this money was there.
You mentioned subprime lending and securitization. In 2005,
I proposed legislation on subprime lending, and I wrote the
ranking member and said, ``We need to move a bill.'' And
actually, I think he agreed to 90 percent, but then litigation
attorneys objected to some of what we wanted to put in as far
as a safe harbor.
I know you were a litigation attorney. I think the Senate
leadership said that was a nonstarter. But we did pass a
subprime lending bill before Dodd-Frank, and I think at least
everyone said that would stop most of that. I want to introduce
on the LIBOR issue, Ms. Waters--this is an article in Reuters I
think from this morning or last night. The regulators, since
2007, knew there were problems with LIBOR. In fact, Barclay's
came to them in 2008 and said, ``We think other institutions
are misrepresenting their costs.''
And it is affecting our ability to operate. The Fed
actually suggested reforms in 2008. Secretary Geithner--he is
now the Secretary of the Treasury, as we all know, but he was
the head of the New York Fed at that time--actually scheduled a
meeting in 2008 and it said the purpose was fixing LIBOR. But
no one ever--they knew there was a problem. People came to them
and said there was a problem. They didn't do anything about it.
MF Global, now I don't know how in the world people can equate
stealing $300 million worth of clients' money, customer money,
with JPMorgan Chase, a hedging operation that lost their own
money.
Isn't there a difference in our right to hedge our own
money and lose money? And investment banking is inherently
risky. All JPMorgan did was took a risk and they lost on that
risk. But even if you go back the last 2 years and you take all
their hedging operations, they made $40-something billion just
in the last 2 years. So suddenly, they lose $2 billion, and
somebody jumps up and equates that to misconduct?
Mr. Lynch. Will the gentleman yield?
Chairman Bachus. I will not, but let me--surely--
Mr. Lynch. It is not $2 billion. It is not $2 billion
anymore.
Chairman Bachus. Well, $7 billion. Let us say $7 billion.
You are still 30--
Mr. Lynch. Let us say $9 billion. We had the guy in last
week.
Chairman Bachus. The gentleman is not in order. This idea
that you are going to go in and micromanage every company and
say that every investment they make has to make money is a
fool's errand. There are investments made every day. Loans are
made every day that aren't going to be paid back. But surely,
we can all agree that stealing customers' money or depositors'
money, for example, MF Global--surely everybody on this
committee thinks that is a worse situation than JPMorgan. And
we have had three or four hearings on JPMorgan, and we had one
on MF Global.
And here you have a company that misrepresents and said
$200 million worth of customer money was in a bank account and
there was only $5 million. Now I submit to you that we would
better enforce the good old accounting rules, fraud, criminal
conduct. But they hadn't even shown that they can invest when
someone comes to the Fed and says we have a problem, that
people are misrepresenting things, or it it takes them 4 or 5
years to even discover there is a problem, when they were told
about the problem?
People went to the SEC and complained about Madoff for
years. And let me close by saying that you say--and this
argument we had back, I remember the same argument when we
passed Dodd-Frank. You all argued against a cost-benefit
analysis. And I will give you this, you are consistent. You say
today that imposing our burdens on cost-benefit analysis is a
tactic without merit. So asking what the cost is as opposed to
the benefit, you actually believe is without merit? Do you
really believe that?
Mr. Kelleher. As stated in my testimony, it spells out how
cost-benefit analysis can be done right, consistent with the
statute and how it is being used by those to defeat financial
reform. And that is the distinction. That is a misquote of my
testimony--
Chairman Bachus. You just think that our motive is wrong--
Mr. Kelleher. No, it is not that. It is how you go about it
and what goal one is trying to accomplish. We spell that out
quite clearly. We have also spelled it out in opposition to the
ICI, the Chamber, and SIFMA in the litigation. But if I might
also say--
Chairman Bachus. Well, you all voted--
Mr. Kelleher. I did not--
Chairman Bachus. You all opposed cost-benefit--
Mr. Kelleher. I did not equate MF Global with JPMorgan.
Chairman Bachus. Okay.
Mr. Kelleher. MF Global is not systemically significant.
JPMorgan is backed up by the U.S. taxpayers and the Federal
safety net. And everybody who cares about taxpayers better care
about JPMorgan, and--
Chairman Bachus. No client, no customer, no depositor, no
taxpayer is threatened by JPMorgan--
Mr. Kelleher. That is not true.
Mr. Schweikert. Gentlemen?
Mr. Kelleher. Can I just very quickly respond--
Mr. Schweikert. No. No.
Mr. Kelleher. --to a couple of points--
Mr. Schweikert. --no--
Mr. Kelleher. One of which is why the regulators didn't--
Mr. Schweikert. Sir?
Why don't the regulators enforce the rules they have?
Mr. Kelleher. --defunded.
Ms. Waters. Unanimous consent, please, Mr. Chairman, to
allow the gentleman to respond?
Mr. Schweikert. Actually, no. I am going to be the one to
object. Because I have been trying to be very kind to both
sides here, particularly--
Chairman Bachus. And Ms. Waters let me say this, we could
go on for 2 hours--
Mr. Schweikert. No, I understand.
Chairman Bachus. --and I don't think we are ever going to
agree.
Mr. Schweikert. No.
Ms. Waters. Regular order, Mr. Chairman, regular order.
Mr. Schweikert. Yes, Mr. Chairman, did you have a document
you wanted to put into--
Chairman Bachus. Yes, I want to introduce this report in
Reuters that our regulators knew about this LIBOR--
Ms. Waters. Regular order? Mr. Chairman, regular order?
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman, without objection, it is so
ordered.
Chairman Bachus. Yes, and that MF Global--
Ms. Waters. Regular order, Mr. Chairman? Regular order?
Chairman Bachus. --and that the regulators were on the
scene for 5 years and never discovered it.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you. It is so ordered.
Mr. Hinojosa?
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you, Chairman Schweikert, and Ranking
Member Waters. As we approach the 2-year anniversary of the
passing of the Dodd-Frank Act, my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle are continually holding these hearings, not on
proposed legislation, but to attack the Act and to make a
political point. Meanwhile, new cracks in Wall Street are
revealing just how important it is for Congress to fund the
regulators at appropriate levels and to encourage them to
propose and finalize the remaining rules under the Act.
In the last year, we have seen high-profile Wall Street
players being convicted of insider trading. JPMorgan
experienced an incredible loss of an amount up to $9 billion as
a result of exotic credit default swaps. And most recently, we
have learned of the involvement of Barclay's and other banks in
the LIBOR rate-fixing scandal. Just last month, JPMorgan's CEO
Mr. Dimon testified before this committee, and in a response to
my question about a need to re-evaluate Wall Street's culture,
he told us that there are people you can trust on Wall Street
and not to paint every firm with the same brush.
I wish he would have talked about the opportunities for
culture change in an organization in response to crisis. As a
former businessman, I can tell you that I understand that this
is management 101. In comparison, many analysts are pointing to
the culture at Barclay's and other global investment banks
overall as a systemic culprit in the LIBOR fixing scandal. And
yet, here we are discussing how Dodd-Frank is hurting our
investment banks. If anything, the recent events on Wall Street
and in London should encourage us to press ahead with
finalizing the rules under the Dodd-Frank Act.
Just like any large and important bill in our Nation's
history, this Act too shall be fine-tuned and refined over
time. And I have no problem with hearing about these tweaks and
other legitimate issues. However, simply attacking Dodd-Frank
as a whole without discussing new legislation comes across as
overtly political and completely unproductive. That being said,
I will ask my direct question to Ms. Simpson. Title VII of the
Act will place reforms to bring transparency, accountability,
and strong stability to the OTC derivatives marketplace. Do you
agree that the changes in Title VII will bring about this
transparency, accountability, and stability that I am talking
about?
Ms. Simpson. Thank you, sir. Yes, we support the regulation
of derivatives, and I should also say that CalPERS as an
investor, makes extensive use of these instruments. In the
letter which is attached to our testimony, we do explain that
the principle of regulating derivatives is extremely important.
But we accept as a player in the market, a market actor, that
there will be some additional costs. For us, those costs are an
investment in safety and soundness and we think that there is
overall going to be systemic benefit to us as an investor. So
we applaud the intent of Title VII and we also realize that we
must not let the perfect be the enemy of the good, and that
wrangling over the detail and delaying implementation is simply
not a good strategy.
We want regulators and market participants to get around
the table, roll up their sleeves, and make sure that these
rules are put on the books. There are some imperfections, but
that is in the nature of making legislation, as in the making
of sausage, as someone once said. But we do need to get these
rules on the books. We mustn't delay, it is far too important
tor the beneficiaries for whom we invest. Thank you.
Mr. Hinojosa. Mr. Kelleher, I also appreciate your passion
in your testimony. You remind me of former Senator Kennedy.
Tell me, what can Congress do to get all the banks, so that
we don't have things like today's New York Times--or yesterday,
Monday, the July 9th New York Times which says that big banks
face the fallout from the global investigation into interest
rate manipulation? American and British lawmakers are
scrutinizing regulators who failed to take action that might
have prevented years of illegal activity.
Mr. Kelleher. Thank you for the question, and thank you for
the compliment. I appreciate it.
One of the most important things that can be done very
quickly by the United States Congress is to fund the regulators
adequately. Wall Street often--and it is too broad, it doesn't
apply to everybody--is a high-crime area. Deregulation took all
the cops off the beat. You added the responsibilities to the
regulators. The regulators are the Wall Street policemen. You
added massive responsibilities--
Mr. Hinojosa. Time is running out on us, and I agree with
you. Did you know that we need 1,200 people working in that
Bureau, and we only have 800?
Mr. Kelleher. Yes, and they have no IT. It is an unfair
fight. And the Street is constantly overwhelming them, knowing
that they don't have the personnel, the resources or the
technology to compete. It is an unfair fight.
People who say they are for financial reform are not for
financial reform if they do not vote for big increases for
these regulators. They are voting for Wall Street profits, not
taxpayer pockets.
Mr. Hinojosa. I agree with you 100 percent.
And I yield back.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you.
Mr. Neugebauer?
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Deutsch, I have been kind of watching the
securitization markets a little bit since the 2008 period, and
it appears that, for example, in the automobiles and credit
cards and some of those areas, the securitization market has in
many cases returned to pre-2008 levels.
The area where we are still seeing a huge amount of vacancy
in private activity is obviously in the residential market
area.
Just to kind of set the framework here, is there a
qualified automobile loan provision anywhere?
Mr. Deutsch. In the risk retention proposals, there is a
qualified auto loan exemption that would require at least a 20
percent downpayment to buy a car. I am not aware of anybody who
puts a 20 percent downpayment on a car. It is precisely the
type of concern we have of a risk retention rule designed for
mortgages that is being applied to autos, but in fact, it
doesn't really apply to autos.
Mr. Neugebauer. But basically these markets that I am
talking about don't have all the onerous provisions that have
been talked about for the residential market. So would you
attribute the fact there is a lack of private activity to the
fact that there is just a huge amount of uncertainty about
market participants coming back into that?
Mr. Deutsch. Yes, there are willing investors and willing
issuers engaging in the auto market, $50 billion to $60 billion
a year in transactions, to which Dodd-Frank rules don't
currently apply. And I think the investors feel that they have
appropriate protections to be able to purchase those securities
and yield good returns.
Mr. Neugebauer. One of the things that a lot of people
talked about, and I think you brought up, or somebody brought
up, is that the taxpayers have about $200 billion invested in
Freddie and Fannie. And so the discussion has been, what do you
replace Freddie and Fannie with? And obviously many of us think
you replace it with private market activity.
If there were not all of these uncertainties out there
today, dealing with risk retention and Qualified Residential
Mortgages and all of the things that are out there, do you
believe that there would be more private market activity in the
residential market area?
Mr. Deutsch. I would say there would be an increase in
private market activity, but without resolving Fannie and
Freddie, sort of the big outstanding question, it is extremely
difficult for private market participants to compete against an
underpriced government guarantee.
Mr. Neugebauer. It is because basically the risk premium
that the private market wants versus these mortgages has been
sanitized by the American taxpayers. It is hard for them to
compete.
If that playing field was leveled, if Freddie and Fannie,
for example, were required to charge a higher guarantee fee,
where then the marketplace can say, ``I think I would rather
keep that return because I have looked at the integrity of
those mortgages, rather than paying a 50, 70 basis point
premium or giving up that much return.''
Mr. Deutsch. Yes, I think there is no question that private
market capital would return back to the mortgage sector. Rates
would be higher, but that is I think the appropriate balance
between risk and return in lending out money for people to take
out mortgages.
Mr. Neugebauer. It turns out we weren't pricing those
mortgages at Freddie and Fannie appropriately anyway, because
obviously the risk premium they were using turned out not to
be--
Mr. Deutsch. I think it is approximately $200 billion
underpricing of the risk premium currently to the U.S.
taxpayer.
Mr. Neugebauer. Right.
Mr. Bentsen, I know that your folks have looked at some of
the securitization issues. What do you think is the bigger
inhibitant?
Mr. Bentsen. I agree with Mr. Deutsch in much of what he
said. I think that for starters, the premium capture cash
reserve is something that Congress, we believe, never intended
in the original legislation. And as I said, both from our sell
side and our buy side members, who don't always agree, both
feel that this really takes the legs out from under the ability
to really restart the securitization market, and in particular
as it relates to the residential mortgage bond market.
So for starters, we think that provision really ought to be
greatly amended or taken out in order to make sure that we can
attract private capital back into the securitization market.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes. I think I was a little perplexed, too,
that we decided to use a premium from Freddie and Fannie to
finance other activities rather than trying to use that to make
the American taxpayers at least get some of their--
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Neugebauer.
Mr. Lynch?
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Kelleher, you were interrupted. You had an exchange
going with the full committee chairman. There was an analysis
going on, a comparison going on between yourself and the full
committee chairman about the difference between MF Global,
which actually stole--well, took client money to fill a hole
that it had and some losses it was generating.
And the comparison was being made with Jamie Dimon and
JPMorgan Chase where they simply--they were here a couple of
weeks ago and we were asking them about their $2 billion loss,
which was staggering at the time. And interestingly enough, my
last question to Mr. Dimon was, there is word on the street
that this loss could go to $5 billion.
And the full committee chairman refused me the opportunity
to get an answer. He said my time had expired and he excused
Mr. Dimon from answering that question.
And now we understand it could go as high as $9 billion.
And you were talking about--you were trying to address the risk
that the JPMorgan Chase instance presented, and I would like to
give you some time to explain the danger there to the American
taxpayer.
Mr. Kelleher. Thank you, Congressman Lynch.
There is no similarity between what happened at MF Global
and JPMorgan Chase. In fact, MF Global should be the model for
the future, which is to say, it is a company that made wild
bets, it shouldn't have done it, it failed, it is in
bankruptcy, it lost its money and people lost their jobs with
no systemic risk at all.
That will never happen if JPMorgan fails. If JPMorgan
fails, it is going to be a systemic event that will be saved by
the U.S. taxpayer. It has a balance sheet of $2.35 trillion. It
has 270,000 employees across the world, thousands of legal
entities, 550 subsidiaries, and on and on.
And it is backed, therefore, by the U.S. taxpayer. It gets
massive subsidies, both on the FDIC side and the Fed side. So
the U.S. taxpayer is underpinning JPMorgan Chase and the rest
of the too-big-to-fail banks.
What JPMorgan Chase did in the so-called London Whale
splash is it is reported to have bet over $100 billion in
exotic, illiquid, complex derivatives, intending to make a lot
of money. It didn't make a lot of money; it is losing money.
And it is locked into those investments and can't get out.
It is a classic example of what banks backed up by the U.S.
taxpayer should not be doing. It is also a classic example of
what they did before the crisis, where they lost tons and tons
of money.
And the chairman mentioned, by the way, why should we care?
That operation has made $40 billion or $50 billion over time.
We should care because they are claiming falsely that it is
hedging. Hedging doesn't make money. Hedging should have
offsetting gains and losses. That is not what they are doing.
They are doing proprietary trading under the guise of hedging,
which is what everybody here was worried about when the Volcker
Rule was put into place to stop proprietary trading, which
contributed significantly to the crisis and the need for
taxpayer bailouts in 2008.
Mr. Lynch. Very good.
I do see the comparison here. I remember I was on this
committee back in 2007-2008 when this whole crisis evolved, and
I remember one of the first events that we had, we had the
failure of the Bear Stearns funds, but I remember distinctly
the impact on Merrill Lynch. And at the time the CEO, whose
name was Stanley O'Neal, and he came out and he did a press
conference and he was reporting $2 billion in losses, $2.3
billion, something like that, $2.3 billion in losses of Merrill
Lynch.
But he reassured people that this was well under control.
But then 6 days later, he had to come out again, and he said,
``Actually, our losses are $7.3 billion.'' And, embarrassingly,
he again said, ``We have things under control.'' And then,
about 2 weeks after that, he had to come back and say, ``We
actually lost $11 billion.'' At that point, he was fired.
Now, the problem there is because these structured products
are so complex he didn't know what they lost. These folks who
were supposed to be the smartest, it was so opaque, and so
complex that they didn't know what they lost.
And that is what Dodd-Frank is trying to get at with our
transparency requirements, with the reporting requirements, to
allow folks like Ms. Simpson over at CalPERS to know what those
pension funds are investing in, to know what the counterparty
exposure is, to have some transparency, to make sure that
people have skin in the game and that there is retained capital
there to address some losses if they do occur.
And so it doesn't have to be this way, where you folks
defend the banks and anything they want to do, and then folks
try to shackle, I guess, legitimate business practice. I think
there is an opportunity here to actually protect the taxpayer.
Ms. Simpson, could you just use the last 45 seconds here to
talk about the special danger to, I think, vulnerable parties,
especially vulnerable parties like pension funds, if we were to
go back to the way things were before Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Schweikert. Ms. Simpson, I will ask you to go quickly,
and pull the microphone close.
Ms. Simpson. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Simpson. We simply cannot afford another crisis. In the
worst dark days of the most recent crisis, CalPERS was $70
billion down. Now, we have grown our way back to close to where
we were, but it is simply not achievable to earn rates of
return that would plug that gap. So these reforms for us are
absolutely system critical to long-term sustainability.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much. I yield back.
And I thank the gentleman for his indulgence.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Hensarling?
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that the study by Mark Zandi of Moody Analytics has
already been brought up and discussed, but I would like to dig
a little deeper into this matter. I, myself, have not seen the
study. I do know Mr. Zandi is a frequently cited economist,
particularly by my colleagues on the other side of the aisle.
Mr. Bentsen and Mr. Deutsch, I think you both alluded to
this study, so I assume perhaps you have looked into it more
deeply. But as I understand it, and I guess, Mr. Deutsch, I am
reading from your testimony, that the premium capture cash
reserve account that the rules promulgated under Dodd-Frank,
that according to Mark Zandi, this could increase mortgage
interest rates 1 to 4 percentage points; 100 to 400 basis
points.
The last time I looked, I believe 30-year fixed-rate
mortgages are going for roughly 3.75 percent. So is it a fair
assessment to say that Dodd-Frank has the potential to double
mortgage interest rates by the premium capture cash reserve
account alone?
Mr. Deutsch?
Mr. Deutsch. I guess my response is that just one provision
of Dodd-Frank could double the interest rate. If you add all
the provisions relative to Dodd-Frank, it would be well more
than that.
Mr. Hensarling. Staggering. Have you seen any other
studies? And so, again, this is just one provision of Dodd-
Frank, cumulative impact.
I believe also you mentioned in your testimony about the
Qualified Mortgage; that due to a subjective standard that will
be promulgated by the CBPB, which frankly puts the capital
``S'' in subjectivity, as we all know. But you cite, I believe,
another study that says that the lawsuits arising from that
could cost anywhere from $70,000 to $100,000.
Have you calculated what that provision alone could do to
interest rates? Do you know the answer to that?
Mr. Deutsch. I think a lot of our members have tried to
calculate just how much the costs would be. And they have all
come to the conclusion that it just will be too prohibitively
high to be able to engage in any mortgage lending even close to
the line of what a nonqualified mortgage is. So they simply
will not be able to originate mortgages even close to that line
of what a Qualified Mortgage would be.
Mr. Hensarling. Mr. Bentsen, again, you cited the Zandi
study as well. Could you elaborate on its findings for your
organization?
Mr. Bentsen. I agree with Mr. Deutsch that just the premium
recapture provision alone changes the economics so
significantly that it could have an impact like Zandi and his
colleague found in the Moody's study. And so to his point, that
is just one provision.
And I think it comes down the points that I made earlier,
it is important how these rules are written and how they are
implemented. It is important to consider the costs associated
with how the rules are proposed. It may seem like mountains of
paper, but that is known as the Administrative Procedures Act,
and that is the whole process which Congress established long
ago to comment as rules are written.
That is why, like the Zandi study; like the Oliver Wyman
study as it relates to corporate bond issuance and the impact
that the Volcker Rule as proposed could have; like the Federal
Reserve's proposal for single counterparty credit limits and
the impact that could have--we have to look at then in the
totality and what the costs will be to the cost of capital and
the cost of credit. And beyond any reasonable doubt, that will
have an impact on economic activity.
Mr. Hensarling. Mr. Deutsch, on page six of your testimony,
you state that the ABS market briefly ground to a halt in
December of 2010 because of investor concerns over the Orderly
Liquidation Authority, and only resumed due to a near-term
patch in the form of an FDIC General Counsel's letter. These
types of risk will be priced into the asset-backed security
market, resulting in higher costs for consumers and businesses.
Could you elaborate, please?
Mr. Deutsch. Yes, the Orderly Liquidation Authority created
a provision that allows the FDIC effectively to step in for
nonbank financial companies. When asset-backed securities are
issued, the auto companies create and hold title effectively to
the car loan and they will sell off the asset-backed
securities.
Investors began to realize, and it took them 6 months to
actually figure out the complex weave of the Dodd-Frank
regulation, that in fact under the Orderly Liquidation
Authority, the FDIC may be able to come in and take the
underlying notes to the auto securitization, in effect,
eliminating the securitization part of the securitization,
which would leave an investor unprotected.
Ultimately, the FDIC had to step in and patch that, to say,
``No, no, we won't take that in.'' But Dodd-Frank, on its very
face, did allow that, and ultimately the ABS markets, much like
under the 436(g) scenario in July of 2010, had to shut down for
a brief period of time until the FDIC resolved that.
Mr. Hensarling. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Chairman, 2,000 pages and so little time. Thank you.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
I don't know who to address this question to, but perhaps
the worst day in Congress I have had, and for many others, is
when the big banks came to us and said, ``If you don't bail us
out, we are going to take the whole economy down with us.''
One argument there is, is maybe no one bank should be big
enough to take the whole economy down. Another argument is
maybe we should have higher capital requirements. The third
approach is maybe we should just ignore the problem until it
comes up again.
Assuming we want to create a circumstance where, at least
as long as I serve in Congress, which some would argue will
only be a few months, but others might think longer, that we
are not going to have a situation where a bank is able to call
the Treasury and claim they are going to take the whole economy
down with them, unless we bail them out.
Mr. Bentsen, you have handled tougher questions before in
our time together. I don't know if you have a comment or
whether anybody else does.
Mr. Bentsen. Mr. Sherman, I guess I would make a couple of
comments. Dodd-Frank did establish in Title I and Title II
provisions that really address the first two points that you
make, and in terms of establishing a systemic risk regulator
statutorily over large and even not-so-large bank holding
companies, and then establishing the authority to impose bank-
like prudential standards on designated nonbank entities.
In addition--
Mr. Sherman. So if those powers are actually used, you
think that insulates us?
Mr. Bentsen. They are used by law for bank holding
companies with more than $50 billion in assets. But if I may,
Mr. Sherman, it is a very important point. The law also
established the Orderly Liquidation Authority to wind down
failing systemic entities. We supported that. We think that is
a good thing to mitigate systemic risk.
And importantly, the Act precludes--it repealed a provision
under the Federal Reserve Act that precludes the Federal
Reserve, the government, from stepping in to bail out any
failing institution.
And the last thing I would make very clear is that we can't
ignore Basel 2.5 and Basel III, the international capital
accords of which the United States is a party to and which
firms both in the United States and non-U.S. firms operating in
the United States have raised tremendous amounts of capital,
high-quality capital, far greater than where they were before
in meeting the Basel III requirements which haven't even taken
effect yet.
Mr. Sherman. I am sure the shareholders of JPMorgan are
happy that the institution was well-capitalized, and I thank
you for that answer. Dodd-Frank has certainly done a lot to
insulate us, but the amount of that insulation will depend in
large part on how assertive the regulators are in using the
enormous power that we have given them.
Mr. Vanderslice, I have heard from banks in my district
that the regulators get anxious about local and regional bank
exposure to any kind of commercial property. Do you have a
perspective on this?
Mr. Vanderslice. I do. And again, I am here speaking on
behalf of CREFC, not my employer. But as far as the bank
exposure to commercial real estate, I think Basel III, which is
another topic that has not been brought up, basically now
applies to the smaller community banks as well. So the
increased capital, considerations that those banks will have to
have in place again kind of constrains the amount of money that
would at least go into commercial real estate.
You really have two issues. You have a legacy issue on the
balance sheets of a lot of banks and regional banks, small
lenders. And also, you have the wave of maturities coming up.
So you take those two things into account.
And, we think any type of regulation should be supportive
of, kind of see that picture of loans coming due, as well as
increased capital considerations, and kind of take the whole
picture into account.
Mr. Sherman. Do you find that banks are under pressure not
to simply renew loans--you know these are mostly 5-year loans
when they come due when of course foreclosing on the property
exposes the bank to perhaps even more risk?
Mr. Vanderslice. Most of what I am involved in is CMBS,
which is effectively where the loans are sold into a trust,
there is a third party servicer that is brought in. So those
servicers, when a loan reaches its maturity, they go through a
series of scenarios whether it is in the best interest of the
trust that they service to extend or to foreclose or a lot of
times, it is a middle ground where there is a partial
discounted pay off as it is called, and then a restructured
loan.
So there are a variety of different exits, as it is called.
So there is no one solution that fits all.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzpatrick?
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for Mr. Lemke regarding money market
funds, and of course, any member of the panel is welcome to
respond, as well.
It has been widely reported that the SEC is contemplating
new regulations for money market funds, and there are several
members who have expressed concerns about new regulations when
only recently new reforms were implemented.
So I was wondering if you could comment on those reforms,
and specifically how you think reforms are working out?
Mr. Lemke. Absolutely, and the industry agrees very much
that these reforms that were adopted in 2010 need to be given
an opportunity to work.
During last year when we had difficulties in Europe, the
reforms actually worked very well. We had no major issues with
money market funds, and we believe those reforms were more than
adequate to deal with the issues that came up with money market
funds during the crisis.
In particular, the proposals that the SEC is reportedly
talking about while we always support solid regulation in our
industry, these regulation can't destroy the fundamental
structure of a money market fund. And what we have been hearing
from our clients, both in the institutional world and in the
retail world, is they are not in favor of floating NAV funds,
which is one of the options that is being proposed.
And the second option being talked about is redemption fees
and capital hold backs, both of which will be unwieldy and make
the product unworkable. So we are hoping the SEC comes out with
proposals that maintain the integrity of the product that is so
popular with many investors and also is a great source of
funding for so many sources within the country.
Mr. Kelleher. If I may add, we should remember though that
during the fall of 2008, one of the biggest outlays of the U.S.
taxpayers and the government to stop the financial crisis from
actually leading to a collapse of the financial system and a
second great depression, was the guarantee that the U.S.
Government did to put the full faith and credit of the U.S.
Government behind the $3.8 trillion money market fund at the
time.
It was, I believe, the single largest U.S. Government
guarantee of a private activity in the history of the country.
So I am not disagreeing with Mr. Lemke; I am just saying that
it is overwhelmingly important that we get the rules right.
Because contagion and the domino effect run right through the
money market funds.
It is fast money, and it moves fast. If we don't build the
protections around that right, the U.S. taxpayer is going to be
on the hook again.
Mr. Lemke. But it is also important, Dennis, to note that
there were no claims made under that protection, and in fact
the government made $1.2 million of premiums from the industry.
Mr. Kelleher. The government actually did not make $1.2
million on a risk-adjusted basis.
Mr. Lemke. --the question for--
Mr. Kelleher. There were no claims because the guarantee
wasn't there.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Reclaimining my time, Ms. Simpson, do you
think that banks will impose Volcker Rule compliance costs?
Will that ultimately be borne by customers? Who is going to
bear the brunt and the cost of compliance of the Volcker Rule?
Ms. Simpson. Thank you.
The cost will ultimately be borne by shareholders. The
important calculation here is about risk adjusted returns. And
I think that the industry is going to be restructured by these
rules, but it is going to be restructured for the safety and
soundness of the market, which is why we support this.
It is no good to any of this if we can run up high returns,
running very high risks. So it is quite true and we have set
this out in our accompanying letter on the Volcker Rule, that
we anticipate that there will be an impact on liquidity, there
will be an impact on profitability, but actually these are
false returns if they are not underpinned by proper risk
management and Volcker is actually going to help with that.
There is no return without risk, but we need to have risks
properly managed.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Ms. Simpson, are you familiar with Senator
Franken's credit rating agency reform proposal, in the Senate?
Ms. Simpson. Is this regarding the issue of pays model
being rethought?
Mr. Fitzpatrick. It is the Rolodex--the next credit rating
agency that comes up would be assigned to do credit reviews of
structured products.
Ms. Simpson. Yes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Does CalPERS support the Franken
Amendment?
Ms. Simpson. No, we do think the issue of pays model needs
to be revisited because there is an inherent conflict of
interest there, but we do think to have the Rolodex model isn't
actually going to solve the problem.
We want the reforms that have been promised to be put on
the books. We think that is going to be very helpful, but there
is something more flawed in the business model that needs to be
addressed. So we would like an opportunity to get around the
table with the industry and the regulators and try to solve
that problem.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Okay. I yield back, Mr. Chairman, thank
you.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Ms. Moore?
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to start out with Mr. Lemke and sort of follow
up on what Representative Fitzpatrick was discussing to say I
am very concerned about the floating NAV and so I want to start
out by asking you sir, if the SEC and the FDIC and the Fed were
concerned--if they were to promulgate rules that included the
floating net asset values, and of course I think that would
mean this money would flow out of those particular investments.
Where do you think those funds would go? Do you think that
they would go into less regulated or overseas instruments or
vehicles?
And if the industry is so opposed to the floating NAV, how
do we address the concerns of the SEC and the Fed--I believe
that Mr. Kelleher mentioned that we had full backing of the
FDIC, and that is what stabilized the market at that time.
So, how do we address the concerns of the SEC and the Fed?
Mr. Lemke. We continue to believe that the 2010 amendments
that the SEC put in place have already addressed the concerns
with money market funds. Again, we had a highly extraordinary
market crisis, a temporary fix was put in place--and we should
point out that money market funds were one of the first
financial institutions that suffered during the crisis because
they invest in such short-term paper.
They are much like a canary in a coal mine, the signal to
the general market that problems were coming. We think that
those issues have been addressed and--bring back the other
issue with the SEC is that perhaps they are talking to
different people, but what we are hearing from retail and
institutional investors is they do not favor a floating NAV.
It is highly complicated, it is going to make their lives
far more difficult, and as we already know, money will leave
money market funds and that is going to reduce opportunities
for investors to get returns, but it is also going to reduce
the market for corporations and State and local governments
that need funding on a short-term basis to be able to operate
their activities.
Ms. Moore. So, what is your suggestion?
Mr. Lemke. For?
Ms. Moore. You believe it has already been done?
Mr. Lemke. Yes, we do.
Ms. Moore. And we just need more time to demonstrate that?
Mr. Lemke. Yes, and the experience so far has been very
positive that these reforms have worked.
Ms. Moore. Mr. Kelleher, I see you are dying to respond to
this question as well.
Mr. Kelleher. One can't fairly say that the reforms since
2010 have worked. We haven't had a crisis. We haven't had a
run. And frankly, even today, what used to be the implicit
guarantee behind the too-big-to-fail banks is now explicit.
The U.S. Government is not going to allow a too-big-to-fail
bank to fail today. It is why they get a funding advantage, a
credit rating boost, and why they can compete unfairly against
all the other banks and all the other institutions in the
country.
So, saying that the rules have worked well is to say
nothing. The only time that we will know if the rules work is
if we have another crisis, and believe me, we don't want one.
But we need rules that work in a crisis when there is a
real run. Mr. Lemke is exactly right, and spells out the
problem well. Let me quote him, ``investing the money market
funds in short-term paper, it is like the canary in the coal
mine.'' He is right. It is the first money to run. And that is
why we have to get that right, because that is almost like the
light on the fuse, the end of which is the explosion and the
collapse of the financial system.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Kelleher. I reclaim my time.
You mentioned earlier in your testimony that you didn't
think that Dodd-Frank was perfect, although we definitely need
some kind of re-regulation.
What unintended consequences if any do you see in Dodd-
Frank that we need to address? What areas of our work do we
need to revisit?
Mr. Kelleher. I think the regulators would disagree with
you that Better Markets thinks Dodd-Frank was perfect, because
we filed 100 comment letters and had dozens of meetings about
how to change Dodd-Frank and implement the rules in a way that
is faithful to the law.
It is not perfect. It is not the law I would have written.
So we haven't taken that position and no one would take that
position. It is a product of democracy and it has pluses and
minuses, but overall, it can work if people of good faith
implement it.
The Volcker Rule needs to be changed in some way so that it
is clear and more faithful to the statute. The statute got it
right, better in some ways than the Rule, but the Volcker Rule
has to focus on compensation and focus on making sure the
permitted activities of market making and hedging actually do
those activities and don't become a vehicle for disguised prop-
trading. There are a whole variety of things in the derivatives
area and in the too-big-to-fail area including putting in place
the prudential standards under Section 165 at the Fed,
including the Orderly Liquidation Authority and living wills.
All of which we have recommended changes that be made in
the rulemaking process. Because while there has been discussion
earlier about the Orderly Liquidation Authority of the FDIC,
that is at the end. It is as important to get the front-end
regulation from the Fed and the Treasury to make sure that the
living wills are in place and that these too-big-to-fail
institutions can be taken down in an orderly fashion, which
they cannot be today because we don't even have international
agreements yet.
So if you look at Lehman, Lehman would happen today just
like it did in 2008. And if the government doesn't step in,
then JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and all the
other too-big-to-fail banks would be bankrupt, as they would
have been in 2008 but for the trillions of dollars the U.S.
Government and U.S. taxpayers put behind them.
So I think there are a lot of things that can be improved,
and we have been arguing to improve them.
Ms. Moore. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Ms. Moore.
Mr. Royce?
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Kelleher, just going through some of the observations
you made earlier about the side effects of Dodd-Frank in terms
of the impact it does have on the larger institutions crowding
out their smaller competitors, I think that this is one of the
reasons why some of us have a problem with a strategy that
ended with now several years after the crisis we now have 5 of
the largest banks holding 52 percent of all U.S. banking
industry assets, right?
That is up sizably over the last couple of years, and that
means exactly what you implied there, that the FDIC is right
when they say that there is this huge basis point advantage,
lower cost of lending, that goes to these large institutions.
Why? Because, you are right, it is explicit now.
And there are those economists who said all along that the
problem in the system was that we were not requiring enough
capital, and when we hit a storm or when the Fed got the
interest rates wrong and created a bubble because we ran
negative real interest rates for 4 years running, or all of the
other errors that were made, arguably, in this whole scheme,
that we would hit the skids and if these institutions weren't
well-capitalized enough they wouldn't survive.
The GSEs--and I know we have talked about this--were
leveraged 100-1. The investment banks were allowed to leverage
30-1. It should have been 10-1.
So the question I really have for you is, to think that
those regulators who so blatantly failed the last time around
are going to be so prescient that they are going to be able to
see this thing coming, that is not the way things work in
financial calamity. That is why we require adequate capital, or
should have. That is why, going forward, we should be requiring
adequate capital.
Because you presume that you can do something that I am not
sure human beings can really do. Right?
Mr. Kelleher. No.
Mr. Royce. And I just throw that question out for you.
Mr. Kelleher. Thank you. There is much that we agree on,
but the one thing that is very important is that we learned,
history teaches us after the Great Depression that there is no
silver bullet for policing the financial industry. What you
have to have is layers of protection.
And history also teaches us that while capital is a
convenient mechanism, it almost always fails, because it is
risk-adjusted capital, it is easy to be gamed based on the
assets and things, but it is a key, key--
Mr. Royce. No, no, no, but if you do the leverage ratio,
and if regulators can do one thing--and let us hope we can do
that--manage to keep abreast of where that ratio is. That is
where we were so far off the mark, right, 100-1 at the GSEs,
30-1 for the investment banks, and that is with knowledge, that
is with the regulators knowing that was the situation.
If we are going to assume that you have special powers--
Mr. Kelleher. No--
Mr. Royce. --shouldn't we at least assume that you would be
able to get to the bottom of a leverage ratio and enforce it?
How do we do that? Because my concern is that all the other
folderol that we have enacted has allowed the larger
institutions now going forward because of that lower cost of
borrowing to gobble up their smaller competitors and thereby to
overleverage again.
In other words, I am not sure we are out of the thicket.
And I think to get back to the solution at hand, I would like
to have you sort of just revisit this. I remember I was
involved in the markup and I remember your engagement, too, on
the Senate side. I just think we should rethink some of these
premises. Do you know what I mean?
Mr. Kelleher. Look, everything can be rethought and looked
at again to make sure it works by people in good faith who
believe fundamentally in financial reform, but I would say that
there are too-big-to-fail banks which compete unfairly because
of public subsidies and support that preexisted Dodd-Frank. And
Dodd-Frank didn't create it and Dodd-Frank didn't even make it
worse. The financial crisis did.
But what is most important--
Mr. Royce. No, but making it explicit did. I think you
would concur--
Mr. Kelleher. The U.S. Government did that, not Dodd-Frank.
But more importantly, the point is, you are right. I don't
presume anybody is prescient or fully capable. We need layers
of protection--capital is one part of it, but multiple other
layers are absolutely essential to protect the American
taxpayer, our financial system and our economy from this ever
happening to them again.
Mr. Royce. Right. But remember one other thing: The largest
institutions are now best positioned to absorb those regulatory
costs, which--and my worry is with their competition, right? I
am worried about the other financial institutions, the banks,
the community banks.
Mr. Kelleher. We want fair competition, too.
Mr. Royce. See? And so, we have now layered on all of those
costs that have so disadvantaged the competition, thus in some
ways compounding the problem. That is why I would like to get
us to see this from a different paradigm.
Mr. Kelleher. 90 percent of Dodd-Frank is focused on
systemically significant institutions, maybe even more--
Mr. Royce. But not in terms of regulatory cost.
Mr. Kelleher. Ultimately, it is really focused on
systemically significant firms. So I think nobody has a bigger
interest in reining in Wall Street than the other 99 percent of
the banks. There are 7,500 banks in the United States. Only 20
have assets more than $20 billion--$50 billion. Those 7,500
banks have a huge interest in reining in Wall Street to
eliminate that unfair competition and subsidy. I agree with
that.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Royce.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for appearing. And if I may, Mr. Chairman, we have a witness
who is from Houston who represented us in Congress, and I want
to thank him for being here and thank you for the rich history
that your family has in making Texas a better State and the
country a better place. That, of course, is Mr. Bentsen.
And I also thank you for your balanced approach. You have
indicated that there are some things in Dodd-Frank that you
have supported, but you do have some concerns with the Volcker
Rule, and I share some of your concerns and look forward to
working with you to see if we can come to some bipartisan
solutions.
Mr. Deutsch, how are you today?
Mr. Deutsch. Doing great. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Green. How many times have you appeared before the
committee? This is just a matter of curiosity.
Mr. Deutsch. I think we are in the range of 12 or 13 times.
Mr. Green. You and I know each other fairly well. Welcome
back.
Mr. Deutsch. It is always great to answer questions from
you.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much.
Mr. Deas, I think that you have, with your candor--and I
appreciate candor--brought us to what I see as a crucial
question. You have indicated that the cure is worse than the
problem that we had. That was your comments as it relates to
Dodd-Frank. I will give you a chance to amend. Do you agree
with that statement, that the cure is worse than the problem?
Mr. Deas. No, sir, I said that--what I meant to say--
Mr. Green. All right.
Mr. Deas. --what I believe I said was that the cure as it
was applied to end-users and Main Street companies is worse
than the disease.
Mr. Green. So is it fair to say--thank you for the
clarification--that you do not support the repeal of Dodd-
Frank?
Mr. Deas. We have been working within the--
Mr. Green. I am going to have to do something now. I hate
to do this to you, but let me just ask you this, and I will
extend this to everyone on the panel. Because I think that
there is some confusion as to where people stand on this
question of Dodd-Frank, and let us just go on the record, and
let us understand that we have made prior statements and this
is a time to be consistent with our prior statements.
So if you are of the opinion that we should repeal Dodd-
Frank, kindly extend a hand into the air. If you are of the
opinion we should repeal it. All right, I take it from the
absence of hands, and I would like the record to reflect, that
there is no one on the panel who desires to repeal Dodd-Frank.
And that is a good thing, because, quite candidly, I think
that it can be amended, it can be tweaked.
Is there anyone who believes that any legislation of this
magnitude has ever been developed that didn't have to be
amended? If so, raise your hand. So we are in agreement, Dodd-
Frank is very much like any major legislation, you have it and
then you have to work with it to tweak it and make it better.
But I do want to go to Mr. Kelleher, and I hope I
pronounced it correctly. If I did not, you will have the
opportunity to correct me. But you were talking about what I am
going to call the baby in the bathwater test. There are people
who will say that there is a baby in the bathwater, but then
they throw out everything, the baby and the bathwater.
Recognizing that there is a baby in the bathwater, and then
throwing out the baby, I am not sure that your actions are
comporting with what you say. And this is what you brought up,
sir.
So I would like for you to continue your comments about
people saying one thing and doing another as it relates to
Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Kelleher. I think the most important marker of whether
or not people who claim they are for financial reform, people
who claim that they want to protect the American taxpayer, the
economy and the financial system, the marker is, are they
voting for funding for the regulators or not?
The regulators are so grossly underfunded, they don't have
the manpower, personnel or IT capability, just technology, to
keep up with the industry.
So if people believe in financial reform, we need to put
the cops back on the Wall Street beat, we need to make it a
fair fight so that they have the ability to pass intelligent,
robust, capable, proper rules that implement financial reform
and regulate Wall Street in a smart way.
That is what has to be done. Right now, they are just being
pummeled. They are being criticized. They are being abused
nonstop.
And so anybody who says they are for financial reform but
does not loudly, publicly, and often demand increased funding
for the regulators, the CFTC and the SEC, then don't believe
them when they say they are for financial reform. You cannot be
for financial reform and not be for funding the regulators and
putting the cops back on the beat. That is all there is to it.
It is an either-or. Either you are going to protect Wall
Street's profits or you are going to protect taxpayer pockets.
That is the choice.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Green. Mr. Stivers?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the
committee everybody. And I am going to focus on probably the
Volcker Rule. Maybe a little bit about money markets. A couple
of my colleagues have talked about that. And then if I have
time, I will ask some questions about risk retention. But I
would like to start with the Volcker Rule and I would like to
start with Mr. Bentsen. Can you tell me, you talked about the
Wyman Study earlier and how it will affect capital markets. Can
you talk about how the Volcker Rule might impact U.S. jobs and
job creation?
Mr. Bentsen. The Wyman Study found that in the case of
corporate bond issuance--as I mentioned, the cost associated
with that would have a net negative effect on corporate
earnings. And so one could extrapolate from that obviously if
you have a net negative effect on corporate earnings, that is
going to impact capital investment or investment in plant and
equipment and ultimately jobs by corporations. I think that the
bigger question, or the bigger issue with Volcker is that it
doesn't have to be that way. Now very clearly SIFMA was not
supportive of Volcker when it was being considered. We were
very upfront about that.
It is the law of the land. But we believe the regulators
have misinterpreted what Congress wrote in the statute and have
actually come up with a proposed rule that is contrary to the
statute, will impede traditional market-making activity and
raise the cost of capital for--as virtually every commentator
or certainly 90 percent of the commentators from buy side to
sell side, to issuers, to foreign central banks, will raise the
cost of capital which will have a negative economic impact.
Mr. Stivers. And obviously, there will be some cost
associated with that which could affect American jobs. Do you
think anything in the Volcker Rule could encourage American
companies to relocate jobs overseas? Or incentivize investors
or firms to move operations to foreign jurisdictions?
Mr. Bentsen. I think the best way I could answer that,
Congressman, would be that if it has, as we believe--if the
Rule proceeded as proposed, we believe it would have a very
negative impact on U.S. financial markets. U.S. financial
markets have been losing share of business in equities and the
corporate bond market over time. Some of that is just a natural
progression as other markets grow and develop. But I don't
think we want to hasten that decline that would have an impact
on U.S. corporations, small businesses and the like to access
our capital markets.
Mr. Stivers. Thanks. And other than this transaction-based
approach, you actually suggested in your testimony that there
is a better approach as opposed to looking at every individual
transaction, maybe looking at the entire picture of what a firm
is going as opposed to getting them concerned about every
transaction. Do you want to talk any more about that?
Mr. Bentsen. Absolutely. We think that there are a number
of things that the regulators--and we suggested a number of
things that the regulators could do and again we are not alone
in this. The buy side has weighed in on this in addition to the
sell side. We think first of all you need to reverse the
negative presumption. Second of all, you need to move away from
hard coated metrics and instead have supervisors work with the
firms that they examine and allowing those firms to develop
their own set of metrics and come up with their own compliance
programs, similar to what is done in the anti money laundering
program.
And most of all, that the Rule recognized what Congress
recognized in saying that customer focused business fits within
the market making exemption and allows that to move forward.
And so we think that nothing we have proposed takes away the
authority of the examiner or the regulators to step in and tell
a firm, we don't like what you are doing. But it does it in a
way that we think doesn't impede the ability of firms to meet
their market making commitment, provide liquidity to the
markets as Congress explicitly provided for in the statute.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. And Mr. Deas, can you talk about
the impact of the Volcker Rule on Main Street? Your testimony
talked about what it would do and what it would cost companies
on Main Street in additional cost of credit. But what does that
mean to jobs? And what does that mean to American
competitiveness?
Mr. Deas. The example I used, that on our most recent bond
issue of $300 million, we estimate the cost over the life of
the issue would be an additional $15 million of financing
costs. And that is $15 million that my company wouldn't have to
invest in expanding plant and ultimately growing jobs. That
effect would be replicated across the entire productive
economy.
Mr. Stivers. And to Mr. Green's point, do you think that
the--to Mr. Bentsen's point, do you believe the Volcker Rule
could be fixed as well?
Mr. Deas. I believe that inherently the Volcker Rule
requires intent be proven or disproved. And in other words,
from the eyes of one regulator, and there are five regulators
who are charged with implementing this, a transaction may be
proprietary trading, whereas from the financial market
participant it might be market making, which they thought was
exempt. And if that cannot be cleared up, then they will stay
away from it at a higher cost to American business.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. I yield back the balance of my nonexistent
time.
[laughter].
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Manzullo?
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you. The problem I still have with
Dodd-Frank is at the time of the collapse, there were Federal
regulations and laws in effect that if had been properly
implemented, could have avoided the entire crash. Let me just
give you an example. The Fed has had the authority since 1994
to govern bank holding companies, documentation and
underwriting standards for mortgages that they issue. If the
Fed had been properly doing its job, it would not have allowed
the 1As and the subprimes and the so-called cheater loans to
take place.
It wasn't until October 1, 2009, that the Fed required
written proof of a mortgage applicant's earnings. Come on. That
was so basic. And Ken, you were here in 2000 when we had the
first GSE reform bill. It didn't go anywhere. In 2005, we had
the second one, along with the Royce Amendment which would have
really tightened up the underwriting standards. Of course
everybody was fighting. Oh you can't stop the building boom, et
cetera, et cetera. But we can talk all we want about the
Volcker Rule, about this and about that and we need to get back
to, at least in my opinion the reason for the collapse of the
economy was in the residential home market.
But no one seems to talk about the fact that we are looking
at new rules and new regulations and yet there were laws in
effect at the time that could have stopped this. Now granted,
75 percent of the mortgages were private label. In fact during
the height of all of this, 25 percent were GSEs. Does anybody
agree with me on this statement? Want to comment on it? Which I
find interesting. Because people very seldom want to talk about
what really caused the economic collapse. And I have gone
through the testimony here.
Unfortunately, I didn't have the opportunity to sit in on
all the testimony going on. But maybe it is because I have been
on this committee since 1994, that I have had the opportunity
to sort of take a historical view as what could have happened.
It was hell around here. When people like myself and Ed Royce
were taking a look at something come down in the future, we
couldn't put our finger on it, but we could smell that
something was going wrong and something dramatically would
happen when people who could not even make the first monthly
payment on their homes were allowed to purchase homes.
The Federal Government had the authority to intervene and
stop that practice. Why didn't the Federal Government intervene
at that time? Anybody who is in favor of Dodd-Frank and more
legislation should be able to answer that question. Or at least
comment on it. Do I have no takers on it?
Mr. Kelleher. It depends on what you are saying. I think it
is certainly the case, sir that there were plenty of rules on
the books that were not enforced, or were poorly enforced. But
I think you will agree, because you were here, that in 1999
Gramm-Leach-Bliley took many laws off the books. In 2000, the
Commodity Futures Modernization Act prohibited regulation of
the derivatives markets. In 2001, there was a famous picture
that reflected the attitude at the time where the two top
banking regulators and the two top banking lobbyists had a
chainsaw cutting through regulations saying they weren't going
to be enforced.
And in 2004, I think it was the OCC that sued to stop
States from enforcing predatory lending, the point that you
just made. So one of the problem is--and I may be wrong, it may
not have been the OCC, maybe one of the other Federal
regulators, I don't remember. But there were States like North
Carolina and others who saw what was happening on the street
level as you often do when you go home to your districts. You
are actually close to the street and you know what is
happening, particularly in the neighborhoods, residential
markets. And what they saw was unleashed predatory behavior in
the mortgage markets. Exactly what you just said.
No money down, and get 110 percent of your loan. So the
State attorneys general started to enforce their predatory
lending laws. A Federal regulator went to court to preempt them
from doing that saying that it was Federal power and then they
didn't do it. So you are absolutely right that there were some
laws in place that could have stopped this, including,
importantly, State laws that the Fed stopped from being
enforced. But it is also the case that many laws were repealed,
overtaken, and changed both statutorily from here--
Mr. Manzullo. I understand, but the reason I brought that
up--I am not being critical of anybody here on the panel
because everybody has made some really good statements--is the
fact that maybe I am wrong and maybe I look at it through a
different lens, but there had to be a trigger cause.
There had to be a trigger. And to me, it was the
residential market. And even with the repeal, in Gramm-Leach-
Bliley, of different regulations, et cetera, there never was a
repeal of the authority that the Fed had all along in order to
regulate the documents and the underwriting standards.
And I make that statement based upon the fact that you
could have the best drafted bill in the world that Congressman
Bentsen would agree that doesn't--the Volcker Rule, for
example, doesn't go transaction by transaction, but it is just
a broad generic view. And still, if the people in charge of the
agencies are not with it and are not monitoring Wall Street, it
still won't do any good.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Manzullo, I can't imagine you ever
being wrong.
[laughter].
And now to one of those moments that I am going to yield
myself 5 minutes here. And almost every potential question has,
sort of, been randomly thrown out, but there is something that
I have, sort of, a fixation on that I would love to solicit the
panel. I am going to start with you, Mr. Deutsch.
Presently, if you look at our mortgage markets, our
residential mortgage markets, it is a government market now. I
see numbers 97, 96, 98 percent of all home loans now are
Fannie, Freddie, Ginnie, FHA. And we have worked very hard both
in my office and on this committee in the discussions on the
mechanics, what do we have to do to start to rebuild a private-
label market again, something that will be stable, good
visibility--the appropriate visibility so we never have the
problems in the future?
And we meet with different players up and down the food
chain, from the folks in the TBA side all the way down to the
securitization, to the servicing. And we get this pushback
constantly, saying, ``Well, there is this one piece of Dodd-
Frank we are worried about.'' And often that worry is it is a
rule that hasn't actually been promulgated yet, but we are
worried about it.
Mr. Deutsch, you and I have had this conversation at least
a couple dozen times as we have been, sort of, systematically
trying to figure out how you rebuild a private securitization
market.
What do you see in Dodd-Frank right now that are the
biggest barriers to move from functionally a socialized
mortgage market we have today to something that would have some
competition in it?
Mr. Deutsch. First, I would start with what is not in Dodd-
Frank, which is there is no reform of Fannie and Freddie. That
is a big outstanding question, and if you are a market
participant, you want to know what that is. And right now, they
are issuing $1.2 trillion of mortgage-backed securities a year.
That is a huge part of the market that you just don't know
where it is going to go; how is that reform going to fall?
Second, the Premium Capture Cash Reserve Account. I think
if we could beat that horse any harder, we would.
Unfortunately, we can't beat it any harder. It is a regulatory
abomination, in terms of being able to create CMBS and RMBS in
the future.
Third, the Qualified Mortgage definition: If it comes out
that is very vague, as to what is or is not a Qualified
Mortgage, any originator and then ultimately any investor who
would buy into a mortgage-backed security is going to say, if
there is anything even close, I don't want that loan, which
means credit is going to get cut off more and more to the
borrowers who most need it.
So those are a couple of the quick areas. I think within
Dodd-Frank there are substantial questions outstanding for the
RMBS market. And until many of those are answered, if you are
running a business, if you are running a firm, why would you
want to put money to create a platform when, a year from now or
2 years from now or 3 years from now, the regulators may say,
sorry, that is not going to be a platform that can work?
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Vanderslice, almost the same question,
maybe more on the CMBS: What is out there in Dodd-Frank that is
scaring the expansion, the growth and the reforms within the
private-label markets?
Mr. Vanderslice. I think it was said best before; I think
the term was ``regulatory abomination,'' with respect to PCCRA.
There are plenty of things in Dodd-Frank that work for the
commercial real estate market. I think we have been very clear
about that at CREFC--risk retention, better disclosure,
increased transparency.
And, there are a lot of things that are very positive.
PCCRA is the stumbling block that we are wrestling with right
now.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. And, sort of, the open-ended side of
the question is if you are like I am where you believe, whether
it be perception or rules that are to come that we are creating
more and more of a concentration of trillion-plus dollars a
year of a government-insured mortgage market, in many ways we
are creating massive risk at that level.
Congressman, from what you pick up out there, what would
you be doing right now to start reviving the private-label
market? And what Dodd-Frank obstacles do I have within that?
Mr. Bentsen. I think Mr. Deutsch hit a lot of the important
points. I think there is a lot of uncertainty because we don't
know what the final rules are going to be with respect to QM
and QRM, what the final risk retention will look like, whether
or not there will be a premium recapture.
So in order to make an investment and--on a business model,
you don't know what the rules of the road are going to be.
And then on top of that, we have now Basel 2.5 and Basel
III coming in, so if you are subject to those rules, then, in
addition, you are going to have to--you are still trying to
figure out what your capital requirements are going to be, in
addition to risk retention.
So I think all of that uncertainty, not to mention, as
well, as Mr. Deutsch mentioned, what exactly is going to happen
with respect to the GSEs going forward, is that has to be
resolved.
Mr. Schweikert. And we have had the conversation with
probably half of this panel that also fear that running
parallel what happens to the GSEs, what is within Dodd-Frank
that is an impairment in creating a private-label market.
And I am already over my time. I recognize my friend from
New Mexico, Mr. Pearce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since I was feeling the, as you are talking through your
statement and as I am reading it, the desire for
predictability, and I understand that the points have been
well-made, though, that I am not sure that the path forward is
to more regulations. MF Global had the CFTC and the SEC both
sitting in the room there, right at the time they are making
the decision to use the customer's segregate funds in an
illegal way and nobody said a word, and now they can't find,
whatever, or they couldn't find the money for a couple of
months afterwards.
JPMorgan had 57 regulators sitting in the rooms with them
as they were going through their--and so with I understand the
desire for predictability, but as you talked about the
sustainable economic growth, I don't know any country or any
company even in the world that has that. Those sustainable
economic growth models of the really regulated utilities of the
past led to markets that--well, you see what happened in the
telecommunications market when it deregulated.
I grew up with the old black phone, it was just one, and
then you didn't even have an extension cord. And that product
market just exploded once the regulations were pulled away, and
that is what regulations do--they give certainty, but they also
take away the innovations and the future. And so, I don't know.
What actuarial assumptions does your plan have to keep it,
sort of, in balance?
Ms. Simpson. Thank you. It is a very good point about
regulation. This is not a question of quantity; it is about
quality. In our remarks, we really put an emphasis that
regulation is one piece and it must be smart regulation. It
must ensure that the market players play their role. And among
the market players are of course share-earners like CalPERS. We
want the information and we also want the rights so that we can
act as responsible earners.
Mr. Pearce. Sure, I understand that.
Ms. Simpson. That is important. The--
Mr. Pearce. What actuarial assumptions--
Ms. Simpson. The actuarial assumption that we have the
discount rate is 7.5 percent.
Mr. Pearce. 7.5 percent.
Ms. Simpson. That is--
Mr. Pearce. What if you fall 0.25 percent short? How much
does that affect your payout?
Let us say you get 7.5 percent. Do you have that figure?
Ms. Simpson. I am sorry, I don't, and we would be glad to
come back to you, but the impact--
Mr. Pearce. I am guessing that it is going to penalize your
funds something in the neighborhood of $15 billion per 0.25
percent. And that is what we are all facing is that we are in a
highly competitive world.
What kind of a payout do your beneficiaries receive?
In other words, they get blank percent of their active-duty
pay? What--
Ms. Simpson. That is correct. The average pension paid to
our members is $2,000 a month.
Mr. Pearce. No, what percent?
Ms. Simpson. It is 0.5 percent per year, per year of
service. But the formula varies among the 1,000 employers that
we invest for. CalPERS is a complex structure, but we would be
glad to come back to you with the details.
I worked in the investment office, not the actuarial or the
benefits office, so I apologize.
Mr. Pearce. Going back to your testimony, on page five, you
really, kind of, log in on the CDS things, and you talk about
the collateralized debt obligations and those market failures.
And you, sort of, lead to the concept that more regualtions
would be better.
And I would tell you that there are a couple of guys
sitting in a garage apartment in Berkeley, written up in the
big short here. They had $110,000 and they figured out that
these things can't be real, and they bet against it, and with
$110,000, they made $80 million because they were betting
against the CDOs and CDSs and whatever.
Your retirement fund had $232 billion. This is what your
risk managers are supposed to do. And for you to come to us and
you want us to give more regulations, then I am thinking about
the 57 regulators sitting in there watching while JPMorgan does
what they do, and now they are saying, well, if we just had
more, it would be okay.
And I am sorry. I just don't think that predictability is
going to be out there.
Do your beneficiaries vote on the pay levels of high
executives?
Ms. Simpson. At CalPERS?
Mr. Pearce. Yes.
Ms. Simpson. Our staff? No, the--
Mr. Pearce. See, you are asking on page 10 for you to be
able to vote on corporate compensation, but you don't offer it
inside. That is very problematic. If it weren't such a big
problem, you would be doing it yourself anyway, but there is
just--I understand, I really--we all wish there was more
predictability and more certainty, but life is going to be very
uncertain, you can see the worldwide chaos that is developing
in the financial markets. Thank you Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
your indulgence.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Pearce, and we only have
about 3 minutes.
Ms. Simpson. Our request is the transparency for
information that enables us to price risk. Risk is where return
has been in the balance in a proper way. Our salaries are
extremely modest. They are set by State government and they are
all on our Web site. So I do invite you to--
Mr. Schweikert. All right. Thank you, Ms. Simpson, but we
only have about 3 minutes left on the Floor vote so let me,
without objection, ask for unanimous consent to put 2 items
into the record: a statement from the Mortgage Bankers
Association; and a statement from the Bond Dealers of America
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the record will remain open for 30
days for Members to submit written questions to these witnesses
and to place their responses in the record.
Thank you for your participation today. This hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:50 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 10, 2012

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

