- U.S. INSURANCE SECTOR: INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS AND JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. INSURANCE SECTOR: INTERNATIONAL
COMPETITIVENESS AND JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INSURANCE, HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 17, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-129

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-735 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity

JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois, Chairman

ROBERT HURT, Virginia, Vice          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
GARY G. MILLER, California           MAXINE WATERS, California
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BRAD SHERMAN, California
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 17, 2012.................................................     1
Appendix:
May 17, 2012.................................................    29

WITNESSES
Thursday, May 17, 2012

Bartlett, Hon. Steve, President and Chief Executive Officer, The
Financial Services Roundtable..................................     8
Kochenburger, Peter, Executive Director, Insurance Law Center,
and Associate Clinical Professor of Law, the University of
Connecticut School of Law......................................    10
McCarty, Hon. Kevin M., Commissioner, Florida Office of Insurance
Regulation, on behalf of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC)...........................................     6
McRaith, Hon. Michael T., Director, Federal Insurance Office,
U.S. Department of the Treasury................................     5
O'Bryant, Allan E., Executive Vice President, and Head of
International Markets and Operations, Reinsurance Group of
America, Inc. (RGA), on behalf of the Reinsurance Association
of America (RAA)...............................................    12
Sapnar, Michael C., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Transatlantic Reinsurance Company, on behalf of the Reinsurance
Association of America (RAA)...................................    14
Toppeta, William J., Vice Chairman, MetLife, Inc.................    15
Vastine, J. Robert, President, Coalition of Service Industries
(CSI)..........................................................    17

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Dold, Hon. Robert............................................    30
Bartlett, Hon. Steve.........................................    32
Kochenburger, Peter..........................................    38
McCarty, Hon. Kevin M........................................    46
McRaith, Hon. Michael T......................................    57
O'Bryant, Allan E............................................    64
Sapnar, Michael C............................................    76
Toppeta, William J...........................................    93
Vastine, J. Robert...........................................   104

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Gutierrez, Hon. Luis:
Letter to Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner from the
Financial Services Roundtable..............................   112
Hurt, Hon. Robert:
Written statement of the American Insurance Association......   115
Written statement of The Council of Insurance Agents and
Brokers....................................................   121
March 2009 report of the United States International Trade
Commission entitled, ``Property and Casualty Insurance
Services: Competitive Conditions in Foreign Markets''......   125
Written statement of the National Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies (NAMIC)................................   233
Written statement of the Property Casualty Insurers
Association of America (PCI)...............................   237

U.S. INSURANCE SECTOR: INTERNATIONAL
COMPETITIVENESS AND JOBS

----------

Thursday, May 17, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing
and Community Opportunity,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Judy Biggert
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Biggert, Hurt, Capito,
Dold; Gutierrez, Cleaver, Clay, Watt, and Sherman.
Chairwoman Biggert. This hearing of the Subcommittee on
Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity will come to
order.
We will get through our opening statements and then hear
from all the witnesses, and we thank you.
And thank you, Director McRaith, for agreeing to have the
two panels together. I think that this will work out well. So,
thank you very much.
And good afternoon. I would like to welcome our
distinguished panel of witnesses to today's hearing.
As our subcommittee and others hold hearings, particularly
on Dodd-Frank, one distinction has become increasingly clear:
Insurance is not banking. We all saw how well the U.S.
insurance sector, in contrast to the banking sector, weathered
the financial crisis. That point was highlighted in the first
annual report issued by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC).
Nonetheless, domestic regulators continue to press for a
bank-centric model of regulation for insurance providers. And
today, we are expanding our oversight beyond our borders to
international issues that have created uncertainty for U.S.
insurance and reinsurance companies. Are we doing everything
that we can to help our American businesses compete, export
services, and create jobs here in the United States? I think we
can do more.
According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, in 2011 the
United States imported more insurance services than it
exported, with U.S. exports totaling $15.4 billion and U.S.
imports totaling $57.6 billion. Contrast that with the fact
that other noninsurance financial services exports totaled $73
billion and imports totaled $15.1 billion.
For our insurers and the domestic jobs they create, we must
do better. Don't get me wrong, the creation of the Federal
Insurance Office, or FIO, which I supported, will help our U.S.
insurers compete abroad. And other organizations are working
toward the same goal, including the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, or NAIC; State regulators; the U.S.
Trade Representative; the Treasury and State Departments; and
other insurance trade associations, including the American
Council for Life Insurers, the American Insurance Association,
the Reinsurance Association of America, and many others.
But we can do more to help our insurers remain competitive
and gain access to new markets abroad. According to a 2009
report issued by the U.S. International Trade Commission,
liberalization of property-casualty foreign insurance markets
would result in greater access for U.S. insurers, billions of
dollars in increased sales, and increased employment at U.S.-
based companies, among other economic benefits.
That is why during today's hearing, we will examine the
international competitiveness of U.S.-domiciled insurance and
reinsurance companies. We will hear from witnesses about the
opportunities and challenges that regulatory changes, free
trade agreements, and state-owned enterprises present to U.S.
companies. And we will hear about the activities undertaken by
our U.S. insurance experts in a variety of forums that
establish international insurance standards and regulations.
I look forward to today's hearing, and again, I welcome our
witnesses.
And, with that, I will turn to our ranking member, Mr.
Gutierrez, for his opening statement.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
for holding this important hearing. I also thank the witnesses.
I think it is very important for our Members and the public
to learn of the progress that has been made since the creation
of the Federal Insurance Office. This is one area of the Dodd-
Frank law where there is a great deal of consensus on both
sides of the aisle and between the private sector and the
Federal Government.
Most observers of the international insurance sector agree
that Federal action is needed in order to assist our U.S.-
domiciled insurance companies and their global affiliates to
achieve much more equitable treatment in the global insurance
marketplace. Not including health insurance, we in the United
States account for at least 27 percent of all premiums in bulk
volume, making the United States the world's largest single
country insurance market.
Unfortunately, our exports and even affiliate sales of
insurance products do not correspond to our share of premium
space. In fact, we have a serious trade imbalance in
international insurance, and the United States receives a
relatively low proportion of its total insurance revenue from
international sources. As with other sectors of the economy,
the world is quickly growing smaller and much more complex. The
extreme complexity of modern economies presents this Congress,
as well as regulators and supervisors, with enormous challenges
that need to be met head-on if we are to avoid a repeat of the
recent and continuing economic issues.
In order to assist the U.S.-domiciled insurance industry
achieve a level playing field both domestically and
internationally, Congress created FIO. I am pleased that its
first Director, who is here with us this afternoon, is former
State of Illinois Insurance Commissioner Michael McRaith.
And I am glad to welcome you as one of our distinguished
witnesses today, Mr. McRaith. I am very much looking forward to
hearing your testimony about the achievements of FIO in the
international arena during the last few months since its
inception.
Madam Chairwoman, I would request unanimous consent to
introduce into the record the March 14, 2012, letter from the
Financial Services Roundtable to Treasury Secretary Geithner on
international insurance issues and the role of FIO.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you.
I think it is particularly important because this letter
does speak to how there really is broad support. It says, ``It
has been clear for some time that the business of insurance is
vitally important to the underpinnings of our national economy
and should receive proper consideration at the Federal level.
Congress recognized the Federal Government should develop more
expertise on insurance issues by including in Dodd-Frank the
creation of FIO, and we support full funding and staffing. The
establishment of FIO for the first time places an expert in the
Department of the Treasury to increase Federal understanding of
the business of insurance, an industry that is unique from
other financial services, both in terms of its business model
and regulatory requirements.''
I thank the gentlelady.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentlelady from West Virginia for 2\1/
2\ minutes.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I would like to thank Chairwoman Biggert and Ranking Member
Gutierrez for continuing what is an important debate under this
subcommittee's jurisdiction, and that is the international
competitiveness of the U.S. insurance industry.
I would like to thank our witnesses before us today, and I
appreciate their input.
I would like to welcome Director McRaith back to the
committee and I look forward to hearing his testimony on the
progress of the Federal Insurance Office and his office's
representation of the United States in the international
community. I am interested to hear how Mr. McRaith uses his
office's broad authorities in international matters and also
how the office consults with States on issues of domestic and
international importance.
We all know that the Dodd-Frank Act was implemented to
address the flaws in our banking and security systems that led
to the financial collapse of 2008. Throughout that time,
however, the insurance industry as a whole was able to uphold a
stable presence and was expected to be untouched by many of the
laws and regulations implemented in the Act.
Nevertheless, we are seeing that Dodd-Frank could have a
far greater impact on many other parts of the economy than
anticipated, including the insurance sector. The question for
me is, will domestic regulations called for by provisions in
Dodd-Frank adversely affect the industry and U.S. participation
in the global market?
FIO's voice in international regulatory affairs will be
very significant, as effective and globally consistent
standards could allow our U.S. markets to grow internationally
without losing efficiencies. While the EU is currently
modernizing its insurance industry--they have a lot on their
hands, I would say--our understanding of how their structure
will converge with ours can have a great impact, again, on our
competitiveness abroad.
In these deliberations, I think we should be mindful of
what is in the best interests of the United States and our
consumers. Our system of State-based regulation has proven to
be a dependable and important model for the insurance industry,
so it is important to keep that in mind when adopting
international financial standards. Issues such as heightened
capital requirements, varying accounting practices, and
assessment of risk are all issues to be considered in an
international framework, and how they might inhibit market
access.
Again, I would like to thank the Members for being here,
and I would like to thank the chairwoman for holding the
hearing.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
We have been called for our pesky votes, but I think I will
just introduce all of the witnesses ahead of time, so that when
we come back, we will immediately start with your testimony.
However, we have four bills on the Floor, and the fourth one is
the national flood insurance extension, so I am not leaving
early from that. That bill is very important.
We have with us the Honorable Michael McRaith, Director,
Federal Insurance Office, U.S. Department of the Treasury; the
Honorable Kevin McCarty, insurance commissioner, Florida Office
of Insurance Regulation, on behalf of the National Association
of Insurance Commissioners; the Honorable Steve Bartlett,
president and chief executive officer, The Financial Services
Roundtable; Mr. Peter Kochenburger, executive director,
Insurance Law Center, and associate clinical professor of law
and director of graduate programs, University of Connecticut
School of Law; Mr. Allan E. O'Bryant, executive vice president,
and head of international markets and operations, Reinsurance
Group of America, on behalf of the Reinsurance Association of
America; Mr. Michael Sapnar, president and chief executive
officer, Transatlantic Reinsurance Company, on behalf of the
Reinsurance Association of America; Mr. William Toppeta, vice
chairman, MetLife, Incorporated; and Mr. J. Robert Vastine,
president, the Coalition of Service Industries.
So we will recess and come back after the four votes--I
don't know how long it will take, but at least 20 to 30
minutes. Thank you so much.
[recess]
Chairwoman Biggert. I think everybody will be back in a few
minutes, but let's get started. I am happy to announce that the
bill passed. So, that is just one more step in a long road.
Director McRaith, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL T. MCRAITH, DIRECTOR,
FEDERAL INSURANCE OFFICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. McRaith. Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today. I am Michael McRaith, Director of the Federal
Insurance Office in Treasury.
First, we know of the interest in our modernization report.
I want to acknowledge that it is late. Once it is released in
the near future, we trust you will find it to be of appropriate
depth and quality.
The Dodd-Frank Act created the Federal Insurance Office, or
FIO, and gave it the authority to coordinate Federal efforts
and develop Federal policy on prudential aspects of
international insurance matters, including representing the
United States at the International Association of Insurance
Supervisors (IAIS). As an office within Treasury, FIO is well-
positioned to express U.S. views and to work effectively with
our international counterparts. As we fulfill our statutory
mandate, we will work and consult with Commissioner McCarty and
his State regulator colleagues as well as other Federal
agencies and interested parties.
The insurance sector is critical to the U.S. economy as a
risk-transfer vehicle, as a participant in capital markets, and
as an employer. As this hearing illustrates, FIO's creation
could not arrive at a better time. The United States comprises
more than 27 percent of global premium volume and is a major
source of revenue for international insurers. The U.S. market
itself is growing more international, and insurers generate far
more revenue now than ever before from outside the home
country. With these realities, the need for Federal Government
involvement is clear.
FIO has been involved with the IAIS since last July, and
joined the executive committee in February. The IAIS is
developing a methodology to identify globally significant
insurers. FIO is, of course, also a member of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council, or FSOC. At the IAIS, FIO's aim is
to shape international consensus so that the IAIS criteria,
methodology, and timing are aligned with the Council.
We share industry concerns about the confidentiality of
nonpublic data produced by insurers in support of the IAIS work
and will address these concerns in the coming months. The IAIS
is developing a common framework, or ComFrame, for the
supervision of internationally active insurance groups. We
support ComFrame because it will lead to improved cross-border
supervision and understanding.
In bilateral matters, FIO established in January an EU-U.S.
insurance dialogue that is now led by a steering committee
including FIO, our EU counterparts, and State regulators,
including Commissioner McCarty. The EU Solvency II framework
proposes an equivalence assessment of the U.S. regulatory
system, a prospect causing uncertainty for the transatlantic
insurance sector.
We initiated the dialogue not to decide a winner, but to
compare factually the two regulatory regimes. The steering
committee has been engaged constructively and in good faith,
meeting twice at Treasury, once in Basel, and next in
Frankfurt. Our staffs have been engaged with information
exchange and analyses. After ample chance for public input, we
will finish and define the EU-U.S. path forward by the end of
this year.
I recently participated in the U.S.-China Strategic and
Economic Dialogue, or S&ED, the first of many bilateral
exchanges on insurance supervision. Iowa Insurance Commissioner
Voss attended the S&ED at Treasury's invitation, and we enjoyed
meeting Chairman Xiang of the China Insurance Regulatory
Commission (CIRC). We look forward to fulfilling the commitment
between CIRC and FIO to strengthen cooperation in the
development and implementation of prudential regulation in the
insurance sector. We applaud CIRC's May 1st announcement that
it will open its market to third-party auto liability insurers,
and I am optimistic about the growth prospects for U.S.
insurers and brokers in China.
Issues in Brazil, Argentina, and India illustrate the need
to develop, implement, and enforce international insurance core
principles.
To be clear, in every forum, FIO priorities will be a
strong American economy, job opportunities for the American
people, and market opportunities for U.S.-based brokers and
insurers. Chairwoman Biggert, I reaffirm our commitment to work
with and to support Congress and this committee on these
international topics that are of great local and national
importance.
Thank you for your attention. I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Director McRaith can be found on
page 57 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much, Director.
Mr. McCarty, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE KEVIN M. MCCARTY, COMMISSIONER,
FLORIDA OFFICE OF INSURANCE REGULATION, ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS (NAIC)

Mr. McCarty. Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today.
Chairwoman Biggert, I want to again thank you for
participating in our commissioners' meeting last month. We
appreciate your support and leadership.
My name is Kevin McCarty. I am the insurance commissioner
of the State of Florida and the NAIC president. I present this
testimony on behalf of the NAIC. Today, I will provide the
committee with an overview of the NAIC's involvement in recent
international discussions, including standard setting, trade
and economic development, and enhancement of regulatory
communications.
As the United States is the world's largest insurance
market, with more than a third of the global market share,
insurance is key to our economy. State regulators provide
international leadership by setting strong standards and
developing creative solutions to regulatory challenges while
focusing on protecting our policyholders.
As a founding member of the IAIS, State regulators and the
NAIC staff serve in various leadership roles, ensuring our
system has a prominent voice as we discuss global insurance
principles and standards. We look forward to hosting the IAIS
annual conference here in Washington this October.
We were integral in the development of the updated IAIS
insurance core principles, which provide the basis for the IMF
insurance-sector assessment. When the IMF last assessed the
U.S. regulatory system in 2010, it found our strong regulatory
system contributed to the overall resilience of the insurance
sector during the financial crisis. An IAIS priority is the
development of ComFrame for the supervision of internationally
active insurance groups. If done right, ComFrame has the
potential to create more robust oversight while respecting
differences among jurisdictions.
In addition to the IAIS, the NAIC is actively involved in
the OECD and the Financial Stability Board and through the
Joint Forum, currently chaired by NAIC CEO Dr. Terri Vaughan.
We are pleased to work alongside my friend and colleague,
FIO Director Mike McRaith, on many of the international
efforts. FIO has an important role as a representative of the
Federal Government in these discussions. We are building a
constructive relationship, which is crucial since State
regulators retain ultimate responsibility for implementing any
new international standards. It remains critical that any
discussions or agreements on regulatory prerogatives be made
with the full cooperation of the States.
The insurance sector plays a significant role in promoting
economic development. This demands a level playing field here
and abroad in order to create and protect jobs in the United
States. With that in mind, international trade and trade
agreements are very important. As the USTR negotiates
agreements such as the ongoing TPP agreement, and seeks to
improve market access for U.S. insurers, the NAIC provides
necessary technical expertise and advice.
Our partnership with the USTR dates back to the early
1990s, when NAFTA and GATT were negotiated. In providing expert
guidance to the USTR for the last 2 decades, State regulators
and the NAIC have sought to promote stable practices and
emphasize the successful track record of the U.S. markets. We
illustrate to our trading partners the importance of insurance
to our economy in terms of jobs, economic output, and risk
mitigation for consumers.
Through the NAIC, State insurance supervisors are actively
involved in technical assistance programs with foreign
regulators. As we consider harmonization of approaches, we must
remember that regulatory convergence should focus on outcomes
and not prescriptive requirements or structures.
A prime example of our work in this area is the decade-long
NAIC-EU regulatory dialogue. These exchanges have been
essential to enhancing supervisory understanding between our
respective jurisdictions. Just last month, I joined several
State regulators and our colleagues from FIO for a week of
U.S.-EU events to discuss issues of mutual concern. These
exchanges and dialogues are critical to successfully improving
the framework for regulation globally.
As we continue to work with our international counterparts,
State regulators cannot abdicate our responsibility to consider
the impact of regulatory convergence on the U.S. marketplace
while ensuring that differences in regulations do not become an
unnecessary barrier to trade.
In conclusion, increased regulatory collaboration and
cooperation enhances well-regulated and competitive markets,
providing policyholders better choices and stability. We will
continue to coordinate with FIO, the USTR, and our
international partners to promote open, competitive, stable,
and well-regulated markets around the world.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Commissioner McCarty can be
found on page 46 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Mr. Bartlett, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE STEVE BARTLETT, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE FINANCIAL SERVICES ROUNDTABLE

Mr. Bartlett. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member
Gutierrez, members of the subcommittee, Mr. Watt, Mr. Hurt, and
Mr. Dold.
My name is Steve Bartlett. I am president and CEO of The
Financial Services Roundtable (the Roundtable). We are a
national trade association of 100 of the Nation's largest
banking, securities, and insurance firms. Thirty of our 100
companies are principally in the business of insurance, but I
will say that each one of our 100 companies are engaged in the
business of insurance in rather significant ways.
Making the U.S. insurance sector more competitive at home
and abroad is critical to sustaining our economic recovery.
U.S. insurance companies create jobs in every congressional
district; finance municipal, State, and Federal investment;
help small and large businesses mitigate risk; and support
individuals and families when they need it.
And it is really about the economy. Insurance is an
essential part of every single element of the economy. Without
insurance, people could not drive cars, eat in restaurants, or
buy homes; cities could not build bridges or highways; and a
company could not build plants or create jobs. So, insurance is
not a ``want to have;'' it is essential.
My testimony will highlight four priorities that I think
this committee should focus on and four priorities that will
materially affect the U.S. insurance sector's international
competitiveness: the role of the Federal Insurance Office; the
designation of SIFIs and G-SIFIs; domestic regulations that
hinder U.S. competitiveness; and expanding U.S. insurers'
access to markets around the globe.
First, the Federal Insurance Office. A strong, effective
Federal Insurance Office will enhance U.S. insurers' ability to
compete internationally, and they also help U.S. consumers. To
that end, The Roundtable publicly and directly supports an
increase in FIO's funding, staffing, and levels in stature to
the levels contemplated by Dodd-Frank.
FIO can fill the void in international negotiations, a void
that has long existed. Section 502 of Dodd-Frank establishes
FIO with that international aspect specifically in mind. And I
will quote parts of it: ``The office--FIO--shall have the
authority to coordinate Federal efforts and direct Federal
policy on prudential aspects of international insurance
matters, including representing the United States, as
appropriate, in the International Association of Insurance
Supervisors and assisting the Secretary in negotiating covered
agreements.''
Second, SIFIs and G-SIFIs. Designation of SIFIs and G-SIFIs
should be coordinated between domestic and international
regulators. We shouldn't have one on one side of the Atlantic,
another on the other side of the Atlantic, and a third in Asia.
It is important that global regulators not upset the careful
work of U.S. regulators designed for domestic purposes to
identify SIFIs. International and domestic regulators should
coordinate their rules to prevent redundant and conflicting
regulations. Applying multiple regulatory standards to
international insurance groups would require companies to
comply with redundant and often contradictory regulations,
would create additional deadweight cost that would be passed
along to the consumers, and would deny consumers insurance.
Third, domestic regulations should not be allowed to harm a
U.S. insurer's ability to compete internationally.
Specifically, any new capital requirements for insurance
companies should be insurance-sector-specific. Administering
identical stress tests to insurance companies and bank holding
companies confuses the risk profiles of both.
And, fourth, FIO's expertise will complement USTR's efforts
to eliminate barriers to foreign insurance markets. FIO's
participation in future trade dialogues will increase insurance
expertise and enhance the good work of the USTR.
I have a few specific countries I will cite. The
Administration should, as they have, and FIO, continue to
engage China through the S&ED. The opening of access for
China's auto insurance market was a good step forward, but U.S.
insurers still need the ability to open branches concurrently
rather than one at a time. And China should be asked to lift
its moratorium and clear the backlog for new license approvals
for foreign firms offering retirement security products and
enterprise annuity and group annuity products. That would be
good for the Chinese people and good for the world as a whole.
The FIO Director successfully participated in the most recent
S&ED, and his influence and presence was felt in a positive
way.
The same with Brazil, which in 2010 promulgated some new
trade barriers to reinsurance regulations that we need to
address and get eliminated. And then last is, India opened its
insurance market 12 years ago, but only opened it to 26 percent
direct investment, which means it is not open at all.
Madam Chairwoman, uniform, coherent, and strong insurance
regulation will impact the U.S. economy in a positive way. And
I thank both you and your committee for your efforts in that
area.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bartlett can be found on
page 32 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. I thank you, Mr. Bartlett.
Mr. Kochenburger, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETER KOCHENBURGER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INSURANCE
LAW CENTER, AND ASSOCIATE CLINICAL PROFESSOR OF LAW, THE
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Kochenburger. Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is
Peter Kochenburger, and I am a professor at the University of
Connecticut School of Law, and the executive director of our
school's Insurance Law Center. Thank you for this opportunity
to testify today.
I would like to use my time to address two issues: first,
FIO's necessary role in representing U.S. regulatory interests
internationally; and second, a request that Congress and
Federal and State regulators remain vigilant in maintaining
important consumer protection standards in the United States as
they work closely with their counterparts throughout the world.
Others have very well addressed the challenges insurance
regulators face. These include an increasingly global business,
historically regulated at the regional and national level, and
the traditional segregation of regulatory authority over
insurers, depository institutions, investment firms, and other
financial services providers.
We can and should acknowledge the tremendous effort and
many successes that the NAIC and State insurance regulators
have achieved in addressing these challenges, bringing far
greater regulatory consistency domestically and representing
U.S. regulatory interests abroad. The U.S. insurance sector is
by far the largest in the world and one that has suffered
relatively minor disruptions over the last several decades, at
least compared to our other financial services markets. State
regulators deserve much of the credit for this stability.
However, institutionally, only the Federal Government has
the authority and national perspective to represent our
country's regulatory interests internationally and negotiate
insurance-related trade agreements. FIO was established with
this specific role in mind when it was created in 2010. And,
while still a work in progress, its mission is indispensable
and cannot be undertaken by State-based or private entities.
The trends that have been discussed here and at many other
hearings over the last several years will likely only increase,
as will the need for Federal knowledge and participation in
various regulatory arenas.
Perhaps the best example I can provide as to why FIO has a
vital role to play internationally is the general consensus
represented at today's hearing. Rarely have representatives of
major insurers, prominent professional organizations, the NAIC,
and consumer advocates appeared on the same panel with a
similar message.
My second topic is one we have not heard about today, and
that is consumer protection. Few would argue with the merits of
collaboration and modernization, yet these virtues should not
become code words for deregulation, and international
cooperation should not be an opportunity or rationale to dilute
consumer protection standards in the United States. While
insurance regulation in the United States has significant gaps,
we also have a tradition of consumer protection at the State
and often the Federal level more rigorous than that found in
many other countries.
We do not need to look far in the past to see how these
arguments have been utilized previously. The optional Federal
charter legislation, a recent modernization initiative put
forth by some industry groups, would not only have altered the
current and often effective regulatory balance, it would have
eliminated important consumer protection standards that have
existed for decades.
As international cooperation increases, we will likely hear
arguments about how modern regulatory systems in other
jurisdictions depend largely on market forces rather than
vigilant and empowered regulators to protect policyholders and,
therefore, should be imported to the United States. Please be
cautious about such arguments. We have heard them before and
often with ill effect when adopted.
I do not say this to be critical of an industry that is not
only necessary to our country and economy but also one which
has served it with honor. However, while enlightened industry's
self-interest is to be expected, we cannot accept on their face
the positions it advocates, which should be carefully reviewed.
State insurance regulation creates delays and duplication
of effort by both the insurance industry and insurance
regulators. That is indisputable. However, we have a
constitutional structure that acknowledges significant State
regulatory authority, and Federalism necessarily assumes a
certain degree of duplication and inefficiency. The question is
whether these costs are worth the benefits, not whether the
existence of these costs is an excuse by itself to reduce State
regulatory control.
The benefits of insurance cannot be overstated, but their
importance is exactly why it is necessary to regulate it
carefully to ensure that policyholders obtain their benefit of
the insurance bargain. The primary focus in evaluating
insurance regulation, whether internationally or at the
domestic level, should not be on market efficiency or claims of
international comity but on effectiveness in protecting
policyholders and our national economy.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Professor Kochenburger can be
found on page 38 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay, for
an introduction.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
conducting this hearing.
I would like to welcome Mr. Allan O'Bryant from the
Reinsurance Group of America (RGA). RGA is headquartered in my
home State of Missouri, and has over 700 employees and growing
in Missouri, and a total of over 1,700 employees worldwide.
Mr. O'Bryant, I know you head up RGA's international
markets and operation and have flown all the way from Japan to
join us today.
Mr. O'Bryant technically covers all international, but
given that he is based in Japan, his focus is more on Asia,
where he is in charge of, at a minimum, Japan, Hong Kong,
Korea, India, Malaysia, Taiwan, Thailand, and China.
Thank you so much for making such a long trip and for
providing your valuable input today. We look forward to your
testimony.
And I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And thank you so much for that trip to come here, Mr.
O'Bryant. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALLAN E. O'BRYANT, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, AND
HEAD OF INTERNATIONAL MARKETS AND OPERATIONS, REINSURANCE GROUP
OF AMERICA, INC. (RGA), ON BEHALF OF THE REINSURANCE
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (RAA)

Mr. O'Bryant. Thank you.
Thank you, Congressman Clay, for the introduction.
I am testifying today on behalf of the Reinsurance
Association of America, a national trade association
representing life, property, and casualty reinsurers. And I
would like to thank Chairwoman Biggert and Ranking Member
Gutierrez for holding this important hearing today.
RGA is the largest U.S.-based life reinsurer. Our products
include individual and group life reinsurance, living benefit
reinsurance, and specialized underwriting to help individuals
with unique health problems obtain the life insurance coverage
they need to protect their families. We are headquartered in
St. Louis, Missouri, and have operations in 25 countries.
Our clients are many of the life insurance companies you
hear about every day. Insurers use our services to promote
their volume of business, reduce volatility from catastrophic
events, help meet regulatory requirements, and enhance their
general financial strength. Reinsurance is truly a global
product. Indeed, 49 percent of the life insurance RGA reinsures
is for persons living outside the United States.
Today, I would like to address three issues crucial to the
life insurance sector's, or the U.S. insurance sector's,
international competitiveness and our ability to expand abroad
while creating more jobs here at home: first, the need for a
level playing field in international reinsurance laws and
regulations; second, the challenges of competing with State-
owned insurance and reinsurance companies receiving
preferential treatment; and third, the positive impact of free
trade agreements on insurance and reinsurance.
In addition to those issues, the RAA strongly supported the
establishment of the Federal Insurance Office. The
international competitiveness of U.S.-based firms depends in
part on a functioning governmental entity empowered to engage
foreign governments and regulators on insurance and reinsurance
matters and to advocate on behalf of U.S. consumers and
companies operating abroad. We are encouraged by Director
McRaith's participation in the EU-U.S. transatlantic dialogue
as well as the meeting of the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors.
Reinsurance is a global business. Insurance laws and
regulations in foreign markets should not favor local insurers
and reinsurers over multinational or U.S.-based companies like
RGA.
For example, some markets abroad have so-called seasoning
requirements essentially barring companies from obtaining
licenses until they have been in business for a prescribed
number of years. This requirement does not bring about
healthier insurance markets because it is blind to other
virtues of a company, such as the quality of the assets or of
its management team. Rather, it limits the number of companies
able to provide services, resulting in a less efficient, less
competitive insurance market.
Regarding oversight, we agree that supervision of insurance
groups should be improved. However, creating unified standards
only for a select group of insurers and reinsurers is setting a
double standard.
In the domestic market, we look to our insurance regulators
and officials to ensure that U.S.-based insurers can also
compete on a regulatory level playing field here at home. To
this end, we recommend that the FIO be required to use its
ability to preempt State measures to ensure competitive
equivalence in the U.S. market between U.S. and non-U.S-based
firms. Under Dodd-Frank, FIO can only preempt State measures
that discriminate against U.S. companies. There is nothing in
the law ensuring that U.S.-based firms will not be
discriminated against.
Second, competing with the government-owned insurance and
reinsurance companies abroad is proving to be a problem in many
important emerging markets such as China, India, Brazil, and
Korea. There should be equal regulatory treatment of private
and state-owned insurance and reinsurance firms, but this isn't
always the case. State-owned companies frequently benefit from
more lenient supervision. What is more, if the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors eventually sets higher
standards of scrutiny, entities in these countries may be
excused from new standards if they only operate in one or two
countries. While we do not object to state-owned insurers and
reinsurers, standards need to be applied equally.
And, finally, we applaud the free trade agreements with
Korea, Colombia, and Brazil. Benefits can include protection
and enforcement of agreements to protect confidential
information exchanged between U.S. and foreign insurance
regulators for proper regulatory oversight. We are especially
hopeful that the privacy and data transfer provisions of the
U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement will address the differences in
data protection rules currently existing between the United
States and Korea. The test of these agreements will be in the
creation and the enforcement of laws and regulations within
each participating country consistent with the terms of the
agreement.
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on these
issues, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Bryant can be found on
page 64 of the appendix.]
Mr. Hurt [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. O'Bryant.
Mr. Sapnar, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL C. SAPNAR, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, TRANSATLANTIC REINSURANCE COMPANY, ON BEHALF OF THE
REINSURANCE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (RAA)

Mr. Sapnar. Good afternoon. My name is Mike Sapnar, and I
am the CEO of Transatlantic Reinsurance Company. I am here on
behalf of my company and the Reinsurance Association of
America. I am grateful for the opportunity to address the
subcommittee on the impact of regulatory impediments on U.S.
reinsurance companies.
As you know, there is not a long list of U.S.-domiciled
reinsurers with global operations. Our written statement
details the reasons why this list is short. That aside, I would
like to focus my comments using Transatlantic as a practical
example on four of these issues: increased protectionist
regulatory policies abroad; increased regulatory oversight of
reinsurance abroad; the historical absence of a Federal
advocate for reinsurance in the United States; and the tax
disadvantage of U.S.-domiciled reinsurers.
First, there are two facts that underscore the gravity of
these issues. One, there were five major worldwide property
catastrophe losses in the last 24 months, totaling over $125
billion. Sixty-two-and-a-half percent of these losses will be
paid by reinsurers, and 97 percent of that amount will be paid
by reinsurers outside the country in which the loss occurred.
Two, of the 50 new global reinsurers formed since 2001, exactly
none were formed in the United States In fact, since 1989, no
new global reinsurer has chosen the United States as its home
domicile.
Transatlantic, founded in 1978, is the leading global
property and casualty reinsurer domiciled in and regulated by
the State of New York. We are licensed in all 50 States as well
as in many countries around the world. We have one main
operating company in New York and a global network of 17
branches. This structure provides a strong single-balance-sheet
approach, allowing us to deliver a cost-effective product while
offering local service and superior financial security.
Despite the global capital role that reinsurance plays,
Transatlantic has encountered protectionism policies in many
foreign jurisdictions, notably Asia and Latin America. These
barriers include: limitations for foreign companies on direct
investments and domestic entities; mandatory cessions by local
reinsurers to specified reinsurers; right of first refusal for
domestic reinsurers; punitive minimum capital requirements; and
restrictions on cross-border flows. Often, the countries
imposing these barriers are emerging insurance markets.
Transatlantic does not suggest that the United States
consider retaliatory policies. Instead, our collective goal
should be to educate developing insurance markets on the value
of free trade, regulation without strangulation, and the
syndication of risk. We believe the Federal Insurance Office
can play an important advocacy role on this issue and
elsewhere.
In particular, the FIO can play an important role in
helping U.S. companies address overseas regulatory issues.
Following the 2008 financial crisis, foreign regulators are
more aggressive in how they oversee U.S. reinsurance branches.
One such example is the proposed implementation of the EU's
Solvency II directive and its threat to our operations.
We have three branch offices in Europe operating off our
single balance sheet; thus, we do not have to segregate our
capital. This mitigates infrastructure costs, currency issues,
and value-added taxes. In addition, clients receive local
service while tapping our full financial resources. Regulators,
meanwhile, can interface with local company contacts and
readily access records for inspection and oversight.
Nevertheless, the U.K. regulator has pointed to the fact we
do not have a solitary U.S. insurance regulator to coordinate
with when setting the strategy for the regulation of U.S.
reinsurance branches under this new directive. They noted that
regulation of U.S. insurers varies by State. They felt their
only options were to either apply their own regulatory scheme
on an extraterritorial basis or require a separately
capitalized subsidiary in the EU which could be consistently
regulated under Solvency II.
With this new approach, Transatlantic faces a difficult
choice: close our U.K. branch to avoid dual regulation by the
U.K. FSA and the New York Department of Financial Services or
establish a U.K. subsidiary with separate infrastructure,
capital, and increased costs.
Ironically, during this same period, the NAIC in several
States was focused on relaxing the regulation of foreign
reinsurers. Thus, while U.S. companies are faced with
heightened requirements in the EU, U.S. regulators are lowering
barriers at home.
An active FIO would serve three purposes here: one,
advocate on behalf of all U.S.-domiciled companies for fair
treatment in international jurisdictions; two, provide a single
gate for foreign regulators to interface with U.S. insurance
regulators; and three, coordinate policies at home with issues
abroad. We cannot stress enough the potential value in these
three areas of a well-resourced single U.S. regulator.
Finally, the United States needs to narrow the tax
disparity. The United States has the highest corporate tax rate
in the world, combined with the punitive treatment of
controlled foreign corporations. Companies like us face a
higher cost of capital over time. Lowering the tax rate or
amending the taxable base will not only allow domestic
companies to better compete globally; it will encourage new or
existing reinsurers to locate here. In fact, a revised
corporate tax structure with an empowered Federal advocate
would be a compelling environment for many reinsurers, which
would bring both jobs and capital to the United States.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sapnar can be found on page
76 of the appendix.]
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Sapnar.
Mr. Toppeta, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM J. TOPPETA, VICE CHAIRMAN, METLIFE, INC.

Mr. Toppeta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Bill Toppeta, and I am vice chairman
of MetLife.
You likely know MetLife as the largest life insurer in the
United States. In recent years, we have grown to be a leading
global provider of life insurance, annuities, and employee
benefit programs, serving 90 million customers in over 50
countries.
In 2011, our businesses outside the United States
contributed approximately 35 percent of MetLife's earnings. I
am here today to speak on behalf of a level regulatory playing
field for U.S. insurers throughout the world.
Our recommendations are straightforward. First,
policymakers should carefully weigh the impacts of duplicative
or conflicting regulations. Second, insurance should be
regulated as insurance, not as banking. And third, policymakers
should address non-tariff barriers impacting insurers operating
abroad through trade agreements and intergovernmental
dialogues.
It is hard to imagine an industry that has more layers of
regulation than life insurance, and that situation appears to
be getting worse, not better. Although we favor good, strong
regulations, multiple layers can actually be self-defeating, to
say nothing of confusing and expensive.
The intersection of international and domestic policies and
standard-setting creates an increasingly complex global
regulatory environment. Duplicative or conflicting regulations
may inhibit growth and fail to address the very issues they
were intended to cure. This situation may negatively affect the
competitive position of U.S. insurers.
I will provide a couple of examples to illustrate my point.
One is the Solvency II directive in the European Union. A
component of Solvency II is a greater focus on group
supervision. Since many EU insurance groups also have
businesses in other countries, the EU proposes to assess the
equivalence of these third-country supervisory regimes.
It will not surprise you to learn that, as a large U.S.-
based insurer with operations in Europe, MetLife would like to
see the EU recognize the U.S. as equivalent for Solvency II
purposes. We would argue that regulators should focus on the
outcomes provided by regulation rather than on the structure of
the regulatory system. We are wary of premature arguments for
regulatory convergence. What we need at this stage is
consistency achieved through mutual recognition of the outcomes
of our respective systems, rather than pressure to replicate or
adapt models from other countries.
Congress is in an excellent position to elevate the U.S.-EU
dialogue on equivalence. The congressional spotlight can be
shown on the benefits of mutual recognition which flow to
consumers, EU and U.S. businesses, regulators, and our two
economies. Whenever transatlantic dialogues take place, it will
be helpful to hear a chorus of congressional support for
cooperation on insurance regulation. The world's two largest
insurance markets deserve the level playing field that will
come from mutual recognition.
Let me turn now to a trade example. One of the ways
countries seek to protect their domestic industries is by
restricting foreign direct investment in certain sectors,
usually for a limited period of time. Two of the world's
largest markets, India and China, maintain tight restrictions
on FDI and life insurance. In India, foreign insurers are
limited to 26 percent ownership, and in China, the limit is 50
percent. This means that companies like MetLife who operate in
two of the world's fastest-growing markets must identify local
partners to invest in and jointly govern their operation. No
similar restriction applies to Chinese or Indian companies
operating here.
FDI caps are particularly challenging for life insurers
because we must commit substantial capital not only to bricks
and mortar, marketing and distribution of our product, but even
more so to backing up the financial guarantees we make to our
customers. The initial investment period for starting up new
life insurance ventures can span several years, and local
investors may not always have the patience or the capital to
sustain such long-term investment.
Reduction or elimination of FDI caps in these key markets
will take the concerted effort of our government through all
available channels. Congress is in an excellent position to
keep the spotlight on this issue and to support ongoing efforts
by the White House, USTR, and the Departments of State and
Treasury to eliminate or reduce FDI caps.
Let me conclude by affirming that American companies are
innovative, and American workers are highly productive. Given a
fair chance, with a fair, level regulatory playing field, we
can compete and win against anybody in the world.
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Toppeta can be found on page
93 of the appendix. ]
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. Vastine, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J. ROBERT VASTINE, PRESIDENT, COALITION OF SERVICE
INDUSTRIES (CSI)

Mr. Vastine. Thank you very much, Mr. Hurt, and thank you,
members of the subcommittee.
For the record, I would like to thank Chairwoman Biggert
for her work as co-chair of the Congressional Services Caucus.
We deeply appreciate her and her staff's understanding of the
importance of the services sector, the country's biggest
employer.
The United States is the world's largest services exporter.
Exports reached $588 billion with a surplus of almost $200
billion in 2011. That is a new record. U.S. cross-border
insurance exports, as the chairman pointed out at the outset,
accounted for only 2.6 percent of those exports, or about $15
billion. But insurance cross-border exports understate the very
substantial role of our insurers in global markets through
overseas affiliates, where sales were $60 billion in 2009 in
official statistics. We have reason to believe that this is an
understatement in itself.
Although our exports are strong, a recent study by Dr. Brad
Jensen at the Peterson Institute estimated that the United
States has the potential to export far more and that 3 million
more U.S. jobs could be created if we can remove the many
complex foreign barriers to our services trade. And here is
where we certainly need the coordinated help of the FIO and the
U.S. Trade Representative and other agencies.
CSI was founded 30 years ago to bring services to the
forefront of the U.S. trade agenda, and we believe we have
achieved that goal. And so, it is appropriate to appear today
with Bill Toppeta, our chairman.
There are now numerous opportunities, new opportunities in
which CSI and its members vigorously engage to promote
insurance trade and investment, including the International
Services Agreement being discussed in Geneva, the Trans-Pacific
Partnership being negotiated this week in Dallas, the U.S.-EU
High-Level Working Group, as Bill has described it, and there
are others.
In all services negotiations, the most important objective
is to achieve access to foreign markets. And this means the
right to establish your business, to own it fully, to use the
corporate forum most suitable to the market, and to operate in
a transparent regulatory environment. Equally important is the
right to get the same regulatory treatment that a local company
gets. This is, of course, known as national treatment.
A recent example of a market access issue on which progress
has been made is that of the auto insurance market in China.
After years of engagement by the U.S. Government and industry,
China finally agreed to open this market--recently at an S&ED
conference, actually. More work must be done to make the
promise a reality. We deeply appreciate the work of the U.S.
negotiators who will, we are sure, secure this commitment.
Bill Toppeta has mentioned the issue of equity caps, and I
won't repeat those. In China, in India, and in other markets,
equity caps are a major deterrent to foreign direct investment
and to local economic growth.
In addition to these market access issues, we are now
confronting what we call our 21st-Century issues. One of the
most important of these is foreign government policies that
favor state-owned enterprises--for example, national postal
services. The sale of insurance through post offices is a
growing problem. For instance, Japan Post is a 100 percent
government-owned postal entity that offers regular mail service
but also insurance and banking and other services, which all
are in direct competition with private sector companies,
including our companies. The Japanese Diet recently passed
legislation that will expand the favorable treatment provided
to Japan Post insurance and make it easier for it to offer
products on a discriminatory basis.
CSI and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have collaborated
recently to bring to the forefront this issue and to actually
table language--to urge our government to table language which
is now being discussed in the Trans-Pacific Partnership
negotiation as a foundation for a global standard.
Freedom of data flows is absolutely essential, and it is
another 21st-Century issue. It underpins our huge services
exports. Our roughly $600 billion of services exports depend on
the ability of data to move. Digital trade, we call it--digital
enablement of services trade.
For example, many countries are attempting to require that
all financial services data, including insurance data, be
processed and stored in-country. The Korean agreement, as has
been pointed out, for the first time contains the provision
that insurance companies may process data outside Korea. Again,
our negotiators in the TPP are working to ensure that
requirements are not placed on the location of servers and that
data flows are not unnecessarily interrupted.
Finally, another 21st-Century issue is forced localization,
which occurs when a country requires multinational companies to
conduct their business activities domestically, requiring that
business processes or hiring be conducted in-country. For
instance, Brazil is forcing the localization of reinsurance,
and Argentina has taken many steps to force global insurances
to localize within that country.
All of these issues and more demonstrate the necessity of
the FIO and the trade agencies and the huge agenda ahead. Thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vastine can be found on page
104 of the appendix.]
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Vastine.
I will now yield myself 5 minutes.
I wanted to see if I could get an answer from Mr. Toppeta
and Mr. Bartlett on this question, and then maybe also hear
from Mr. McRaith and Mr. McCarty.
As we look at, in the future, the designation of certain
companies as SIFIs and G-SIFIs, I would like to know
specifically what concerns the industry has in terms of
recognizing the difference in the business models between
banking and insurance? And what should we be looking at toward
minimizing the consequence of those designations in terms of
global competition?
If we could, Mr. Toppeta, and then Mr. Bartlett. And then,
if we have time, I would love to hear from Mr. McRaith and Mr.
McCarty.
Mr. Toppeta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would say this: The basis of all of this is that the
business models of banking and insurance are considerably
different.
In insurance, we start with our liabilities. We start with
the promises we make to our policyholders, and those are our
liabilities in the future. We have to then match those with
long-term assets. Because we make long-term promises that we
are going to pay on 20 or 30 years in the future, we have to
have long-term assets to go with them.
We do not have the same business model as banks who borrow
money short, in effect, and invest long. We do not have the
same liquidity issues that banks have. Banks can suffer
literally runs on banks, where customers come in and ask for
their deposit. We have in our policies protections against that
so that we have surrender charges, penalties if someone is
going to surrender early; there are tax consequences of
surrendering early.
So I would say the two business models are different. And,
therefore, in all of our regulations, we have to make very sure
that we are regulating insurance as the business of insurance,
not as banking.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you.
Mr. Bartlett?
Mr. Bartlett. The business models are entirely different.
The Dodd-Frank and SIFIs were written, in all fairness,
primarily with the banks and bank holding companies in mind.
But, nevertheless, it did mandate to the Treasury and to the
FSOC to consider all types of financial institutions, and so
that is what they are going to do.
There are a lot of tests in the law as to what makes a
SIFI, but the biggest one, it seems to me anyway, is
interconnectedness. And we have all spent a lot of time
commenting on that, but interconnectedness sort of takes center
stage in that.
I think what is facing FIO now--and I believe FIO is and
should concentrate on this--is to be sure that the G-SIFIs in
Europe and SIFIs in the United States, that definition is as
close to exactly the same as possible or at least quite
concurrent and quite compatible. It is hard enough to figure
out what is an interconnected, systemically risky company, but
if you have to have figure that out with two different
definitions on two sides of the Atlantic, then it would create
confusion and add to systemic risk rather than diminish it.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Bartlett.
Mr. McRaith?
Mr. McRaith. Yes, Mr. Chairman. To add to what the prior
panelists have said, if we look at what happens when a
traditional bank fails and when a traditional insurer fails,
that really depicts the most graphic difference. If a bank
fails, there is the potential for an immediate run on all
assets of that bank. And the liquidity problem may mean the
bank doesn't have sufficient liquidity to meet the demands of
the run. When a traditional insurance business fails, not every
car owner, for example, is going to get into a car accident
immediately upon failure. Not every individual is going to seek
death when its life insurer fails. So, there is not that same
prospect of a run. They are very different business models with
very different consequences in the event of failure.
At the Federal Insurance Office, we are not only involved
with the Financial Stability Oversight Council, we are involved
at the IAIS, where the process is being developed to identify
globally significant insurance institutions. We are working to
align the criteria, the methodology, and the timing of both of
those processes so that no U.S.-based insurer is disadvantaged
through the global designation process.
Mr. Hurt. Mr. McCarty, would you like to just comment
briefly? My time is about up.
Mr. McCarty. Yes, and I will make this brief, Mr. Chairman.
I do agree that not only is the business model different,
but the regulatory model is different and has a stringent
regulatory regime. And it also, because of the nature of
insurance, gives more opportunity for the companies to rebound
and not have the same reaction that you would in the case of a
bank.
We contend that banks have historically been risky,
systemically risky, when traditional insurance has not been.
And we would think that the solution would be to wall off the
insurance entities to prevent them from being systemically
risky.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. McCarty. My time has expired.
I recognize Mr. Clay from Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. O'Bryant, what types of barriers to entry in the
foreign markets have U.S. firms faced? And could you give any
particular instances or identify countries where it may be more
difficult to enter those markets?
Mr. O'Bryant. Yes, Congressman Clay. One barrier that we
are actually considering and facing right now is with the
country of Brazil. Just in the last year-and-a-half, they have
strengthened their own internal requirements that require more
of any type of reinsurance be allocated to the state-owned
insurance reinsurer. That, along with high capital requirements
to enter the market, make that market extremely difficult for
us to enter into and to be profitable. So, it actually limits
the capacity that we could offer to local insurers to write
more business.
Mr. Clay. And would you share with us your recommendations
to correct some of the barriers? How would you recommend it
being done differently?
Mr. O'Bryant. All the gentlemen on the panel, almost, have
addressed the need for a strong voice that could represent the
industry from a Federal level.
I have worked in Japan for many years, and I was around in
1996 and 1998 when the USTR represented the United States in
insurance talks with Japan. One of the things I heard from the
regulators, Japanese regulators, the Ministry of Finance at
that time, was that there was no one who would really speak on
our behalf who knew what we were talking about or what they
were talking about. Not that the USTR was an unfit negotiator,
but they did not look at it from the perspective of the
insurance industry. Whereas, when they were negotiating banking
treaties, the Treasury negotiated on behalf of the U.S. banks.
So, the FIO is very important to us as an industry. As a
Federal representative, it is empowered to represent the
industry and conclude treaties.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that.
And along those same lines, I want to say that another
witness mentioned the concept of a Federal advocate for
reinsurance companies. Could someone expand on that?
Mr. Sapnar?
Mr. Sapnar. Yes, that was me.
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Sapnar. I think, for us, a lot of the international
regulators that we deal with don't understand the U.S.
regulatory system very well. And to have an advocate or a
single gateway where they can go and have a single liaison with
the different States would be useful, considering that
different States have different regulatory regimes.
And I would just go a step further. Last week, I think,
David Cameron, U.K. Prime Minister, sat out in front with
Lloyd's and talked about the importance of the Lloyd's market
and the long-term strategy of Lloyd's. And I think having a
Federal advocate for our business and promoting the
transparency and the financial strength of our--and the
successful regulatory system we do have here that isn't well
understood would go a long ways overseas.
Mr. Clay. And, Mr. Sapnar, you piqued my interest when you
talked about U.S. tax structure and if it was competitive with
the rest of the world. I was wondering, if it was competitive,
if it was lower rates, would your company be receptive to
repatriating your profits that you earn overseas and bringing
them back here and paying a fair tax on those profits and
reinvesting them in this country?
Mr. Sapnar. Sure, I will talk about that on two levels.
First of all, yes, we already do that as a branch system.
So, the profits we earn overseas are consolidated under our New
York office, and we pay full tax on that.
Second, last year we went through a situation where we were
being merged with another entity that was a Bermuda-based
company. During that process, four other companies eventually
emerged wanting to buy Transatlantic. Why did they want to buy
Transatlantic? Because if they could get our capital and our
assets offshore, it was a big coup for them. So, clearly, other
people see that, and that is a potential threat to jobs here in
the United States or Transatlantic staying on shore.
We did ultimately choose, as a management team, to combine
with a U.S.-based company for other reasons that were
compelling, in my view, at the end of the day, but I had to
answer to the shareholders.
Mr. Clay. Okay. Thank you for that response.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Clay.
Mr. Dold is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I certainly want to thank all of our witnesses for
being flexible today and for coming from great distances to
join us.
I also want to welcome all of our former committee staff
who happen to be in the audience today. We certainly appreciate
you being with us.
Mr. Chairman, I was obviously on the Floor when we started
on opening statements, and I would like to ask unanimous
consent that my opening statement, which I was unable to give,
be submitted for the record.
Mr. Hurt. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director McRaith, it is so great to see you again. I hope
all is going well. I thought we would just start with you.
The other two insurance experts on the FSOC, Mr. Woodall
and Missouri Insurance Commissioner John Huff, have both said
that they didn't think that the traditional property casualty
insurance could be deemed systemically significant. In fact, in
July, Mr. Huff actually testified before this subcommittee and
said that traditional insurance products and activities do not
typically create systemic risk.
As the FIO Director, the Dodd-Frank Act charges you with
making recommendations to the FSOC on insurance companies to be
designated for the heightened prudential standards and
supervision by the Federal Reserve. Do you foresee the FIO
recommending to the FSOC or any equivalent international body
that any insurer be deemed systemically significant?
Mr. McRaith. The Financial Stability Oversight Council, by
statute, looks at all firms that may present a vulnerability or
threaten the health of the economy. It does not afford the
Council the opportunity of exempting any one industry or
sector. In that process, I know the Council is evaluating large
firms that have many different business components. While the
traditional business of insurance may not, in itself, present
systemic risk, that is not a reason not to look at a larger
firm.
I would not disagree with the statements that Director Huff
and Mr. Woodall have made. I would say that I think, as a
country, it is clear that we need to always evaluate a firm as
a whole, ``look under the hood,'' as they say, and evaluate
what are the nontraditional insurance aspects of that firm's
operations.
Mr. Dold. And I certainly believe that is fair. Are there
any firms that you can think of right now, insurance firms,
that you think potentially you would recommend to the FSOC as
systemically significant?
Mr. McRaith. No, but I would--looking at history, of
course, we could look at AIG--
Mr. Dold. Sure.
Mr. McRaith. --a firm that was predominantly known as an
insurance firm. That would be a firm, if we were to go back
several years, we would like to be designated.
Mr. Dold. Director McRaith, I don't disagree. My question
to you on AIG is, property and casualty, was that part of the
issue with AIG?
Mr. McRaith. I don't want to comment on any firm today,
but--
Mr. Dold. Sure.
Mr. McRaith. --I would say, looking back at AIG,
historically, there were issues in some of the insurance--
Mr. Dold. No question, there were issues.
Mr. McRaith. Yes.
Mr. Dold. I just think that if we look at it on the aspects
of their business, if we have a traditional property and
casualty insurance business, generally those weren't really the
issues. And I understand your need to try and look under the
hood, and I think that is certainly good. I just wanted to see
if you had any on the top of your mind right now.
If I can, I would just like to switch to Mr. O'Bryant.
Thank you again for making the trek in as long as you have. The
question I have for you is, you expressed concern in your
written testimony about the reinsurance of certain term life
insurance products because the United States has strict
reserving rules for such products that are not present in many
other countries. Further, you suggest that if the FIO does not
address this disparity, a number of U.S. firms would be
disadvantaged in their ability to offer competitive prices to
reinsure such products.
What specific recommendations, if any, would you have for
Director McRaith, the FIO, to address this concern?
Mr. O'Bryant. Thank you for the question.
Again, I think the most important thing is to have a strong
advocate that can use the U.S. model and the strength of the
industry.
One of the things we enjoy from the State regulators is a
very strong and prudent model that has protected the industry
and protected the consumers and policyholders for many years.
And it has shown that reserving requirements here are indeed
substantial and, because of the long-term results of reserving
standards here, that they have applicability worldwide.
But I think having the one voice that can advocate the same
type of standards and same type of solvency requirements is the
greatest strength that we could ask for.
Mr. Dold. I certainly thank you for the comments.
Mr. Bartlett, I had a question. My time has expired, so I
will submit that in writing to you.
But, again, thank you all for taking the time to join us
today.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Dold.
Mr. Cleaver is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. I will yield to the gentleman if he would like
to--not completely, but--
Mr. Dold. No, no, just for the question.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Mr. Dold. I do appreciate that. I thank my friend for
yielding just for the question.
Mr. Bartlett, in your testimony, you applauded the Chinese
Government's announcement that it would lift the prohibition on
foreign firms offering mandatory auto insurance policies.
Are there other restrictions that impede U.S.
competitiveness in China that the Administration can address
through its Strategic and Economic Dialogue?
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you. I will be brief.
Yes, of course, it is China, so there are a lot of
restrictions. Auto insurance was another step forward. The two
that come to mind is, one is that U.S. insurers need to be able
to open branches concurrently. It would be like saying that you
can offer a new brand of fertilizer for soybeans but only one
field at a time per year, and that wouldn't get you very far
very fast.
And then second is to lift its moratorium on license
approvals for foreign firms offering annuities and retirement
products. That would be astoundingly positive for the Chinese
themselves as well as for global trade.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it.
And I appreciate my friend for yielding.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me go with Mr. O'Bryant and Mr. Bartlett, not just
because they have a big operation in Missouri, but--I am
wondering, Mr. O'Bryant, what specifically can the Federal
Government do to help companies like yours? Now, the follow-up
is dangerous, but go ahead. What can we do to help companies
like RGA?
Mr. O'Bryant. As we enter new markets, the greatest
challenge that we have is local regulations. Clearly, the
standards are different from those that we have here at home.
And our whole entire business model is built on providing
additional services to expand the ability of local insurers, as
well as multinationals in those countries, to offer products to
a greater number of people through our specialized underwriting
capabilities as well as to inject new knowledge through product
development ideas in those countries.
But because of the barriers that we find, often because of
capital that is required--and, as Mr. Sapnar said, in many
cases, we are required to set up localized companies instead of
being able to work through branch structures. And then also, in
many cases, as I mentioned earlier, in Brazil, where there are
requirements that the state-owned company receive a greater
portion of any kind of ceded premium, it restricts our ability
to move into those markets, and it actually helps local
companies expand their companies.
Mr. Cleaver. So the follow-up would be--and you may have
answered this--what is it that we are doing presently that you
believe to be the greatest impediment to RGA? Either you or Mr.
Bartlett or both?
Mr. Bartlett. What I have communicated clearly with Mr.
McRaith and with others is that I think the greatest challenge
and the single place that we can advance the cause of the
American consumer the most is with uniform standards from State
to State, to create equal protection of the laws in every
State. The American people, both consumers and businesses, are
highly mobile. They are interstate, they are interconnected,
and they deserve the opportunity to have a uniform set of
standards.
We are a long way from that, and it can be happening in
incremental steps, but I think that is one of the challenges
for FIO in which they can advance the cause for the American
people by a lot.
Mr. Cleaver. Mr. Sapnar?
Mr. Sapnar. Thank you.
I think Director McRaith has a unique opportunity,
difficult in being the first Director as well, but he has some
abilities or authorities that the States don't have, and we
historically haven't had in the United States, to enter into
some agreements with foreign regulators that are binding.
And I think that the biggest problem we face is we have 50
different States that are hard for our overseas regulators to
understand. And if he can get down to settlement of those
issues, rather than discussions of principles, we think that
would be a really good thing at the end of the day.
That is very difficult for him. He has a lot to do, there
is a lot going on, so he needs the support. We are prepared to
support him and to educate the office as much as possible. I am
not suggesting it is easy, but I think it is certainly
possible.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Cleaver.
Without objection, I would like to recognize myself for an
additional 5 minutes to ask questions of Mr. Vastine and
Professor Kochenburger.
We have heard concern about the European Union's Solvency
II initiative, and I would like to hear from you about whether
or not you believe that initiative will put U.S. insurers at an
unfair disadvantage. And how would you recommend to minimize
that unfair advantage?
If I could have Mr. Vastine address that question, and
then, Mr. Kochenburger, if you could also weigh in. Thank you.
Mr. Vastine. Solvency II is obviously an enormous concern
to our country, and it does pose competitive issues that the
industry is engaging in a very intense way with regulators in
Europe and with the help of Mr. McRaith.
So I think the response of the industry has been, in the
context especially of the EU-U.S. High-Level Working Group, to
more actively and thoroughly engage the Europeans in a dialogue
that will result in a mutually recognized and mutually
beneficial outcome, so that these two huge global markets can
coordinate their regulation and mutually accept the
effectiveness of each other's regulation, so that the United
States is not faced with a set of regulations that are foreign
to its business or strange to its business, are not endogenous,
and we can come to an agreement.
So we have embraced the services--the insurance sector has
really embraced the U.S.-EU High-Level Working Group as a means
to promote that very important dialogue with the Europeans.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Vastine.
Mr. Kochenburger?
Mr. Kochenburger. Thank you.
I think a couple of years ago--just one quick point to
add--a couple of years ago, Director McRaith, when he was
commissioner in Illinois, testified before Congress on behalf
of the NAIC on Solvency II. And I think the term he used, which
is one I like, is that it is not a cure-all, it is not a
panacea, and it is not necessarily the model for the world.
And I think part of the concern would be that the United
States solvency models have actually worked fairly--well, very
effectively, and, also, that some of those models in the United
States respond to very different situations that we have in the
EU or elsewhere in the world, particularly in property
casualty, where in property there may be a lot of similarities,
but of course liability models in the United States are far
different. Briefly put, you can be sued about many more things
in the United States than in other countries and often for a
long time. So, property casualty companies in the United States
have had to be very concerned about not only asbestos claims,
clerical abuse claims, and others that go back 20, 30, 40, or
50 years, but what will be the next level of asbestos claims.
Again, this responds to our own unique liability system.
And that means that Solvency II and other models, whatever
their merits, may, in fact, not necessarily be the best ones
for here. And so, that is a concern I share.
Also, however, the importance of equivalence, of course,
can't be overstated. Our companies absolutely--and they can say
it much better than I can, and they have said it today--need
the ability to be deemed equivalent in order to work within
their second significant largest insurance market in the world.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Kochenburger.
Mr. McRaith, would you like to respond?
Mr. McRaith. The EU's Solvency II framework is a well-
conceived framework adopted by some very smart insurance people
who reside and operate and have worked in the EU. And we
congratulate them on that initiative and on the development and
progress they have made.
The purpose of the EU-U.S. insurance dialogue which I
described earlier is to alleviate the concern, resolve the
uncertainty for the insurance sector based in both
jurisdictions, so that companies, whether based in Europe or
the United States, can compete, as needed, in emerging
economies around the world.
Whether this results in something called an equivalence
assessment by the EU, we can't be sure. What I can tell you is
that the United States, through the dialogue or the insurance
project that is now being undertaken, will conclude this year
with a path forward. And we will, in fact, embrace best
practices, if there are best practices to be embraced. If not,
we are going to move forward, hopefully arm-in-arm with our
colleagues from overseas.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you.
Mr. McCarty, we are over time, but would you like to
respond briefly?
Mr. McCarty. Yes, I concur with Director McRaith that we
certainly commend our colleagues overseas for the great work
they did to modernize their solvency system; that we are
participating with the Director on the steering committee to
look at--and I think it is absolutely essential that we have a
mutual recognition in order to preserve transatlantic commerce
and provide better choices and stability for our consumers.
Mr. Hurt. Excellent. Thank you.
I want to thank each of you for joining us today and for
providing your insight and comments to our committee.
I ask unanimous consent to insert the following material
into the record: a May 17, 2012, statement from the American
Insurance Association; a May 17, 2012, statement from the
Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers; a May 17, 2012,
statement from Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America; a May 17, 2012, statement from the National
Association of Mutual Insurance Companies; and a 2009 U.S.
International Trade Commission report entitled, ``Property and
Casualty Insurance Services: Competitive Conditions in Foreign
Markets.'' Without objection, those documents will be admitted
into the record.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
With that, once again, I thank the members of the
committee, and I thank the members of the panel for joining us.
And this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:10 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 17, 2012


