- AN EXAMINATION OF THE AVAILABILITY OF CREDIT FOR CONSUMERS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN EXAMINATION OF THE AVAILABILITY
OF CREDIT FOR CONSUMERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 22, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-65

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-606 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
September 22, 2011...........................................     1
Appendix:
September 22, 2011...........................................    65

WITNESSES
Thursday, September 22, 2011

Gilbert, Ryan, Chief Executive Officer, BillFloat, Inc...........    42
Grant, Michael A., President, National Bankers Association.......    44
Guzman, Gerri, Executive Director, Consumer Rights Coalition
(CRC)..........................................................    38
Koide, Melissa, Vice President of Policy, Center for Financial
Services Innovation (CFSI).....................................    40
Manturuk, Kimberly R., Research Associate, University of North
Carolina Center for Community Capital..........................    46
Marquis, David M., Executive Director, National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA)..........................................    11
Mooney, Robert W., Deputy Director, Consumer Protection and
Community Affairs, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)     9
Rademacher, Ida, Vice President, Policy and Research, the
Corporation for Enterprise Development (CFED)..................    48
Wides, Barry, Deputy Comptroller for Community Affairs, Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)..........................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Gilbert, Ryan................................................    66
Grant, Michael A.............................................    70
Guzman, Gerri................................................    72
Koide, Melissa...............................................    74
Manturuk, Kimberly R.........................................    82
Marquis, David M.............................................   116
Mooney, Robert W.............................................   139
Rademacher, Ida..............................................   151
Wides, Barry.................................................   156

AN EXAMINATION OF THE AVAILABILITY
OF CREDIT FOR CONSUMERS

----------

Thursday, September 22, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:31 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Royce,
McHenry, Pearce, Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Canseco,
Grimm, Fincher; Maloney, Gutierrez, Watt, Hinojosa, McCarthy of
New York, Baca, Miller of North Carolina, Scott, Meeks, and
Carney.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order. Close
the doors there.
I would like to thank the Members for being cooperative and
the witnesses for starting early this morning. The Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee has a very important hearing in
this room at 2 p.m., and we need to move through this hearing
as expeditiously as possible so that they can have enough time
to complete their hearing.
We are also likely to have a series of votes around 1 p.m.,
and it is my intention to try to wrap up the hearing when those
votes are called. That said, I would like to remind Members to
try to abide by the 5-minute rule when questioning witnesses so
all Members will have sufficient time to ask questions.
The financial crisis and economic downturn have left many
Americans with fewer financial resources. Furthermore, some
Americans have lost their jobs and suffered significant
reductions in their standard of living. Many have exhausted
their savings and are now seeking new financial products to
help them get through these difficult times.
While many of us will weather the storm and regain our
financial footing, those who have struggled may have fallen out
of the banking system or are teetering on the edge. Today's
hearing will give members of the Financial Institutions and
Consumer Credit Subcommittee a better understanding of the
ongoing innovation of financial products to meet the demand for
credit.
Our first panel of regulator witnesses will provide us with
an assessment of programs that financial institutions offer for
borrowers seeking lower-dollar loans. Our second panel will
provide members of the subcommittee with an overview of
entrepreneurship and innovation in dealing with new financial
products as well as the necessary safeguards to make sure that
these products are safe for the consumer.
We need to foster innovation in the creation of new
financial products to meet our consumers' needs. There should
be diverse product offerings for consumers so that they can
best tailor the products to their needs.
This product expansion is critical to consumers' ability to
gain--to regain, in some cases--and maintain financial
stability and to access the credit products they need. It is my
hope that this hearing will provide Members with the
information necessary to make informed decisions about ways to
expand credit availability for the underserved.
I would like to now recognize the ranking member, the
gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney, for the purpose of
making an opening statement.

We experienced some technical difficulties at the
beginning of Mrs. Maloney's statement.]

Mrs. Maloney. --particularly not only from government in
the first panel, but the second panel, on many in the private
sector that are exploring short-term credit options and other
ways to provide credit to the underbanked. According to a
recent study, this segment is approximately 55 million people,
or 24 percent of all households in America, and this population
has grown by approximately 12 percent over the last 4 years, in
large part due to the economic crisis.
Even those who do have checking accounts at traditional
banks often face credit challenges. In fact, research from the
Bureau of Economic Research tells us in their recent report--I
find this an astonishing statistic--that about half of all
Americans would not be able to come up with $2,000 in 30 days
for emergencies. I would say this is, then, an emergency that
government faces.
Whether they use payday lenders, check cashers, or simply
seek to borrow money from their friends and families, these
consumers tend to feel that their banks can't provide them with
the money they need to fill the financial void that they face.
And in many cases, banks are not willing to give this type of
loan to a customer. So they seek services outside of their
banks, where there is often a greater likelihood of predatory
practices.
We know that the population of people seeking these types
of short-term credit products is growing in this uncertain
economy, where the unemployment rate has been over 9 percent
for some time. I have always supported consumer choice, whether
it be in the area of credit cards, overdraft protection, check
cashers, or any other form of short-term loans. I believe that
as long as the prices are clear, the risks are clear, and that
consumers are on a level playing field with their financial
institutions, then they should be empowered to make decisions
about their finances that are right for them and their
families.
I was very happy to learn about the National Credit Union
Administration's short-term loan product for credit unions, and
that the FDIC pilot project enabled a small number of banks to
offer a low-dollar loan product. This is important that you are
looking in these directions.
But the problem is that consumers say the reason they seek
a short-term loan as opposed to a loan from their bank is
because the payday loan, or the check cash, or whatever it is,
is fast and easy to obtain, and often these loans do not
require a credit check.
I look forward to hearing from the regulators on our first
panel whether they think the loan products that their banks
offer could be a viable alternative. I also would like to hear
from them what they are doing for check cashers, because many
are telling me that they can't get any cooperation from a bank.
I know that in the great State of New York, there is only one
bank that will cooperate with check cashers, and--even though
they will check the credit of the people and ensure the credit
of the people they are looking at.
I really do feel that this is a huge, huge problem. There
are many unbanked and underbanked citizens in our country, and
we need to figure out how we can help them become banked,
either through an alternative low-term project in the
government, in the government banks--or the government-
regulated banks--or in the other alternative areas.
And I would like to raise to the OCC, these alternative
areas are not regulated. Maybe the OCC should regulate this
area too, or what are your ideas of how this should be
approached?
In any event, I compliment the chairwoman for focusing on
this. Regrettably, it is a growing problem in our country.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Westmoreland for 1 minute for
an opening statement.

[Technical difficulties.]

Mr. Westmoreland. --for this hearing, and despite the
Administration's assurances that 2010 would be a recovery
summer, consumers are still struggling to gain access to
credit. This is particularly true in Georgia, where the
proliferation of bank failures and burdensome regulations from
this Administration further hindered bank's abilities to lend
to creditworthy borrowers.
Now, banks are expanding to offer nontraditional financial
products to consumers because regulations have increased costs
and limited banks' ability to charge customers for these
services. I am especially concerned about Federal regulators
regulating profit over regulating the product. This is
particularly true of recent OCC guidance, issued June 8, 2011.
And I look forward, Madam Chairwoman, to hearing the
testimony today from these witnesses.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Gutierrez for 3 minutes for
an opening statement.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you very much.
And I want to thank you and the ranking member. I support
the work these regulatory agencies are doing to encourage banks
to offer safe and sensible loan products to underserved
borrowers.
I am also interested in innovations and really helping
families get out of the debt cycles and build good credit. I
consider this a very important issue, and one for which I want
to explore solutions, and how will we address the potential
abuses that exist just before us?
Big banks--the same banks that we bailed out--are not
offering products that look very familiar to anyone looking at
them and fighting abusive and predatory lending practices.
Wells Fargo--I just got this from the Internet--Wells Fargo has
something called ``direct deposit advance,'' and U.S. Bank has
``checking account advance.''
While these offers may sound interesting and pretty
innocent, they may not be all they seem to be. They are
charging fees and interest rates that work out to almost 120
percent APR or more, and that looks pretty much like a payday
loan to me.
They are writing terms that they say can take their payout
straight from their next direct deposit. Sounds like a payday
loan to me.
And guess what? If you can't pay it off at the end of the
month, they are going to go to your account and debit your
account, and if the money doesn't exist, you get an overdraft
fee from U.S. Bank and Wells Fargo.
I don't know about the rest of you, but I am paying
attention, because I thought the payday industry was the ugly
little brother duckling that the big banks always frowned upon.
But it appears that after we bailed them out, and they took us
to the brink of disaster that is exactly where they want to
take many of their customers today.
I hope we check into these products and use enforceable
standards created by a new consumer protection agency, which I
hope we stop tying the hands of.
Thank you so much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Luetkemeyer for 2\1/2\
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
As unemployment hovers above 9 percent, and the economy
remains stagnant, the American people continue to suffer.
Traditional financial institutions are facing a sizeable wave
of new regulations and have, in some cases, turned to increased
fees to help weather the financial storm.
Regardless of who or what is to blame, the simple truth is
that some low- and middle-income Americans are being forced out
of depository institutions. They are more frequently turning to
alternative sources of capital.
Twenty-five percent of American households have difficulty
obtaining credit from traditional sources, and 55 percent of
our citizens have trouble pulling together $2,000 to deal with
an emergency. We seem to continue to work against the non-
depository institutions despite the fact that they are
regulated, have high customer satisfaction, and serve a
population that others are not interested in or able to serve.
If we want to get serious about helping those with limited
access to credit, we need to consider novel concepts that
include a wide variety of institutions. We are beginning to do
this, but must continue to make progress. To take the FDIC's
small-dollar loan pilot program, this is just one example of a
new initiative that could ultimately lead to wider access to
credit.
Most institutions that have participated have viewed it--
some of them have viewed it as a success, and did so because it
gave them an opportunity to build relationships with customers.
Without that connection, financial institutions have no reason
to do a small-dollar, short-term loan that might be needed to
pay a medical bill or a car payment that allows the American
public to get well, get educated, or get back to work.
We can improve upon this program by consenting to the
formation of partnerships between banks and non-banks, which I
believe would encourage increased access to credit and stronger
consumer protections. The economy isn't improving. Our
constituents continue to suffer.
It is time for our government to work together and identify
innovative ways to foster cooperation and advance this
conversation. Hopefully, today's hearing will provide a forum
to do just that.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Baca for 2 minutes for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and anchor
for our third-base team, as well as our ranking member, as
well.
Today, we are here to discuss the credit crisis and how it
impacts the unbanked and underbanked population in this
country. With all the attention the near-collapse of Wall
Street received, relatively little attention has been given to
the population of minority and underbanked and unbanked
communities.
These individuals and families are struggling with high
unemployment and limited options as to where to go for credit.
A recent study by the National Bureau of Economic Research
found that one quarter of Americans would be unable to come up
with $2,000 in 30 days if they had financial emergencies. So,
you have to put yourself in that kind of a situation.
Another 19 percent would have to rely on short-term credit
products in order to come up with the cash. This population is
no longer just the poor. It is the middle-class families
fighting to pay their bills, mortgages, and educational costs
for their kids, and knowing that they need a $2,000 loan and
can't get it anywhere else.
Today's banks are not serving the underserved consumers and
are not supporting the innovation that we need in the market.
In this situation, where can these individuals go? Some Members
may choose to focus on the subset of the short-term loans--
payday loans, what they feel are the danger of this product.
But payday loan providers do not offer $2,000 loans. It
would be a disservice to the people in need of credit to focus
on these products alone.
If close to half of Americans cannot come up with $2,000 on
their own in 30 days, the problem is much bigger than just
payday loans. We need to discuss short-term products and how
they can help.
We need to create an environment for safe but effective
financial innovation that at the end will provide more access
to people who need it. This year, I have introduced H.R. 1909,
the Federal Financial Services and Credit Companies Charter Act
of 2011.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time--
Mr. Baca. May I have 30 seconds?
Thank you very much, Coach.
The goal of the legislation is to provide access to short-
term products and safe, transparent--instead of reinventing the
wheel, the bills work with what we have. Let us create Federal
charter incorporated products. I realize that we have a lot to
discuss and I look forward to hearing the testimony of the
individuals today, and hopefully they will consider my bill, as
well, in that, and that is the FFSCC Charter Act.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco, for 1 minute for an opening statement.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for holding this
meeting.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has as much as said
that credit is the lifeblood of our economy. And based on a
recent FDIC survey which shows millions of American families
are unable and limited in their ability to access credit, and
to quote my colleague, Mrs. Maloney, who stated and quoted the
National Bureau of Economic Research that found that half of
American families could not raise $2,000 in an emergency if
they needed to.
This is truly a daunting problem that threatens the future
of American prosperity. To correct this, Congress should focus
on fostering a vibrant and competitive financial services
industry--one that provides ample choices for consumers and
allows borrowers mobility from one type of lending product to
the next.
Unfortunately, the recent legislation and the hundreds of
regulations that they mandate will restrict credit to even more
and more Americans and disallow low- and moderate-income
families access to traditional banking systems and other
sources of credit. I look forward to hearing the testimony of
the witnesses today.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Scott for 2 minutes for an
opening statement.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I think the statistics point out clearly this great need.
Right now, only 17 percent of banks consider it a priority to
really get into the communities and serve the unbanked areas.
We are now in a very difficult economic time, with soaring
unemployment. These unbanked individuals are not generally
financially irresponsible. For example, there are those who
have been unemployed for at least 4 months and are looking for
work, and they have dried up their savings; there are those who
are young adults who have limited access to liquidity due to
various circumstances but realize the value in saving money
where possible--they need access to credit.
Additionally, there are those who receive an hourly wage
from often more than one job, who are just trying to hold on
and find steady employment, with the economy hovering at 10
percent unemployment--and that is being very generous when you
count those who have given up work. So we have an opportunity
here. We have a responsibility to make sure we have a fair,
level playing field.
One size does not fit all. There is room for payday
lenders; there is room for small industrial loan companies;
there is room for pawn shops. All play a very vital role.
And as we move forward with regulations we have to make
sure that the one thing that is paramount is that our consumers
deserve choices that fit their very serious economic
circumstances at this time.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Fincher for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The poor state of this economy is hurting those the most
who have the least. In an era of 9.1 percent unemployment,
access to credit is tighter than it has ever been.
However, in my home State of Tennessee, there is a way to
get credit that requires no credit score and has provided
thousands of Tennesseans with funds to pay for emergencies and
life's other problems. These lenders in Tennessee have
satisfied a unique demand in the marketplace that banks and
other financial institutions cannot fill.
Low-dollar lenders provide short-term, low-dollar loans,
far below the amount that a person can borrow from the bank
without a credit check. These loans offer another immediate
option to many consumers who have low credit or no credit at
all.
I look forward to hearing the testimony today from the
witnesses, and I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to thank the Members for their opening
statements, and now I would like to introduce our first panel
of witnesses for the purpose of giving a 5-minute opening
statement.
We have your written testimony.
Our first witness is Mr. Barry Wides, Deputy Comptroller
for Community Affairs, Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency.
Welcome, Mr. Wides.

STATEMENT OF BARRY WIDES, DEPUTY COMPTROLLER FOR COMMUNITY
AFFAIRS, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY (OCC)

Mr. Wides. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
appear on OCC's behalf to discuss consumer credit and the types
of products that national banks and Federal savings
associations are making available to meet small-dollar credit
needs.
National banks and Federal savings associations provide the
lion's share of unsecured consumer lending in the United
States, with over $600 billion in credit card and other
revolving debt outstanding. Consumer credit comes in many
forms: unsecured and secured credit cards; term consumer
installment loans; and lines of credit linked to checking
accounts.
Many banks and thrifts offer credit cards that provide
households with a crucial source of credit and a flexible
repayment schedule. Lines of credit which are widely offered
are frequently tied to checking accounts and can be set up
automatically transfer funds to cover overdrafts. Most banks
and thrifts also have unsecured consumer loan products, where
the borrower makes installment payments over a set period of
time.
But there are many factors that may limit a borrower's
access to traditional types of credit. Some prospective
borrowers may have yet to establish a credit history or may
only have a limited credit record.
For other prospective borrowers, previous late payments,
repossession action, bankruptcy, or foreclosure may have
damaged their credit score. And some consumers are just unaware
that the better credit products for which they would qualify
are available.
However, a growing number of banks and thrifts recognize
that there are ways for these customer segments to be
underwritten safely and soundly. And many banks and thrifts
have taken initiatives to provide products tailored to the
needs of these customers.
My written testimony highlights examples of small-dollar
loan products offered by banks and thrifts and shows that much
is being done to improve access to credit. Many banks and
thrifts use high-touch manual underwriting when making a loan
decision, which allows them to consider mitigating
circumstances such as temporary unemployment or emergency
medical expenses. This approach is prudent as long as the
customer has otherwise managed credit and has the capacity to
repay the loan.
Other banks offer products such as secured credit cards to
help borrowers reestablish or improve their credit. And new
scoring models are helping to automate underwriting for thin-
file customers. This not only lowers costs for low-margin small
loans, but also allows rapid decisioning and expedited
disbursement of funds.
The bank regulatory agencies' Community Reinvestment Act
guidelines specifically acknowledges the importance of small-
dollar loans as a means of serving the credit needs of the
community. Programs that provide small, unsecured consumer
loans based on the borrower's ability to repay and with
reasonable terms are eligible for positive CRA consideration.
Loan programs that feature reporting to consumer reporting
agencies or include a financial education component also may be
favorably considered. And banks and thrifts may receive
positive CRA consideration for qualified investments in
financial intermediaries that offer small-dollar programs.
The OCC's community affairs staff engage in a variety of
activities to encourage nationally chartered banks and thrifts
to address consumer credit needs. We educate by communicating
best practices through online resources and publications. We
also work with the other bank regulatory agencies to conduct
dozens of seminars each year where bankers hear firsthand from
practitioners about how best to implement constructive
programs, such as small-dollar loan initiatives.
The OCC works actively in partnership with the National
League of Cities Bank On initiative to expand banking
opportunities for unbanked and underbanked individuals. Under
this initiative, banks and thrifts are offering low-cost
checking with no minimum balance requirements, prepaid debit
cards, and small-dollar loans with the support of counseling
organizations who provide budgeting and financial counseling
assistance.
I would like to conclude by reemphasizing that the OCC
firmly supports efforts by national banks and Federal savings
associations to be leaders in their communities. The OCC's
guidance and supervision encourages our regulated institutions
to offer products and programs that meet a spectrum of credit
needs in a safe, sound, and sustainable manner.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Comptroller Wides can be
found on page 156 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. Robert Mooney, the Deputy Director
for Consumer Protection and Community Affairs at the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Welcome, Mr. Mooney.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT W. MOONEY, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CONSUMER
PROTECTION AND COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Mooney. Thank you for inviting me to testify on options
available to consumers in need of small-dollar, short-term
credit. Expanding the availability of mainstream financial
services in general, and affordable small-dollar loans in
particular, is a priority at the FDIC.
A generation or so ago, it was not uncommon for banks to
make small, unsecured loans to individuals. However, over time
a series of product and technological innovations in the
competitive landscape of banking contributed to a decline in
the number of banks offering small loans and an increase in
alternative credit providers offering more costly credit
products.
The FDIC began reviewing whether banks could feasibly offer
alternatives to high-cost, short-term credit in the context of
military personnel, whose financial problems can collectively
affect the readiness of our Armed Forces. In December 2006, we
held a conference titled, ``Affordable, Responsible Loans for
the Military: Programs and Prototypes,'' where attendees,
including military banks, representatives from the Department
of Defense, community groups, and others developed a template
for an affordable, small-dollar loan program.
In June of 2007, to encourage more banks to offer these
loan products, the FDIC issued its Affordable Small-Dollar Loan
Guidelines. The guidelines encourage affordable prices,
reasonable loan terms, streamlined underwriting, and suggest
linking a savings component and financial education to short-
term loan products.
In February 2008, the FDIC launched a 2-year small-dollar
loan pilot program to determine the feasibility of banks
offering small-dollar loans as an alternative to high-cost
emergency credit such as payday loans or fee-based overdraft
programs. The pilot concluded in 2009. Twenty-eight volunteer
banks participated with total assets ranging from $27 million
to $10 billion, and with almost 450 branches in 27 States.
Banks made 34,400 loans with a principal balance of just
over $40 million. While delinquencies on the loans tended to be
higher than for unsecured consumer loans in general, charge-
offs were in line with those other loans.
The pilot has resulted in a model, or template, of product
elements for a safe, affordable, and sustainable small-dollar
loan. Product elements include loan amounts of $2,500 or less,
loan terms of 90 days or more, APRs of 36 percent or less, and
low or no fees. Elements also include streamlined but solid
underwriting, and optional savings and financial education
components.
The template is simple and replicable.
Most pilot bankers indicated that these loans were a useful
business strategy for developing or retaining profitable, long-
term relationships with customers. The most prominent product
element bankers linked to the success of this program was a
loan term longer than just a few pay cycles to give consumers
time to repay the loan. And perhaps most importantly, the pilot
shows that banks can offer affordable small-dollar loans in a
manner that suits their business plans and is fair to
consumers.
Going forward, the FDIC is working with the banking
industry and others to support strategies that expand the
supply of small-dollar loans. These strategies include
highlighting the successful features of the pilot and other
small-dollar loan models, such as we are all doing here today;
and encouraging broad-based partnerships among banks,
nonprofits, and others to design and deliver small-dollar
loans, including the use of new technologies and business
models.
The FDIC is also engaged in a number of related
initiatives, such as our Model Safe Accounts pilot, where we
hope to demonstrate affordable savings and transaction
accounts; Money Smart, our comprehensive financial education
curriculum; our Alliances for Economic Inclusion that we have
in 14 markets around the country; and our unbanked and
underbanked surveys and other consumer research.
In conclusion, like all of us, underserved consumers need
to cash their paychecks, pay bills, and save for the future
with products that are safe, affordable, and easy to
understand. They also need to access reasonably priced credit
to buy a home or car, pay for their children's education, and
of particular relevance to this hearing, to meet unexpected
short-term financial needs.
The FDIC looks forward to the day when affordable small-
dollar loans become a staple product at all banks, helping
American families address their short-term credit needs in a
safe, reliable, and financially sound manner.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Director Mooney can be
found on page 139 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Mooney.
Our final witness on this panel is Mr. David Marquis, who
is the executive director of the National Credit Union
Administration.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF DAVID M. MARQUIS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION (NCUA)

Mr. Marquis. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking
Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. NCUA
appreciates the invitation to testify about the availability of
credit for the underbanked--that is, people who have a savings
account but who also use alternative financial services.
In recent years, credit unions have outperformed banks in
lending overall. Between December 2007 and June of 2011, credit
union loans have expanded by about 6 percent while credit
contracted for the rest of the economy.
Of note, low-income credit unions, which focus on providing
services to individuals in communities more likely to have
underbanked populations, have performed even better. Lending at
these particular institutions grew by about 14 percent.
In passing the Federal Credit Union Act nearly 80 years
ago, Congress decided that credit unions have a mission of
meeting the credit and savings needs of consumers, especially
people of modest means. NCUA therefore has considerable
experience facilitating the ability of credit unions to meet
the financial needs of the underbanked.
NCUA works to help the underbanked obtain credit in three
principal ways: by facilitating the availability of loan
products; by expanding credit union access to members in
underserved communities; and by offering assistance to credit
unions focused on providing service to the underbanked.
To facilitate the availability of credit for the
underbanked, the NCUA finalized its small loan program last
September. The rule provides a viable, consumer-friendly,
lower-cost alternative for credit. With strong consumer
protections, the rule balances increased risk and access to
affordable, fully-amortized credit that is faster and easier to
qualify for as compared to more traditional lending products.
Since its introduction, the product has gained growing
market acceptance and enhanced the availability of short-term
credit. At the end of June, 343 Federal credit unions reported
more than 33,000 small loans averaging just over $412 each and
just under 21 percent interest rates, which is significantly
lower than the triple-digit interest rates often charged by
payday lenders.
To further expand credit union access to unbanked
households, NCUA also revised its rules in June. These changes
ease regulatory burdens on credit unions seeking lower-income
credit union designation.
Additionally, NCUA continues to promote access to credit by
approving applications allowing credit unions to add
underserved areas for their field of memberships.
To provide additional assistance to credit unions, NCUA
operates the Community Revolving Loan Fund. Congress created
this fund to provide low-interest loans and grants to support
low-income credit unions' efforts like improving financial
literacy, providing financial education, creating new products,
and preventing foreclosures and expanding overall access to
credit.
In May, NCUA issued a proposed rule to eliminate outdated
procedures and increase transparency. When finalized, NCUA
anticipates that the reduction of regulatory burden will
increase loan demand and enhance the availability of basic
financial service in low-income communities.
The committee has also requested ideas to increase the
availability of sustainable, affordable credit options for
underbanked households. In this regard, NCUA has several
suggestions.
First, current law only permits multiple common-bond credit
unions to serve underserved areas. Allowing other types of
credit unions to add underserved areas would promote improved
access to basic financial services, loan products, and wealth-
building opportunities.
Second, Congress could permit credit unions to serve any
adjacent geographic area meeting economically distressed
criteria like poverty and unemployment without regard to CDFI
fund's more restrictive conditions than NCUA's local community
requirements.
Finally, focusing more broadly on job creation and economic
growth, the passage of the bipartisan Small Credit Union
Lending Enactment Act, sponsored by Congressman Royce and
Congresswoman McCarthy, would also increase access to credit.
The bill would enable credit unions to prudently make safe,
well-underwritten member business loans more frequently,
supporting economic growth and job creation.
If enacted, NCUA will act quickly to implement the strong
safety and soundness regime called for in the bill by writing
new rules and remaining vigilant in our supervision effort
programs.
In sum, NCUA recognizes the real need to expand access to
credit for the underbanked. As a result, the agency has long
sought to enhance the availability of credit, increase access
to potential members, and assist credit unions. NCUA also
stands to work with the committee on any future legislative
efforts to increase access to credit.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to discuss these
important issues. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marquis can be found on page
116 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
And I am going to go ahead and begin the questioning.
My question is in relation to the interchange issue that we
had earlier in the year on the debit and credit--or, it was the
debit cards, and some of the push-back from the financial
institutions was because of the loss of revenue in that area,
that they were going to be eliminating some credit card
rewards. But also, some, I think, have started to assess
monthly charges for a banking account, a checking account with
the financial institutions, and some people--the folks that we
are talking about today are--my fear was that they would just
drop out of the banking system because of the--you know $10 a
month is a significant amount of money here.
Are you finding with the institutions that you regulate
that they are losing customers in this economic range and that
maybe developing a short-term, low-dollar loan program is a way
to get them back into the banking systems? Is that something
that is working?
Mr. Wides. One of the banks that we actually highlighted in
my testimony was KeyBank, in Cleveland, Ohio. They have
actually, as a large bank, developed a very aggressive strategy
for going after the unbanked. They have check cashing within
their branch locations; they offer remittance services; and as
I mentioned in my testimony, they recently rolled out a small-
dollar product for customers who didn't qualify for the bank's
other unsecured credit products. And this credit product that
they developed is geared toward individuals who have thin
credit files or are reestablishing credit.
And I would say that KeyBank is an example of a national
bank that has actually developed a strategy to affirmatively go
after this clientele, and they do offer the kinds of products
that you mentioned, the low-cost products that provide a
slimmed-down set of offerings for consumers.
I can't speak to the other question in terms of whether the
interchange rules have or have not had an effect yet. But we do
see promising signs of banks seeing the unbanked as a market
that is worth going after.
Mr. Mooney. I would briefly add that in the FDIC's survey
of banks 2 years ago relative to their activities in
underserved markets, banks that responded said that about 73
percent of those were aware of the increased demand in low- and
moderate-income areas and underserved areas, and they
considered that to be an important market. However, only 18
percent of those banks prioritized it as a market that they
would go into, which is why the FDIC started Alliances for
Economic Inclusion. In 14 different markets, we brought
together banks, nonprofits, and public officials to talk about
ways to reach into these underserved neighborhoods and develop
products that are useful to them, including small-dollar loans.
Our pilot program showed that the banks who found that loan
program to be the most profitable were those that targeted low-
and moderate-income areas, targeted the military--targeting the
individuals who otherwise don't have free and ready access to
the financial system.
Chairwoman Capito. In regards to your pilot program, the
original participants in that program, are they still offering
those--
Mr. Mooney. It is a good question.
Chairwoman Capito. --products?
Mr. Mooney. We began with 31 banks that started the
program. We ended the program 2 years later with 28 banks. Most
of those banks, we believe, are still in the program; we
haven't surveyed them recently.
But we are very encouraged by the fact that an additional
50 banks who are members of our Alliances for Economic
Inclusion have either started to offer a small-dollar loan
program or are developing a program to initiate in the very
near future. I was just at a meeting of military banks, and the
military banks that were part of the program continue to offer
the program and consider it very important.
Chairwoman Capito. Let me ask a quick question, because I
only have a little bit of time left. I have heard kind of
veiled references to qualify, qualify, qualify. How does a
person qualify? Is it your credit score? And can you qualify,
is a question I would have?
So, just briefly, if somebody would like to address that?
Mr. Wides. Sure. I would say mostly they are looking at the
credit profile; they may use the credit score, but if the
borrower does not have a credit score because of a thin file,
they are beginning to use alternative data sources that look at
utility payment, rent payment, and other public file
characteristics.
They also do a debt-to-income ratio capacity, and for
credit card lending, under the Card Act, in fact, a capacity
analysis is required.
Mr. Mooney. It is important that the underwriting be very
streamlined and very fast.
Chairwoman Capito. Yes, I am thinking that somebody who
needs a $2,000 loan for whatever, it is usually something that
is pretty crucial to them; it is not to go on vacation. And
timeliness is extremely important.
Mr. Mooney. Our pilot banks turned those around within 24
hours, some very quickly. Remember, they are serving their own
customers, so--
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Mr. Mooney. --they do know them.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
All right. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
And in response to your question on the Card Act--the
Credit Card Bill of Rights, which I authored and worked on for
4 years and which passed this body with strong bipartisan
support, the Pew Foundation found that bill alone saved
consumers over $10 billion last year by stopping unfair abusive
practices, such as raising rates retroactively on balances for
no reason at all.
I think the answer to that is if a bank is raising and
charging fees, go to a different bank. Go to a community bank.
Go to a credit union. They all provide the same service.
And shop around. In many cases the interest rate is much,
much lower at some banks than at other banks. So consumers
should, if they are getting unfair fees, cancel their account
and move to another bank that is providing what they feel is
fair service.
I feel that this is a truly important issue about
addressing the unbanked, and one of the reasons that many
people think that financial institutions are not providing it
is that there are often not branches in low-income
neighborhoods. But a report that was issued in 2008 from the
New York City Department of Consumer Affairs on Financial
Empowerment found that a fundamental mismatch between the
products being offered and the population's real need was the
primary reason why lower loans and products were not getting
out to the unbanked.
And then the areas that we do have services--and I will
note one that is active in the community I represent, which is
money service businesses--they cannot get banks to work with
them. So we really have to get this system to work better, and
I wrote the OCC several times and inquired, was the OCC
cracking down on banks that were working with MSBs? The banks
in my district said that they would not offer services to MSBs
because the OCC was telling them not to, that they were going
to rate them differently.
I just want to say that I did put in a bill on self-
certification of the MSBs, that if they comply with the Bank
Secrecy Act and the anti-money laundering statutes, the bill
makes strict penalties for MSBs that in any way are not up to
their statements, and banks are not held liable for MSB
activities. And the banking associations did not oppose this
bill; they found it fine. But they are afraid of regulators
hitting them hard if they cooperate with some of these
alternative areas that are out there.
So I think that banks have choices, and they are going to
be able--they have the choice to go to what product they feel
meets their business model, and we should recognize that and
honor that. We are in a free enterprise system.
But also, these new alternatives that are coming up, I
believe we should help them regulate them--they are
unregulated; they would like to be regulated, and maybe the OCC
should start regulating them and working on ways they can work
with the financial systems that already exist to get the credit
out to the communities. What I am hearing many of my
constituents say is, ``We are seeing banks that are too-big-to-
fail and too-big-to-give-any-credit.''
So they are really important banks. They are international.
They are serving the world, but they are not serving
communities and they are certainly not serving the unbanked and
underserved.
I will just throw that out as a question: Would the OCC be
open to creating a unit that would oversee or regulate these
new entities and look at ways to encourage the existing banking
system--credit unions, financial institutions--to work with
them to get the credit out? We don't have to reinvent the
wheel. There are many people who are out there trying to help
in that particular field.
So my question is really to the OCC.
Mr. Wides. You raise very important points, and I would
like to address a couple of them. Number one, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau will have the authority and does
have the authority to regulate the check cashers, payday
lenders, and it probably would require legislation to move that
function back under the OCC. As it relates to the money
services businesses, there are issues that have been raised in
that context relative to anti-money laundering, and I am not an
expert on all of that, but we are aware of the issues that have
been raised about some of the money service businesses not
being able to get access to the services of banks because of
the concern of the bank regarding the anti-money laundering.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired. I look forward to
meeting with you on this issue. FINRA came out in support of
the bill and the whole area that looks at that area in our
economy, so I think it is a challenge that we need to look at.
And on the CFPB, we are having trouble getting a Director in
there so that they can really get started.
So anyway, my time has expired.
Mr. Wides. I would be happy to work with you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Renacci for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you all for testifying today. My concern is,
again, the underbanked and the unbanked represent 14 percent,
or 230 million adults in our country, and I am trying to get an
understanding as to how we can better serve those individuals.
Mr. Mooney, in some of your comments, you said that the 2-
year pilot program was simple and replicable. My question is,
was it successful in the sense that, were the banks profitable?
And one of your other comments was that you started out
with 31 and went to 28. I would really like to hear how many
banks are doing it now.
Mr. Mooney. Congressman, thank you. You hit on two very key
points relative to the pilot program.
The banks that participated in the program considered it to
be successful for them because they realized that over time,
they were able to develop longer-term relationships with
customers they already had or were new customers who would
become profitable over the long term and the long run. The
banks that participated in the program, we started with 31; we
ended the program with 28 banks. You have to remember that this
period of time, 2008 and 2009, was one of the most financially
troubled. There was such turmoil in the financial marketplaces
that it would not have been unusual for a couple of banks to
join and then drop out, depending on their circumstances.
But at the end of the pilot program 28 of those banks
continued to offer the small-dollar loan program. They
considered it an important part of their product mix.
What we can do--
Mr. Renacci. How many--
Mr. Mooney. --we will look for--I am sorry--
Mr. Renacci. I was going to say, how many today?
Mr. Mooney. We will find that out. We haven't done a survey
of those institutions recently; we will be happy to do that for
you.

[The following information was received from Mr. Mooney for
the record:
Number of banks in the pilot program: 28.
Number of banks continuing to offer SDLs: 24.
Number of banks no longer doing so: 3.
Number of banks merged into another bank: 1.]

Mr. Renacci. It is very difficult to determine the success.
And a lot of times--I was in business for 28 years, and I have
only been in Congress for 9 months.
Sometimes, I think people in the real world out there don't
connect with what you are saying here today, because I have
talked to the banks and I have talked to some of the
underbanked. They can't get the money. They can't borrow the
money today.
And I have talked to some of the banks. I have had meetings
for the last 6 weeks with small banks and community banks, and
they are not going toward these programs. They don't feel they
are profitable; they feel they are overregulated already; and
they have problems in doing it because of all the other
regulations.
So it would be very helpful--and hopefully after today's
hearing, if you could get back to me and tell me, out of the 31
that started, how many are still going forward? I would
appreciate that information.
Mr. Marquis, on the 343 credit unions you mentioned in your
testimony who would report small loans on their call reports
since the announcement of the small-loan rule, can you tell me
how many are still participating and still following through
with these type of programs?
Mr. Marquis. That is the current data as of June, so that
is the number of credit unions that are actually participating
as of June of this year. And so far on their balance sheets,
they have $14 million. Plus, these are small-dollar loans, so
the total dollars won't add up to a lot.
And no one is saying, at least the evidence so far, that
anyone is having any big issues with that issue. It is a high-
volume issue, requires some human resources, but we gave them
some flexibility to manage within that.
And of course, they have to be a member for at least for a
month to participate in this program, and the goal here is then
to get them into the other financial products so they can stay
a member of a credit union and also build a credit history so
they can better get access to financial resources later on.
Mr. Renacci. And again, I guess just all three of you can
maybe just comment on this: There are other alternatives to the
banking or credit union opportunities, and I guess my question
is, I was talking to some regulators last night who had said,
``They are going to charge too many fees and they are going to
charge too many interest rates,'' and my comment was, as long
as the consumer understands and is fully disclosed and totally
gets it and up-front--if somehow they could get all the
information and say, ``I understand it,'' don't you believe
that consumers should have all options available to them--
banks, credit unions, and any other option available to them,
as long as they are fully disclosed and they understand the
consequences?
Mr. Wides?
Mr. Wides. We certainly favor full disclosure. We believe
that consumers have choices, as you pointed out. Certainly, the
OCC has not issued any guidelines which would preclude a bank
from offering a particular product or service that would meet
the needs of the unbanked.
Mr. Mooney. I would say that the FDIC's concern is not over
the non-banks and what they are offering as much as it is over
what banks are offering. We believe that banks have the
capacity and the existing infrastructure to affordably offer
small-dollar loans and some other products as well: 7,500
institutions exist across the country; 7,000 of those are
supervised by the FDIC; 5,500 of those are banks that have less
than $1 billion in assets; and about 4,400 or so have assets of
less than $250 million.
These community banks have shown and have a proven track
record of meeting whatever the real credit needs of their local
communities are, and they have done a good job. We would like
to encourage those institutions to begin offering, once again,
affordable, small-dollar loans as an option for their community
members.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you all.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mrs. McCarthy, for 5 minutes for questions?
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
And thank you to the witnesses.
I happen to be very interested in financial literacy, with
my colleague here, Mr. Hinojosa, and we have been working on it
not only in the Education & the Workforce Committee, but also
here on this particular committee. So while you have the
opportunity--and I guess, I will go to Mr. Mooney and Mr.
Marquis--to go into the underserved areas, for those that you
offer credit, are you also teaching them financial literacy,
how to get out of debt, how to build up their savings, how to
have more sustainable credit and everything else like that?
Mr. Mooney. Thank you, Mrs. McCarthy. At the FDIC, we offer
the Money Smart financial education program, and we promote
that. It is available free of charge; it is not copyrighted.
Banks, nonprofits, and others are offering it. Right now, our
numbers indicate 2.75 million Americans have taken some portion
of that course.
Financial education is fine as far as it goes, but it
doesn't go far enough unless it results in a safe, sound, and
profitable banking relationship, but also one that is
affordable. We conducted a longitudinal survey of our Money
Smart students 2 years ago to find out if there was an actual
change in behaviors as a result of taking the course. In this
Gallup survey, we interviewed people before they took the
course, after they took the course, and a year later to see if
behaviors changed. The good news is that those individuals
started to budget for the first time and adhere to a budget;
they saved more; they shopped around for financial services;
and they paid their bills on time. This is terribly important
proof to banks that this is a market which is very profitable
and a good one for them. We encourage banks to not only offer
financial education, but then open accounts for these folks.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Marquis?
Mr. Marquis. Thank you.
We put on several workshops for the small credit unions to
help them do financial literacy. We also have the CDRLF fund
that Congress has given money to that allows us to give
technical grants to help credit unions put on literacy
programs.
And we have added almost 1,700 underserved areas to credit
unions over the years. Right now, only multiple-bond credit
unions can add underserved areas. We could go further if we
could have other credit unions add those areas.
We also have economic development specialists. They are not
really examiners who examine. There are 15 of them and they go
only to small credit unions to help them produce programs that
better the educational needs of their membership at a credit
union.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Marquis, also, being that
you are in the underserved area, and I understand you have
outreach programs, but what products do you offer that are the
most successful? Plus, how do you handle those customers who go
into default? How do you work with them?
Mr. Marquis. Every credit union does it a little bit
differently. Delinquency sometimes tends to be a little higher
in our small credit unions.
Over the decades we have learned, as examiners, how to deal
with that. Just because they skip some payments, they usually
make their payments over time, especially on the low-dollar
amounts. There are different ways to look at that. A credit
score is not the only way to evaluate a loan.
A lot of low-income people have other ways to make income.
We look at what their character is; we look at how they pay
their other bills. And over time, they establish a relationship
with the credit union and the credit union learns who those
members are, and over time they understand how they get in
trouble from time to time over short periods of time, and they
learn to work with their members.
But every credit union is a little different. They just
have to learn how to manage their delinquency in a prudent way
to maintain safety and soundness.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
With that, I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes for questions?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Mooney, in your testimony you make a comment that you
are studying the creation of pools and nonprofit or government
funds to serve as guarantees for small-dollar loans. Can you
explain that program just a little bit for me, please?
Mr. Mooney. Yes. We are familiar with different government
programs. For example, the State of Maryland has one, I
believe, and the State of Virginia, whereby funds are either
made available to guarantee these types of loans, and in those
particular cases, we have seen them involving State employee
programs partnering with either a credit union or a bank. In
Illinois, for example, there was a bank in Lake Forest that
actually partnered with a local city, and they were part of our
small-dollar loan program, to offer small-dollar loans through
the City's payroll department.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Are these States where they normally don't
have any small-dollar lending authority, or are these in
competition with existing--
Mr. Mooney. That is a good question. I don't know what the
answer to that is.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Quite frankly, I am kind of concerned from
the standpoint that if you get the government involved in
guaranteeing loans again, we have found that this has been kind
of a disaster in the housing situation, where you had two
separate programs that have come through this committee--the
one was a 95 percent loss; the other we spent $40 million for,
I think, 11 loans, or something like that, which is a disaster.
And now, we are looking at something like that again. If
private enterprise is willing to take that risk, and we have
entities out there that are willing to do this, why are we even
looking at this unless it is a State where we don't have that
authorization?
Mr. Mooney. You raise a good point. I think that is worth
considering.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Along those lines, with regards to
the small-dollar pilot program that you had, I know one of the
folks testified here recently when we were discussing it with
them, and I had the FDIC in my office and we discussed it
thoroughly, that some of the folks who participated in the
program and were supportive of it did it because it helped them
with their CRA rating--Community Reinvestment Act. And I can
understand that is--because that is basically what CRA does. It
tries to get you into other areas they believe are underserved.
So, Mr. Wides, do you think this is a pretty good way to go
to help with the CRA rating? Would you be supportive of that if
you had a bank that wanted to do this?
Mr. Wides. Yes. We have had a number of banks let us know
that CRA was a main driver for them getting involved. But what
we found was after they got involved with the program, they
actually found that it was a way of attracting new customers
and a way of providing a service that they could do.
They didn't say that it was profitable, but they said that
it was manageable, in terms of the costs that they incurred.
And they did find efficiencies, and this was something we had
talked about earlier, that they had found ways to more
efficiently process them, and I think that there is a lot of
knowledge-sharing around that.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I had some discussions with some of the
banks in my district recently, and what is the normal time that
it takes to get a CRA rating once the examination has been
completed?
Mr. Wides. I would have to get back to you. I think it
would depend on the size of the institution and--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Can you give me a rough estimate--a month,
2 months, 6 months, 10 months?
Mr. Wides. I would have to get back to you. I would like
to--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you think 3 years is a little out of
line?
Mr. Wides. I would say for a community bank, yes. For a
very large bank, that would probably be the sort of the outset
of how long it could take.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Normally, you have those exams about every
2 years, do you not?
Mr. Wides. Large banks would have an exam every 3 years,
roughly; a community bank every 5 years, assuming they have
good CRA performance.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I am a former regulator. I don't quite
think that is where we are going, but I will let you get away
with that.
I really think that when we are looking at 3 years, and you
are getting to the point where you are getting into the next
exam, I think we have missed the boat. So, I think we need to
take a look at our processes and procedures to make sure we get
back to where we are going to be so we can get these banks to
where they can actually go out, because what you are doing is
hindering them from being able to expand, put in new branches,
buy additional banks, and in doing that, now we are exactly
where we are at today with this, from the standpoint we are
hurting the ability of people to get credit and be able to
access financial services.
So I am very concerned about that, and I would love to
continue the discussion with you on that off to the side.
I am kind of curious, also, I know in the pilot project,
one of the things that you discussed was the terms of the loan.
I know that in discussing it again, with the FDIC folks, the
successful folks who had the program had larger amounts than
what normal payday loans are, and it extended the terms out
longer as a result of that.
Do you think that is something that can be worked on with
regards to a new pilot program, and perhaps have the FDIC
engaged with the small lending--small-dollar folks? Why would
you not include them in your pilot program? Right now, it is
only the banks. Why do you not include the small-dollar folks
in the program?
Mr. Mooney. We certainly encourage partnerships for banks
with others, but at the same time, the FDIC chose to focus on
the banks that it supervises relative to involvement in the
pilot program, as well as banks that it insures. What we want
to do primarily, Congressman, is to encourage a large number of
institutions with a large branch network to begin to think
about offering this type of affordable credit to their
communities.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I had discussions with your comrades. They
made a statement that they are not prohibited from doing that.
I assume that is--
Mr. Mooney. Correct. They are not prohibited from doing
that. But again, for the pilot program our focus was on those
institutions that we insure and supervise.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Gutierrez?
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you very much.
To Mr. Mooney and/or Mr. Wides, I understand that there are
guidelines, but some mainstream banks are still offering loans
that have the same pitfalls as payday loans. What is the FDIC
or the OCC doing to prevent financial institutions from
offering predatory services? Please, either one of you can
begin.
Mr. Mooney?
Mr. Mooney. Congressman, thank you for raising this issue.
It is important to us during our examination process to ensure
that consumers are treated fairly and that the products and
features are fully disclosed.
We are also concerned about bank partnerships with third
parties that may be engaging in activities that do not comply
with consumer protection laws and regulations. Certainly, a
focal point of our exams is on current deceptive acts and
practices.
To that end, the FDIC issued particular guidance to
financial institutions it supervises on the risks inherent--
Mr. Gutierrez. Because of the clock, unfortunately, there
was a minute between the answer part of your answer and part of
my question. So, what do you think?
Mr. Mooney. I think most of our banks don't show much risk
in terms of offering products that are that troublesome.
Mr. Gutierrez. They don't show any risk--
Mr. Mooney. Nonetheless--
Mr. Gutierrez. What do you think about the consumer?
Mr. Mooney. Oh, the consumer--
Mr. Gutierrez. Do you think this is a good deal for the
consumer to walk into Wells Fargo or U.S. Bank and take out a--
what is the--do you think these are essentially payday loans?
Mr. Mooney. I would have--
Mr. Gutierrez. Have you examined these loans?
Mr. Mooney. I think your points certainly indicate that
there may be problems with them, and I would certainly pay
attention to your views.
Mr. Gutierrez. Okay. Could you please look at these loans--
Mr. Mooney. Of course.
Mr. Gutierrez. --and evaluate these loans, and maybe get
back to us? Because I am going to read it, and it says, ``The
direct deposit advance service offers a temporary source of
credit when you need help managing unexpected or emergency
expenses. As a Wells Fargo consumer checking customer you
qualify for up to $500 with advances directly linked to your
direct deposit on your checking account. The credit service
advance access to your next electronically deposited paycheck
or recurring deposit of $100 or more.''
I think that if you looked at an advertisement for a payday
loan, it would read almost exactly the same way. And the terms
are almost--they are going to offer you 20--it is 120 percent
APR if you don't pay it, right? You can pay it all back, so you
get a one-time fee.
But if you don't pay it, they allow you to extend the loan,
and extend the loan, and extend the loan up to 6 months. And
then there is a cooling-off period, but they don't stop
charging you interest on the loan; they just don't allow you to
take any more money.
These are all the same pitfalls. You have examined the
payday industry. You know something about the payday industry,
don't you, Mr. Mooney?
Mr. Mooney. I think that your points relative to the
features that you discuss are worth looking at. We have always
shared the concerns about consumers who are in desperate need
of cash getting to the right products.
Mr. Gutierrez. And I guess my only point is, in the past
they would always say, ``These are not FDIC-regulated
institutions. These are payday loans. These are institutions
outside the regulatory sphere.''
But these are within the regulatory sphere of the FDIC, and
how it is that--anyway, Mr. Wides?
Mr. Mooney. Your points are well made and well taken.
Mr. Gutierrez. OCC?
Mr. Wides. Yes. We are aware of those concerns. Those
concerns led us, actually, to issuing proposed guidelines back
in June regarding the appropriate safety and soundness and
consumer protection that should be provided with these types of
products.
We have received about 14,000 comments. The comment period
closed last month. And we are looking at the various comments
and certainly will take into account the various types of
concerns that you raise today as we look toward finalizing this
guidance.
Mr. Gutierrez. I understand the functioning that you have.
But that is why I was always fighting for a consumer protection
agency, someone whose purpose is to look specifically at these
kinds of loans.
And I have to tell you that I sit here and I keep hearing
about how it is that the Fed and the government is just--first
there was the $700-plus billion bailout that maintained it; now
they are coming back with these kinds of loans. And then it is
FDIC-insured, and we all know that things have been going well,
but they could go badly.
We back them up, but they are not backing us up. And I hope
the two of you take a close look at this so that we don't fall
into this kind of exploitation of our American taxpayer.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The richness of what we are doing here today is amazing. We
are hearing the testimony of how the government is advising
people who are broke to borrow more money.
If there is anything that the government knows how to do,
that is it. We are borrowing 42 percent of every dollar that we
spend, and in fact, we can't borrow that much so we actually
printed 70 percent of the money that we borrowed last year.
So I hope next, you give printing lessons to those people
who can't afford to get more loans. Let's keep the continuity
going here.
It would also be interesting to see if you talked to the
largest payday lender in history--that would be the IRS. They
have extraordinarily high interest and penalties, and they just
keep going no matter what, as long as you don't pay, and so
many times the interest and penalty are far greater, and it
basically looks like a payday loan to me, what the IRS is
doing. So I hope that at some point, your agencies will drift
off into those oversights.
Mr. Mooney, I am interested in your small-dollar loan pilot
program. New Mexico's average income is about $29,000, and we
have Indian reservations where the unemployment is running in
the 30 percent range. I notice that none of the banks in that
list come from New Mexico.
What are the criteria for choosing those banks?
Mr. Mooney. First of all, it is entirely voluntary. They
had to be well managed and well run. We looked for a variety of
institutions across the country of different asset sizes and
different business strategies, but they had to actually apply
and volunteer for the program.
Mr. Pearce. Okay. Now, you mentioned that the default rate
is 3 to 4 times on these loans.
Mr. Mooney. That is right.
Mr. Pearce. Do these customers pay more interest? Do they
have other requirements?
Mr. Mooney. I am not aware that there was, in most cases,
an interest adjustment relative to delinquencies, but most of
those delinquencies were brought up to current status during--
Mr. Pearce. Would you all look with suspicion if banks
actually charged more interest to people who default at a
higher rate?
Mr. Mooney. No. In fact, in this program we wanted to
conduct a feasibility study. We wanted to find what the impact
was on banks and we wanted to give them enough flexibility so
that they could innovate. That would include the rates and fees
they charge.
I should point out, about half of the banks that
participated did not charge additional fees, but half did.
Although for all of them, the total cost of the loan was still
less than 36 percent APR.
Mr. Pearce. Just an observation, I think if we--let's say
that we started a stock fund that was going to fund the kind of
loans that you are talking about today--all three of you--and
we gave priority to Members of Congress who are telling banks
how to loan their money and how to run their business, I
suspect you wouldn't get one Member of Congress who would buy
the preferred stock to lend people money who may or may not pay
back where the chances of not getting your money back.
So what we are engaged in here today is noble, but also it
is highly suspicious. It is one of the reasons businesses are
having very great difficulty making it. When we are faced with
9 percent unemployment, we are spending a lot of effort in an
area which I don't think any one of us would put our money into
that.
Would you invest in a stock like that, Mr. Mooney, if you
were given the opportunity to put your own money into a stock
that would go in and lend to people who have a history of not
repaying?
Mr. Mooney. I--
Mr. Pearce. You don't have to answer that. I am asking--
[laughter]
I just thought it would be interesting to pitch it out
there.
Anyway, just--I do get the richness, and I understand what
we are talking about, but at some point, if you don't have any
money you probably shouldn't be borrowing too much more, and if
we would learn that method in the Federal Government, we might
get our credit rating back instead of having it downgraded even
worse.
But I yield back my time, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Watt?
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I actually came not expecting to ask any questions, but
because I actually thought this hearing was more about
something slightly different, and I wanted to find out what was
going on with reevaluation of collateral, but this is a
different category of borrowers we are talking about. But I am,
kind of like Mr. Pearce, surprised that--maybe from a slightly
different perspective, but we are here bragging about a pilot
program that has an annual percentage rate of 36 percent, and
last time I checked most of these banks were borrowing money
from the Fed at zero percent.
I assume, based on what all of you have testified,
including the credit union, Mr. Marquis, that all of these
people go through some credit qualification. It sounds like
they pay back their loans. They might not pay them on time.
Why are we bragging about--and then I heard Mr. Wides say
that now we want to give them CRA credit for loaning money to
somebody at 36 percent interest that they got at zero percent
interest. I am having a little trouble figuring this out, so
maybe you all can help me, because I don't think we ought to
be--I am like Mr. Pearce. I don't think we ought to be loaning
money to people who can't pay it back.
But if an assessment has been made of their credit and they
are going to pay it back I don't think we ought to be charging
them 36 percent annual percentage rate on money that the lender
got for zero percent. And this is not--and I don't think the
FDIC ought to be bragging about a pilot program that has a 36
percent annual percentage rate on. So help me understand what I
am missing here.
Mr. Mooney. Congressman, thank you for that point. I want
to clarify that in the pilot program, no institution charged
more than a 36 percent APR; many institutions charged far less.
Some were charging 10, 12, or 15 percent interest. It doesn't
speak to your point--and an important point--about the funds
they use to lend to those individuals or the interest rate that
they pay to borrow those funds.
But I think what we tried to do during this pilot program
was to encourage institutions to offer fair, responsible, and
affordable interest rates, so that they could afford to repay
over a reasonable period of time. And that is what we think
those institutions did do.
Mr. Watt. $1,000, $360 in interest if I keep it for 1 year?
I am missing something.
Mr. Mooney. Some actually were charging lower interest
rates. The 28 institutions' experience was different. We didn't
want to see them--
Mr. Watt. Mr. Pearce might change his mind about investing
in that--that is a pretty good return, if somebody is actually
paying the loan back. And then I get on his side of the
equation. If they are not going to pay the loan back, then I am
not sure why we are encouraging them to borrow.
So, I am just frustrated, I guess, as a lot of the
borrowers out there are, and it is not unique to the people in
this category of borrowing. It goes on up the line. It goes on
up the line.
Mr. Mooney. During the pilot, some banks in the pilot--and
we encouraged them to do this--offered a savings component on
the repayment of the loan, so a portion of the payment would go
into a savings account so they wouldn't have to borrow again,
so they would have a financial cushion, a small amount of
savings to meet emergency credit needs.
So I think, Congressman Pearce and Congressman Watt, your
points relative to the fact that some people may not be able to
afford to borrow responsibly but should begin saving to develop
that cushion if they can is a point well taken.
Mr. Watt. Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Westmoreland, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Westmoreland. Excuse me, I would like to ask the OCC
and the FDIC, are you allowing Georgia banks to offer any of
these products?
Mr. Mooney. We would encourage banks to consider offering
these products anywhere, yes.
Mr. Wides. The OCC supervised five national banks that
participated in the pilot. None of those five banks were
located in Georgia, although if a bank in Georgia wanted to
offer a product along the lines of the FDIC's program, we would
not have a supervisory objection assuming it had appropriate
safety and soundness controls.
Mr. Westmoreland. Have any of the Goergia banks asked to do
this?
Mr. Mooney. In the pilot program we had, I believe, two
Georgia banks that were part of the program.
Mr. Westmoreland. And so none of them were approved?
Mr. Mooney. I believe that they were part of the program,
and I could check that for you. I don't know if they were or
were not national banks, but they were FDIC-insured banks, if
that is what you are asking.
Mr. Westmoreland. Do you tell these banks how much to
charge for these type of loans--this credit? Anybody?
Mr. Mooney. Either of us? No, we did not. We asked that
they be affordably priced. We showed them the guidelines where
we had a maximum of 36 percent APR. But we wanted to promote
flexibility and innovation in the pilot program, Congressman,
so that the banks had a free hand to analyze their costs and
decide what their charges and fees would be.
Mr. Wides. For the five national banks that participated in
the FDIC's pilot, they developed the guidelines themselves. In
fact, four of the five national banks that participated in the
FDIC's pilot had offered this product prior to the FDIC
announcing its pilot. I spoke to one community banker in Texas
who told me that they had been offering this product for 20
years, that this is part of the bread-and-butter business of
lending in this small community in Texas.
So, the OCC did review the terms under which the banks were
offering it, did not engage in any way in terms of the terms or
features and monitored with the bank to make sure that the
performance was done in a safe and sound manner.
Mr. Westmoreland. Is the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau going to regulate these banks that are doing that, or
are you all going to continue to regulate them, as far as
consumer protection?
Mr. Wides. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has
direct supervisory responsibility for banks over $10 billion in
assets as it relates to certain consumer protection laws. So
for the five banks that participated in the pilot that were
national banks, none of those banks had assets over $10
billion, so the OCC would continue to supervise all aspects of
those banks' operations, including this pilot.
Mr. Westmoreland. And, Mr. Marquis, let me ask you a
question: Under the options that you got for increasing access,
you talk about going into underserved areas and offering, I
guess, your products, or--and it says that you would also be
able to participate in a community development financial
institutions fund. Is that correct?
Mr. Marquis. Many credit unions participate in the
Community Development Loan Fund Program. I think we have let
low-income credit unions borrow about $54 million over the past
several years, and it also gives them access to technical
development funds or grants.
Mr. Westmoreland. Isn't that just a taxpayer guarantee on
those loans?
Mr. Marquis. On the loans, they--we have never had a loss
on one of those loans. They have always been paid back. There
has never been a delinquency on one of those loans.
Sometimes, we require matching funds if we think the credit
union is distressed a little bit, but that has never produced a
loss to that fund. The technical development grant is roughly
$1.2 million appropriated by Congress every year. That is--
Mr. Westmoreland. I understand, but my question was, are
these loans guaranteed by the taxpayer?
Mr. Marquis. I guess they are guaranteed by the taxpayer to
the extent, though, that if we had to liquidate one of those
credit unions, they are protected by--they have access to all
the balance sheet assets first, so in all likelihood, the share
insurance fund would absorb that loss, not the taxpayer.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Baca, for questions?
Mr. Baca. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Mooney, in your testimony you detailed a small-dollar
loan program and how it was constructed and operated during the
last 2-year period in 2008 to 2009. You urged that the pilot
project provide a template for safe and affordable small-dollar
products.
You argue that banks offer these products in a way that
meets the business needs, and I want to follow up in a question
there. If these programs have been successful, then why do only
26 percent of the institutions in the country offer these
products? That is question number one. And surely this can't be
enough institutions to meet the needs of the 50 percent of the
Americans who have trouble raising a $2,000 loan in 30 days,
especially considering the pilots only took place in 27 States.
Mr. Mooney. Those points are well made, Congressman, and
that is precisely why we engaged these institutions in the
pilot program. We wanted to demonstrate that banks should
consider offering these products to their customers. We wanted
to find out whether or not they would be profitable, whether or
not institutions would consider offering them on their own.
What we found out was that banks did consider the long-term
relationships that they develop with these customers to be
profitable, and that was the primary reason why they engaged in
the program.
We also wanted to produce a model that would be
replicable--that we could encourage other institutions to
consider. The fact is that banks have the infrastructure
currently in existence and the capacity to make these
relatively small-dollar loans available to their customers.
Most of the customers of payday lenders and alternative
lenders have checking accounts with insured financial
institutions. We think it is important that those institutions
consider serving them in helping to meet their needs as well.
Mr. Baca. Some of these loans could go up--you stated
earlier, or I heard the figure--up to 36 percent interest, is
that correct?
Mr. Mooney. Some did go up there, but there was a variety
of interest rates. Banks were able to set their own. But all of
them were offering interest rates and--
Mr. Baca. So actually, the 36 percent interest rate is even
higher than that when someone is late in payment, which means
they are paying a lot more, aren't they?
Mr. Mooney. They could be if there was an additional late
charge, yes.
Mr. Baca. So versus an uncharted bank or someone else that
offers a $2,000 loan for ``X'' amount of dollars means that
they are actually paying a lot less than someone who is
charging 36 percent interest rate plus late payment. Is that
correct?
Mr. Mooney. I am not sure of that.
Mr. Baca. You are pretty sure it is correct. It would be
higher when you take in the total percentages that someone
would pay in the interest rate, now they have a late payment,
now the payments are a lot higher so when you calculate that--
and you borrowed only $2,000. I don't know how you can do that.
But let me ask another question: You said that--earlier I
heard you make a statement that it would take--for someone who
wanted to borrow some money, it would take maybe $2,000 or
less--I will use that figure. It could take up to 24 hours
turnaround time. Is that correct?
Mr. Mooney. Yes. Most of the banks in the pilot try to make
the decision within 24 hours.
Mr. Baca. So what happens if you have an emergency and you
need to fix your vehicle, and you need 4 tires, you had some
maintenance, and you needed a $2,000 loan, and what--you have
to wait 24 hours for a response?
Mr. Mooney. That is right.
Mr. Baca. So that means you are out of luck, you lose your
job possibly, because someone may say, hey, you didn't have a
vehicle in an emergency. So that is a problem that we have
because you have 24 hours turnaround when you can go somewhere
else and obtain a loan and get it and take care of the
emergency that is there.
So I have a question. I have problems with that 24-hour
period because that is quite a long time because then you have
to turn around and do the credit check on the individuals, and
of course you are only going to give it if they establish
credit, have good credit, and have a history in that area, so
that presents some problems.
Let me ask another question: In recent years--this is to
the entire panel--the Federal Government and the Federal
regulators have begun to allow banks and credit unions to offer
small-dollar loans to underserved populations. However, it
seems that these efforts have fallen drastically short when
compared with the actual problem. Then I ask, why would the
government need to continue using these programs when it seems
that we have the tools in the private sector to build upon and
expand?
To any of the panelists?
Mr. Mooney. Thank you for that. This is one of the reasons
why the FDIC has promoted the small-dollar loan pilot program.
We asked banks to volunteer to offer these programs. They
are not underwritten in a way that would pose a risk to the
taxpayer. There are no Federal guarantees involved; we wanted
just private sector involvement and we wanted to see if they
would work without that kind of assistance. I think we showed
that they can do this, or at least the institutions who
participated helped us draw that conclusion.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Grimm, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Mooney, you are on a roll so I am going to kick it over
to you. It is my understanding that many of the non-
depositories have developed quite a bit of expertise, I would
say even efficiencies, in making and servicing loans to a
higher-risk consumer who typically cannot qualify for a small
loan and other credit products that are out there at depository
institutions.
Are there any conditions under which you believe that a
qualified non-depository lender should be allowed to partner or
otherwise work with the depository banks to provide innovative
small loans and other credit products?
Mr. Mooney. Banks have always partnered with third parties
for a variety of reasons, including to obtain computer services
that they provide; and to provide nonfinancial and other
financial services, including loans. There are risks involved.
We would warn institutions to be careful of those risks and to
manage that third party relationship carefully.
Risks would include operational risks, credit risks,
reputational risks, and the like. But if the bank is involved
in activity that is legal with a third party, and they are
closely monitoring and managing the actions and activities of
that third party, and if they have the capacity to do that and
do it well, then we would consider them in compliance with our
guidance on third party risk. So I would say that is a
possibility, yes.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Marquis, under the Credit Union Administration--under
their regulations, you mentioned that interest charged to
consumers is limited but you don't say what exactly that is.
Can you tell me what the limit on interest rates is?
Mr. Marquis. Yes. Overall, the interest on credit unions is
set by statute, except for in certain circumstances that we can
do these pilot programs at 18 percent. In this particular
program, we have allowed the credit unions to charge up to 28
percent provided that we don't have rolling loans where the
consumer doesn't have the capacity to repay. So we are trying
to make this an alternative to payday lending and an
opportunity to establish credit at a financial institution to
better be able to get credit in the future.
So far in this program, that has been outstanding. For a
year, the average interest rate that credit unions did end up
charging came out to 21 percent.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you. Under the small-amount loan rule, I
think it is called, you list several requirements for the
program, from loan amounts to application fees. Why were these
chosen, specifically? Why would you limit a consumer who pays
exactly on time or early, even--some pay early--from using the
product more than 3 times in a rolling 6-month period?
Mr. Marquis. The only time that goes into effect is when a
credit union wants to charge that extra interest rate in the
small credit union program up to the 28 percent, and a consumer
who has been a member for a long time in good standing with the
credit union, there is nothing to stop the credit union from
lending to them continuously on a revolving loan program. This
is just to get people who have not participated in the credit
union to establish a history with the credit union and to
improve their credit histories.
And these loans are not predatory. We want to make sure
that the member does, in fact, have the capacity to repay, so
we said you can make 3 loans over a rolling 6-month period, but
you can't add a fee to it if you extend the loan term, and you
can only charge a $20 fee or less in order to implement the
loan.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Thank you.
I just wanted to say that there are certainly a lot of
underserved communities. Access to credit, I think, is
something that is a problem throughout the entire United States
and throughout just about every community.
And with the current state of our economy and the fact that
many, what we have considered stable, middle-class homes that
always paid their bills on time, are obviously having trouble
right now. Take Staten Island, in Brooklyn, where we just got
hit by a hurricane. Those who traditionally always made their
bills, they are out of work and they have an emergency--
literally an emergency.
I am just going to tell you, people are going to find ways
to get through that emergency. We need to make sure that they
have that access.
With that, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
This has been a fascinating hearing. I have been grappling
with how to approach the situation from my knowledge. We have
an issue here that involves two basic groups, and we are trying
to get an answer that I think kind of ignores that fact.
First of all, we have the unbanked and we have the
underbanked. And I don't see how the pilot program that we are
talking about--that you were talking about--can even approach
the bigger part of this problem, which is the unbanked.
According to a recent study by one of our accounting firms,
KPMG, there are 33 million unbanked, and the unbanked are those
individuals who have absolutely no relationship with a bank.
They have no account; they have nothing. So how can we even
begin to approach the program?
And then the other issue is, banks basically are high-
profit, low-risk, and with stricter regulatory forms that we
are placing on them due to the recent crisis we have had, they
are tightening their underwriting requirements, making it even
more difficult. So it seems to me that a part of this hearing
should be to take a look at and see--for example, let me just
get, for the record, do each of you agree that there is very
serious and very great opportunity and room in all of this for
the alternatives, like payday lenders, pawn shops, cash
checking services, that really apply to the need of easy, quick
access to these 33 million, and the fact that can these
financial institutions really even begin, given their
structure, to really, really address this issue?
Now, the underbanked certainly has some possibility here.
They have a relation with the bank. They just have low credit
ratings.
So I want to sort of find out find out first--am I right
about this? Is this a--
Mr. Mooney. Yes. We conducted our unbanked and underbanked
survey, and we found out when we surveyed banks that 73 percent
surveyed were aware of needs in low- and moderate-income and
underserved areas, but only 18 percent prioritized the need to
develop those products and services. That is why we decided to
focus on and encourage and find different ways that banks can
help to meet those needs.
In 14 MSAs around the country, we have gone to the trouble
to establish Alliances for Economic Inclusion. Many hands make
light work, and many partners can help address this particular
problem that you outlined so well. We have over 1,000 partners
nationwide in these 14 alliances. Over 300 banks are part of
that, and each of those meet on a regular basis locally to
identify areas of need, to identify underserved customers, and
try to figure out new ways to provide affordable financial
services to those individuals.
We think that it is our job to continue to encourage banks
to do that. Banks have the capacity, Congressman; they have the
infrastructure already in place to begin offering these
products. The expenses, the overhead--all of that is already in
place. What we would like to see them do is to help meet the
needs of those particular residents in their community as well.
Mr. Scott. Let me just ask your response to some of the
potential barriers that are faced with. Does consumer confusion
about what types of acceptable forms of identification are
required to open a bank account--just that one fact, does that
discourage some of the consumers from using the financial
institutions?
Mr. Mooney. We have learned in our partnerships with
nonprofits--who work face to face daily counseling consumers--
that can be a cause of concern. Nonetheless, in those
partnerships that I talked about and these alliances, banks are
finding new ways to satisfy those identification requirements
and to make consumers feel more comfortable when they are
actually opening these accounts and engaged in those
transactions.
Mr. Scott. And what about the holding period for clearing
checks? Because the problem which you have here is there are
many people in these emergency situations who need it quickly;
they need it now, and that is why they go to some of the
alternatives. Can these banks fix their situations in terms of
the holding period?
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. I am sorry.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Fincher, for questions?
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Last week, I was looking into the financial situation we
find ourselves in as a country, and I was looking at the
average credit card debt per household in the country was about
$7,000, something like that, and it just was unbelievable how
much debt we have as a country, but also personally how much
debt we have. And as we are listening to the testimony today--
and I really appreciate the input--there is a level of personal
responsibility that we all have in the country, and we must go
back to that, that the government isn't the answer-all. We need
to do our part.
A couple of questions.
Mr. Wides, for you first. You recently proposed guidance on
payday loan alternatives that covers disclosures, costs, and
usage, but did not impose specific requirements or limitations.
Why did the OCC decide to use guidance that lacks specifics?
Mr. Wides. Thank you, Congressman.
It is principle-based guidance. It is trying to lay out
what our safety and soundness expectations are for national
banks and Federal savings associations, in recognizing that
there are needs for consumer protections, as well.
The guidance is out in proposed form. The comment period
closed back in early August. We are reviewing a significant
number of comments relative to that guidance.
We have received comments from some commenters who have
raised the concern that you have raised, that perhaps there
should be specificity on that point. But at the same time, we
received comments on the opposite point of view, as well. So we
are looking at all the comments and working through that, and
trying to come up with an appropriate outcome.
But I can't really go into much more in terms of our
guidance, because it is still in proposed form.
Mr. Fincher. How long will it take, do you think?
Mr. Wides. I really can't give you an idea at this point,
unfortunately. The comment period closed last month. As I
mentioned earlier, we received about 14,000 comments. It was an
area of great interest by consumer groups, as well as financial
institutions and major trades, so unfortunately, I can't really
give you a timeline.
Mr. Fincher. Mr. Mooney, there is a need for short-term,
low-dollar loans, particularly in my State of Tennessee.
However, based on what I have heard today and what I see at
home, banks are not meeting this need. So in your opinion, why
should banks be getting involved if they don't seem to be
interested while there is private--the free market private
sector already meeting this need?
And then, the last part, to Mr. Marquis, how are banks ever
going--or credit unions--going to be able to serve people who
don't have credit?
Mr. Mooney. Congressman, thank you. While the business
strategy of different banks may vary, and not all banks may be
seeking to meet a retail market need, most banks do. Banks are
chartered by States and the Federal Government to do business,
to serve their communities, to meet their financial needs.
While we would like to see all banks offering this type of
product to meet this important need in many communities--we are
encouraging as many as possible to actually do that. They are
there. They have the offices; they have the employees; they are
paying the overhead. And it may make sense for them, in terms
of their overall business strategy. At least for those where it
does make sense, we would like to see them do more.
Mr. Marquis. On a safety and soundness basis, you obviously
don't want to have a consumer get into a debt spiral. You don't
want to cause more harm, as they say.
So you want to establish credit history for that consumer
by making them crawl before they walk, in terms of establishing
credit history. Credit unions are not in business to make a
profit. They make a profit only to establish adequate capital
levels for their institutions.
The more credit unions can establish relationships in
underserved communities, and have better access to underserved
communities, the more capacity they will have to step up and
help them establish a positive credit history.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, guys. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Carney, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
having this--what Mr. Scott characterized as a very fascinating
hearing today. I have to agree with that characterization.
Confusing as well, as we heard Members on both sides of the
aisle talk about the need to provide services and credit for
the unbanked, the underbanked, and yet, they are concerned
about predatory lending rates.
The question was asked, is this the appropriate venue for
traditional banks? I think the answer is ``yes.'' The answer I
heard was ``yes.'' I would like to hear the answer from the OCC
to that question, because obviously the credit unions are doing
it, so they must feel it is an appropriate--but I didn't hear
anything from the OCC about whether this is an appropriate
space for regular banks, if you will, for your banks.
Mr. Wides. Yes, if it is subject to safety and soundness
guidelines.
Mr. Carney. So that seems to be the question, on the
balance between safety and soundness and what are affordable or
reasonable rates. And how do you--how do we do that? How do we
settle on what is predatory and what is not?
I was a little surprised to hear the credit union rates,
frankly, were as high as they were. If you added profit onto
that, that would put it into the 30 percent range. Your
average, I guess, was 20 percent, so maybe not into the 30
percent range.
I heard my colleague up here express concern about 38
percent. How do the banks, or how do--what is your role as
regulators in that process in determining what is predatory or
not in this space?
Anybody?
Mr. Wides. There is no rule or regulation or statute that
establishes a maximum interest rate for a federally chartered
thrift or national bank.
Mr. Carney. So they could charge whatever would be
acceptable in the market?
Mr. Wides. They are also underwriting a credit risk here--
Mr. Carney. Sure.
Mr. Wides. --and we expect them to be prudent in terms of
underwriting the credit risk to a borrower who has sufficient
repayment capacity. That seems to be, I think, the real issue
in terms of the interest rate that is charged is, what is that
borrower's repayment capacity? What is the default rate? What
is the loss rate that you suffer on a given borrower--
Mr. Carney. So some assessment of the loss ratio is going
to be part of the pricing, right? That is fairly obvious. And
then I guess the administrative costs of making low-dollar,
short-term cash available to consumers. Is that--
Mr. Wides. Yes. That is correct.
Mr. Carney. --fair?
Mr. Wides. Yes.
Mr. Carney. But we don't seem to have, on a political
level, a good handle on what is acceptable, I guess. Rates that
have been mentioned here in this hearing today have struck some
people on both sides as kind of unacceptable. How do we--as
Members who come here to represent our constituents and our
districts--look at that question of what is affordable, what is
predatory, and what is acceptable? I guess it depends on our
particular philosophy of banking and the marketplace.
Do you have any views of that from a regulatory perspective
or from a credit union perspective?
Mr. Marquis. You have to balance safety and soundness with
the issue of establishing the credit for someone who may have
ruined their credit over time for whatever the reasons are, and
you have to bring them back onboard in terms of mainstream
financial services. But it is a higher volume business, and it
has a higher cost.
We have to balance that with making sure the financial
institutions don't cause harm to themselves by building out
those portfolios too big. Delinquency tends to be higher;
charge-off tends to be higher. So it doesn't take many loans to
offset and reduce that 20 or 30 percent interest rate to be
something in the negative category, if you are not careful.
Mr. Carney. That is how you get at your 21 percent average
without a profit being part of that, right?
Mr. Marquis. So far. And we have allowed them to charge up
to 28 percent, and up until now, they haven't had to do that.
They are crawling before they walk and trying to manage that
business and determine where the break-even points are in that
business.
Mr. Carney. Really quickly, there was some mention earlier
about debit interchange and the Card Act. Do you have any
impression or any idea of the unintended consequences of, say,
the Card Act, in terms of access to credit for the underserved
consumer?
Mr. Marquis. I am not sure the two subjects are exactly
related, but at the end of the day, financial institutions,
especially credit unions, are not in business to make a profit,
but they have to build adequate capital. There are only several
ways to make money: you can charge more interest on loans; you
can break even on fee structures or charge a little more for
fees; you can reduce your costs of funds; and you can reduce
your expenses.
At the end of the day, those are all finite things that you
have to balance out in terms of what does it take that
organization in their business model to come out at the end of
the day that they are not losing money.
Mr. Carney. Thank you.
I see my time has expired.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Hinojosa, for questions?
Mr. Hinojosa. Chairwoman Capito, thank you for holding this
important and very timely hearing. I commend all that you and
Ranking Member Maloney do to improve the financial literacy
rates of all those residing in the United States.
Before I ask my questions, I think all of us here today
should be aware of some of the following facts. I will just
give three or four.
First, 25 percent of households in the United States, or
close to 30 million households with approximately 60 million
adults, are unbanked. So I have concerns of that group, just as
Congressman Scott gave earlier.
Second, 3 in 10 adults in the United States, or more than
68 million individuals, report they have no savings. And only
24 percent of those adults in the United States are now saving
more than they did a year ago because of the current economic
climate.
Third, I learned that 28 percent, or nearly 64 million
adults, admit to not paying all of their bills on time. So it
seems to me that personal financial literacy education is
essential to ensure that individuals are prepared to manage
money, credit, and debt.
My first question I want to direct to Comptroller Barry
Wides and to Deputy Director Robert Mooney. What are each of
you and the entities you regulate doing to bank the unbanked,
move the underbanked entirely into the mainstream financial
services system, and what are you doing to reign in those
predatory lenders that we are talking about, such as the check
cashers and others that charge excessive interest rates?
Mr. Wides. Thank you, Congressman. The OCC is very involved
with the national financial literacy efforts of the Financial
Literacy and Education Commission. I am the agency's
representative to that Commission.
One of the more interesting, and I think promising,
initiatives in financial literacy and inclusion of the unbanked
is the Bank On initiative, sponsored by the National League of
Cities, in which the Treasury Department and the banking
regulatory agencies are partners with this effort. The way that
initiative is working is that cities around the country are
coming up with a template of a basic banking product that would
be offered in conjunction with financial literacy through local
nonprofits.
And what the banking regulators are doing is collaborating
with these cities that are sponsoring these initiatives to
bring the bankers to the table to see if they can offer a
product in these markets that would be geared toward an
unbanked individual. In many instances, it involves second
chance checking accounts for people who might have previously
been banked but left the system due to high fees or inability
to manage an account. So these initiatives do involve a
financial literacy component, and--
Mr. Hinojosa. Let me interrupt you. If those initiatives
were implemented and they were able to have them open up a bank
account, would they be covered under the FDIC just like anybody
else on that $250,000?
Mr. Wides. Oh yes, yes. These are full bank accounts with
FDIC--
Mr. Hinojosa. The reason I ask you--and I am glad to hear
you say yes, because one of the things that many of our
immigrants have is that they are afraid of not being able to
get their money out, number one; number two, that banks may
fold up and that they will lose their money, like they did in--
back during the 1940s--1930s to 1940s. So I don't blame them
for learning from their parents and their grandparents about
those experiences.
And we just have too many people who could benefit by being
banked. I would like to hear your answer.
Mr. Mooney. Congressman Hinojosa, thank you. The FDIC is
very much aware of what you just stated, and first of all, we
also want to recognize your leadership in the financial
literacy field.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
Mr. Mooney. Our Money Smart program has been updated--the
financial education program--to include issues related to
Federal Deposit Insurance. We embarked on a public service
campaign--a national public service campaign in several
different languages--to build public confidence, in particular
in our minority and immigrant communities as to the importance
of FDIC-insured accounts, not only that they are safe and
insured up to $250,000, but that we provide uninterrupted
access to their financial accounts and the financial services
in the event of a possible bank failure, and we have done that.
Also, with that insurance and with those bank accounts come
consumer protections.
Economic inclusion, as you state, is important, and the
FDIC, several years ago, embarked on a campaign to establish
Alliances of Economic Inclusion, and we have done this in 14
different MSAs around the country, everywhere from Boston, to
Baltimore, to the Black Belt area of Alabama, to Los Angeles,
to Southern Texas, to Chicago, and the list goes on. In those
communities, Congressman, we brought together banks--all the
banks--nonprofits, and public officials to figure out new ways
to reach the underserved in several ways: one, by offering
affordable savings and checking accounts as well as affordable
small-dollar loans; and two, possibly in many of these markets,
affordable foreign remittance services. And in addition to
small business lending, we also encourage the use of financial
education programs--programs that will result in the opening of
accounts for those who are underserved, in particular in some
of the immigrant markets that you have talked about.
More than 1,000 organizations and banks are part of that
initiative, and we are finding very, very positive results in
each of those.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Hinojosa. I like your response.
And, Madam Chairwoman, I want to comment that I have
visited Federal Reserve Banks and others that have materials in
eight languages, but are the banks actually getting any
pushback from either community leaders or elected officials
because we are doing it in languages other than English?
Chairwoman Capito. If you could answer briefly, because we
need to--
Mr. Mooney. I am not aware of that. In fact, our translated
services are very popular with banks.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Miller, for 5 minutes? Do you have
any questions for this panel?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. I do, for the OCC.
I am sorry. As the Chair noted, I have just kind of
sprinted in, but I am curious about your military lending
program. One of the great triumphs of consumer protection is
what we have done in the last decade for servicemembers. There
is a series of articles, or maybe just one big article in the
New York Times about the abuse of servicemembers. Many of them
were fresh out of high school, living independently for the
first time, and they were being gouged by lenders just off the
base, obviously targeting them at a very vulnerable stage of
their lives.
There was legislation introduced to do something about it,
and the industry--the lenders who were doing it--succeeded in
getting that postponed and having the military conduct a study.
The study came back more strongly than they could possibly have
imagined, and the commanders talked about how it was affecting
their readiness, how was it affecting their troops, how it was
affecting their security clearances, how they were unprepared
because they were not sleeping at night or because all they
could think about was how much debt they were under. And
Congress set a cap of 36 percent.
My understanding is that, what are functionally the
equivalent of payday loans are now being offered to the
military and have been designed in a way to avoid that Federal
limitation on interest for our military. Is that correct? Are
there loans being made to our military with a closed end or
open end that exceed 36 percent?
Mr. Mooney. I am not aware of FDIC-supervised banks that
are involved in anything approaching that. In fact, we held a
conference where we highlighted the need for affordable lending
to the military in 2006, and we partnered with the Department
of Defense and military banks. And, actually, as a group at
that conference, they developed a small-dollar loan template
which would provide an alternative to high-cost payday lending
and other lending that had been plaguing the military, as you
have outlined.
That template led to the FDIC's small-dollar loan pilot
program, where small-dollar loans were being offered--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. What is the effective
interest rate on those loans?
Mr. Mooney. In our pilot program, for the 28 banks that
ended the program, the average rate charged was between 14 and
16 percent. The most common was 18 percent. We asked banks not
to charge more than a 36 percent APR, and most charged well
under that.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Are there any loans being
made to servicemembers, whether open- or closed-end, that
presumably would be subject to the statute, that might not be,
where the interest rate does exceed the amount allowed by
Congress in 2006--36 percent per annum?
Mr. Mooney. We examined banks for compliance with those
rules and I am not aware that there are any exceptions, but we
could look into that. I don't think that would be an issue with
banks primarily.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Would you support or oppose
legislation that would make it clear that those lending
programs are subject to a 36 percent cap?
Mr. Mooney. I think the FDIC would have to review that. I
wouldn't be able to comment on it today.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay.
The Center for Responsible Lending made several
observations about today's hearing and suggested that any loans
that the OCC required to comply with certain criteria, certain
minimum standards that they repaid in affordable installments,
and that there be a cooling-off period between installments,
between borrowing, to prevent the repetitive use, which is one
of the great evils of payday lending, that they be reasonably
priced and that the cost of credit be expressed as the interest
rate and not as penalties or fees where the borrower frequently
has no idea what they are getting into--they understand an
interest rate; they may not understand when they are being hit
by penalties and fees--that they be based upon--that there be
an ability to repay requirement for any lender, and that they
not be paid through an automatic set-off against the customer's
deposits, which they said effectively is a wage garnishment and
really prevents the consumer from very effectively being able
to contest the amount being charged.
Do those seem like reasonable limitations? Do you support
those limitations?
Mr. Wides. We are very, very aware of the concerns that
have been raised by the Center for Responsible Lending and
other consumer groups about these types of products. All I can
say is that we have received over 14,000 comments, many of
which are very, very similar to the types of issues that you
have just identified, and we are sifting through those comments
now, as I mentioned that the comment period closed last month.
But we are very aware of those issues and concerns as we look
at determining how we move forward with this guidance.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired, and I
believe that concludes all of the questions for this panel.
I want to thank you all. You have given very, very
excellent testimony.
I would like to request unanimous consent to submit the
following letters into the record: the National Association of
Federal Credit Unions, and VantageScore. Without objection, it
is so ordered.
And I will dismiss the first panel and call up the second
panel.
Mr. Renacci. [presiding]. At this time I would like to call
up our second panel of witnesses. I will introduce them
individually for the purpose of giving a 5-minute opening
statement.
The first, Ms. Gerri Guzman, is the executive director of
the Consumer Rights Coalition.

STATEMENT OF GERRI GUZMAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CONSUMER RIGHTS
COALITION (CRC)

Ms. Guzman. Thank you.
To the chairwoman and members of the subcommittee, I want
to thank you for including us in this conversation. Your work
and ours impacts the daily lives directly of consumers, so we
should be working together to first do no harm, and then
improve both their circumstances and their options.
I am Gerri Guzman, the executive director of the Consumer
Rights Coalition, or CRC. CRC is a nonprofit consumer-based
organization dedicated to ensuring that Americans have
increased access to credit.
I am here today on behalf of more than 200,000 of our
members who are consumers of alternative or nonbank financial
services. Our members have traditional bank accounts, but they
don't always have a financial safety net. They want to preserve
and expand access to a full range of short- and intermediate-
term credit options and other basic financial services.
Millions of Americans, as you know, are coming up short.
They are struggling to make ends meet for several months at a
time or they are dealing with a financial shock like a
reduction in work hours, a medical emergency, or a broken down
car or appliance.
Millions of consumers don't have rainy day savings accounts
to get them to the next paycheck or manage the unexpected. They
may not have credit available on their credit cards or family
to turn to for a few hundred dollars in order to get through a
tough time.
As stated in studies by other panelists, the previous, in
addition to those reports, there was a second study that found
that 64 percent of Americans don't have $1,000 on hand in case
of emergency. If these consumers choose to go to a traditional
bank for a loan, the vast majority of traditional banks and
credit unions could not give them a typical $300 loan needed,
to say nothing of $1,000 or $2,000.
As a result, today almost 20 million Americans are turning
to nonbank financial products, like check cashing,
installments, payday, and pawn loans. The alternative to
traditional banks is quickly becoming the mainstream.
I know firsthand that traditional bank products don't
always offer a realistic solution for people without a
significant financial cushion to help absorb the unexpected. I
relied on a payday loan when I was in danger of losing my home.
It was simple, transparent, less expensive than bouncing a
check or making a late payment, and I knew that it would not
further damage my credit rating.
Short- and intermediate-term loans are easily and
conveniently available from alternative lenders in some States.
Unlike most traditional banks, stores are located in minority
neighborhoods. They are open at times the services are needed
and the process is understandable, quick, and easy. Employees
are likely to speak the language of the local residents, and in
addition, these short-term loans will not ruin people's credit
ratings like bouncing a check or failing to make a payment
would.
Short-term credit options are currently regulated at the
State level, and regulations vary in many States: the fees; the
types of loans; the terms that are offered. Research from the
Federal Reserve and others indicates that States that have
eliminated or restricted credit options have actually done more
harm than good.
For example, when the State of Washington restricted the
number of loans an individual could take out, regulators found
that it had the effect of driving consumers to more expensive
options, further damaging their credit. Studies also found that
consumers in North Carolina, Georgia, and Oregon were hurt by
payday loan bans that drove them to bounce more checks, incur
more late fees, and ultimately file more personal bankruptcies.
Unfortunately, I hear from consumers all the time that they
no longer have access to short-term credit because of
restrictions in their States. They are now spending more on
overdraft, bounced check, late fees, and in many cases banks
are threatening to close their accounts.
The fact is that people will always come up short. If
access to one product is eliminated consumers will seek out
another. And unfortunately, at times it is not a viable option
that works for their household.
Seventy-three percent of banks are aware of the significant
unbanked or underbanked populations in their market, but less
than 18 percent of banks have identified expanding services to
this group. In listing the reasons why, they list profitability
issues, regulatory barriers, and fraud concerns.
A few banks are, however, beginning to compete in the
small-dollar, short-term lending market. This is very good. The
more options, the better. That will allow my consumers to make
choices, weigh out those options, and certainly, ultimately
choose the option that is best for their household.
Laws need to further change, though, to open up the market
to more competitors. We would like to see nonbank financial
service providers already trusted in the communities throughout
the United States have the opportunity to provide more and
better credit services to underserved communities.
All Americans need responsible credit options in order to
build personal financial records, healthy credit ratings, move
up to the traditional banking system, and ultimately build
their own personal wealth and wealth for their neighborhoods
and communities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Guzman can be found on page
72 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness will be Melissa Koide, vice president of
policy, Center for Financial Services Innovation.

STATEMENT OF MELISSA KOIDE, VICE PRESIDENT OF POLICY, CENTER
FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES INNOVATION (CFSI)

Ms. Koide. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Vice Chair
Renacci, and Ranking Member Maloney. I am Melissa Koide, the
vice president of policy at the Center for Financial Services
Innovation. On behalf of CFSI, I appreciate the opportunity to
be here today as a witness.
CFSI, for those of you who may not know us, is a nonprofit
organization in its 8th year of providing leadership, research,
and insights on the financial services needs of underbanked
consumers. Our vision is to see a strong, robust, and
competitive financial services marketplace where the diversity
of consumers' needs are met with a variety of financial
products and services that are transparent and reasonably
priced.
We believe well-structured products can help consumers
address their short-term credit needs and also build positive
credit histories, which we all realize are not only critical
for long-term asset goals, but more immediate needs:
employment; housing; and insurance. In 2008, we conducted a
study--a nationally representative study--and found that almost
one-third of unbanked or underbanked consumers had borrowed for
short-term needs in the prior 12 months.
While the reasons for their borrowing varied, over a third
cited the need to pay bills and to manage their expenses as
their motivation for seeking out the credit. This result
suggests that in addition to helping address emergency
expenses, which we typically think about when we think about
small-dollar credit, that credit is being used as a method to
manage expenses, smooth income at times. And that is especially
relevant in today's context.
Looking at the supply side of small-dollar credit, we pay
quite a bit of attention to some of the innovations in this
area. Over the past half-decade, we have seen a handful of new
and modified products that are emerging to better meet the
demands of consumers with more consumer-friendly structures.
Examples of these innovations include products that offer
flexible loan terms, that use a variety of data to better
underwrite and assess consumers who may have insufficient or
poor credit histories, that link credit with other products and
services, including transaction products and savings, and that
also offer credit products intentionally to help consumers
build or repair their credit records.
But even with these promising trends, there are significant
challenges to the growth of well-designed, small-dollar credit
products, and there is without question concerns about products
that are in the market today. Many, if not most of today's
products are short-term, often with repayment due in a matter
of weeks or when the next paycheck arrives. Many products draw
the full repayment directly from the consumer's account, which
on the one hand, we recognize helps to reduce the likelihood of
default, but on the other hand, leaves some consumers with
little left except the option to borrow again.
Regulatory scrutiny of the product is warranted, but we
also need additional research to shed light on how these
products can be designed to avoid overindebtedness and to help
consumers successfully manage their credit while also ensuring
product sustainability.
On the supply side, it is important, also, to call out the
challenges that are constraining the growth of high-quality
products. Those challenges include capital constraints,
depending on the type of provider. They include regulatory
inconsistency as well as regulatory uncertainty. It also
includes negative stigma associated with the products
themselves, and insufficient underwriting in order to assess
risk.
I think with a few ground rules and a level of regulatory
consistency, we will see more and better small-dollar credit
products emerge that help consumers safely access credit,
reduce the price, and allow for product diversity and
innovation.
With respect to our policy recommendations, we believe
policymakers should support the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, as it is the appropriate Federal regulator to create
and ensure consistent rules and balanced rules that take into
consideration both the consumers using the products and the
providers offering them, and that would be regardless of the
type of provider that is offering the credit, looking at both
the banks and the nonbanks across-the-board. As the Federal
consumer protection regulator that will have rule-writing
authority over consumer protection rules, and for many
providers, supervision and enforcement authority over those
providers, the CFPB will develop a deep knowledge about the
range of small-dollar credit lenders and the products as well
as a rich understanding about the consumers who are using these
products.
This, I believe, will lead to more informed roles that are
coordinated across the Federal regulators as well as the State
regulators that are responsive to the different business models
and that are deeply attuned to the consumers using the
products.
It is also worth noting the CFPB's mission, which I think
we tend to sometimes forget or not necessarily focus on. As
defined in the Act, the CFPB is explicitly required to
recognize its duty to ensure consumers have access to financial
products and services. It also, of course, has the duty to
ensure that those products are fair, transparent, and
competitive.
Before I conclude, I would like to also point out that we
offer a set of consumer protection recommendations detailed in
our written testimony that we think will help to ensure that
these products, regardless of the type of provider, are
prudently provided, that they are manageable for the consumer,
and that they are helping consumers meet their short-term
needs.
Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Vice Chair Renacci, Ranking
Member Maloney, and the other subcommittee members. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Koide can be found on page
74 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. Ryan Gilbert, chief executive
officer, BillFloat, Inc..
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF RYAN GILBERT, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, BILLFLOAT,
INC.

Mr. Gilbert. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, good morning. My name is Ryan
Gilbert and I am the CEO of BillFloat, based in San Francisco,
California. It is a distinct honor to be here today speaking
before you as an immigrant who has been in America for 13
years, discussing the issue of consumer credit.
Our company was founded in 2009 with the backing of PayPal,
Silicon Valley venture capital firms, and angel investors. We
represent a new generation of financial services providers that
embrace technology and innovation to offer consumers hope.
Customers come to BillFloat when they need more time to pay
recurring monthly bills. The majority are mothers balancing a
tight family budget.
Our short-term credit products can only be used to pay
bills. This includes cable bills, utility bills, phone, or
insurance bills, the exact kind of sorely needed short-term
credit options that have been abandoned by many banks.
We offer our services in partnership with some of the
largest billers in the country. These companies offer BillFloat
to their customers as an alternative to late fees and service
interruption.
Central to our product model is our belief in alternative
data, including customers' bill payment experience, cash flow,
borrowing habits, and household expenditures. We are raising
the technology bar with new algorithms that evaluate the
consumers' ability to afford these products and to offer safe,
feasible credit alternatives to consumers whose best option
often is high-interest, short-term loans or simply not paying
their bills.
Meanwhile, the too-big-to-fail banks are, simply put, too
scared to lend.
A recent Federal Reserve Bank of New York report cited that
$1.1 trillion of consumer credit has been removed from the
market since Q3 of 2008 to Q2 of 2011. This retraction of
credit flies in the face of initiatives from many Federal
agencies, including the FDIC, to maintain access to loans and
other viable financial products for underserved consumers.
At the same time, demand for consumer credit has grown
significantly, influenced by several trends, including a
population increase and declining household income. We have
heard often today of the recent paper from the National Bureau
of Economic Research that found that almost half of the
Americans surveyed considered themselves to be financially
fragile. These consumers responded that they could not access
$2,000 to cover a financial emergency, even if given a month to
do so.
The simple truth is that underserved consumers face a bleak
landscape when a sudden expense derails even a responsible
family budget. We do feel that there is hope.
BillFloat represents a new breed of financial services
provider that includes either start-up companies, like Kabbage,
and On Deck Capital, which make loans to small businesses also
suffering from a lack of credit; Square, out of San Francisco,
that enables the long tail of merchants to be able to access
merchant processing infrastructure, previously the domain of
large, established corporations. And we share technology and
market-driven approaches that are highly consumer-centric.
None of us are asking for Federal funding, loan guarantees,
or any other handouts. There is, however, one thing this
subcommittee could do, and that would be to consider H.R. 1909,
introduced by your colleague, Representative Joe Baca. This
bill, the FFSCC Charter Act of 2011, would establish a much-
needed platform for financial services innovators to flourish
and serve the underserved, and I believe this will have an
immediate and hugely positive impact for many Americans and the
economy as a whole.
Today, one of the most difficult challenges facing any
financial services innovator is accessing the critical banking
infrastructure needed to deliver our service. We are frequently
beholden to banks to market our products, from credit offerings
to prepaid cards. It has been our collective experience,
however, that the same banks that are not serving underserved
consumers are not supporting technology and financial services
innovators.
With the charter, there will be a platform for nonbank
providers to operate nationally. The pro-consumer requirements
of the bill are very, very clear, including clear standards for
credit disclosure, account access, financial literacy, and the
breadth of product offerings.
There is also a mission that each charter-holder will have
to observe, which is to provide an array of financial services
to the underbanked, and unbanked, and consumers with low credit
scores. And most important, non-delivery of these services will
mean noncompliance. I haven't seen too many terms like that in
many bills.
I think consumers have spoken clearly. They want access to
convenient service from trustworthy sources, and by removing
reliance on third-party banks and enabling national business
and operating plans, many of these service providers can thrive
and offer safe, affordable, and more convenient alternatives as
opposed to overdraft protection, high interest loans, and
credit card late fees.
Once again, I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you
today, and I would be very happy to answer your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gilbert can be found on page
66 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
Our next witness is Mr. Michael Grant, president, National
Bankers Association.
Welcome, Mr. Grant.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL A. GRANT, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL BANKERS
ASSOCIATION

Mr. Grant. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking
Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. First, Madam
Chairwoman, I owe you an apology. At the end of my statement,
you have been downgraded from ``Madam Chair'' to ``Mr.
Chairman,'' so I want to apologize for that.
And second, I have to leave after this statement because I
have another prior engagement I have to make. Thank you very
much to the whole committee.
I represent the National Bankers Association. It is a
consortium of minority banks in the country, and those who have
studied our organization and the banks that we represent know
that we are representing the heart of this problem that we are
having in our country. The urban areas of our country were
hardest hit by this ongoing financial crisis, so we are super
sensitive to the issue that we are discussing today.
Specifically, I would like to address the subcommittee's
desire to better understand credit products that are available
for consumers who cannot always access more traditional
financial institutions' products and services.
In a nutshell, the underbanked and the unbanked, usually
with low to moderate incomes, continue their historical
struggle to access credit for a number of reasons. The number
one reason is that many of these individuals create such high
risk for lending institutions that they do not meet the minimum
underwriting requirements imposed by the regulators of
traditional financial institutions.
Madam Chairwoman, I picked one of our banks as an example
of how these banks are trying to address this problem of
providing credit for folks in the low- to moderate-income
range, and actually, we chose Citizens Trust Bank of Atlanta,
Georgia. It is kind of a microcosm. It is an urban area, and
the unemployment rate is high, and so forth and so on.
And basically, in 2008 the bank tried to implement this
small-dollar loan program to see how it would work in 11
branches and three different markets: in Atlanta; Columbus; and
in Birmingham. Although the bank's intention was to meet the
pressing economic needs of the consumers in this market, a 13
percent default rate rendered the program a costly failure.
With comparative lenient underwriting criteria, the bank
sought to help consumers with housing payments or car payments
or other financial needs with small loans that ranged from $500
to $1,500. At the beginning of the program, the following
underwriting criteria were established: a score--a FICO score
of only 500; allowed a higher debt-to-income ratio, along with
a $48 document preparation fee, which was financed into the
loan document; 12-month same residence; credit report could not
have outstanding liens or judgments; allowed for collection
items on the report; must provide 6 months' income from the
same employer; 2 years discharged from bankruptcy that is
Chapter 13; no Chapter 7 bankruptcy was allowed.
The result was still a 13 percent default rate, which was
subtracted from the bank's loan loss reserves. Today, the bank
provides this small-dollar program in only one of its branches,
and the requirements are now more rigid. Interestingly enough,
that branch is in Green County, Alabama, one of the poorest
counties in America. The default rate is near zero.
The only recommendation I would like to make today, Madam
Chairwoman, is that if Regulation E were modified to allow
banks to debit borrowers' bank accounts, the bank's risk would
be mitigated and borrowers would probably act more responsibly.
Having direct deposit accounts would also help to ensure that
lenders could make timely payments.
But the largest issue, Madam Chairwoman, and subcommittee
members, is the issue of the cost of risk, and I haven't heard
that kind of analysis today. How can we decide whether it is
predatory lending or banks--how can we decide whether a loan--
the cost of that loan--is excessive if someone hasn't done the
calculus to decide, how do you cover high risk, you know? If
you want to make a loan to someone who has very poor credit and
maybe has not had a history of being consistently employed for
more than a year at a time, we need to find out--we know the
need is great. The credit needs of the poor are great.
But we have to be fair and say, listen, what constitutes
excessive? The cost of these loans can be very high. So the
committee could wrestle with the issue of what constitutes
excessive payment for these loans, and I think we could get to
the heart of the issue.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grant can be found on page
70 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
Our next witness is Dr. Kimberly Manturuk--did I say that
correctly?
Ms. Manturuk. It is ``Manturuk.''
Chairwoman Capito. ``Manturuk''--with a name like
``Capito,'' you would think I would get that right--research
associate, University of North Carolina Center for Community
Capital.
Welcome, Doctor.

STATEMENT OF KIMBERLY R. MANTURUK, RESEARCH ASSOCIATE,
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA CENTER FOR COMMUNITY CAPITAL

Ms. Manturuk. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am Kimberly
Manturuk, from the Center for Community Capital at the
University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, and I am honored
to have the opportunity to share some thoughts and research on
credit options available to underbanked and unbanked American
households.
This hearing comes at a time when families of all income
levels are struggling with financial insecurity and need all
the help they can get rebuilding their financial lives. North
Carolina has long been at the forefront of promoting a
financial services environment in which both consumers and
lenders prosper, and our center has developed a body of
research on credit options available. In addition to
summarizing this research, I will also discuss several emerging
and innovative products that meet consumer demand for credit in
ways that are both affordable and sustainable.
First, our research indicates that most lower-income
families have multiple options available when facing an
immediate financial shortfall. Very few families rely on a
single coping strategy alone.
Among people who use credit to handle their emergencies,
mainstream products such as credit cards and bank loans were
used more commonly than alternative products, such as pawn shop
loans or auto title loans. The use of multiple options suggests
an elaborate level of management where consumers are layering
in resources in some order of preference. However, it also
suggests that none of these products are currently fully
meeting consumer needs.
Second, we have found that consumers who do use alternative
credit products were attracted to them because the loans were
private, fast, and above all, easy to obtain. People cited the
short application process, lack of a credit check, and
guaranteed acceptance of such loans.
When we asked former payday loan borrowers whether they
thought they would have been able to get a loan if there had
been a credit check, they generally thought not. However, there
was also overwhelming agreement that these products did not
sufficiently meet their needs.
In our research with payday loan borrowers, we found strong
support for small-dollar credit with a lower interest rate. The
former payday loan customers we spoke to, including those who
wanted to retain the option to take such loans, wanted a lower
APR, a longer amortizing repayment term, as well as limits on
renewals and the amounts borrowed.
Current industry best practices do not begin to approach
the requirements that our focus group's participants wanted.
There are, however, some emerging products in the small-dollar
consumer credit space which offer reasonable terms and
conditions while retaining profitability for lenders. I would
like to conclude today by highlighting a few of these products.
First, a product called FlexWage works with employers to
give workers access to a payroll card with a linked salary
advance feature, an alternative to the traditional payday loan.
Through the WageBank product, the company makes available wages
that have been earned but not yet paid.
Customers are charged a flat convenience fee for the pre-
disbursement of earned wages. There is no loan, and therefore,
nothing to repay.
For consumers who need to borrow more than their already
earned wages, Workers Choice USA allow employees to borrow up
to 50 percent of their monthly salary at a competitive interest
rate. The lender remains profitable because there are low
underwriting costs associated with this loan since most of the
borrower's information has already been verified by the
employer. Repayment is done via payroll deduction over time and
there is no cost to the employer to offer these loans.
Finally, in 2001 the North Carolina State Employee's Credit
Union introduced a 12 percent APR product called the salary
advance loan. Over the past 10 years, the credit union has made
over 5 million loans and lent a total of over $2 billion. They
have had an average annual charge-off or bad debt expense of
less than 1 percent. The credit union calculates that it is
saving members an average of $33.6 million per year in payday
loan fees.
In conclusion, our research indicates that there is strong
demand for small-dollar consumer credit that is ill-served by
existing products, such as payday loans, credit cards, or bank
loans. Consumers want credit that is affordable, repayable, and
closed-ended.
This promise is found in the FDIC's affordable small-dollar
loan product guidelines, issued in June 2007, which calls for
FDIC-supervised financial institutions to promote consumer
credit products with an APR not to exceed 36 percent and
amortizing repayments. The guideline also recommends
underwriting for ability to repay, incorporating a savings
component in the product, working with other organizations, and
providing an avenue for financial education.
We encourage lawmakers to promote policies which encourage
these types of loans as well as to continue to encourage
lenders, particularly non-depository institutions, to better
leverage emerging technologies to increase consumer access to
low-cost credit options.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Manturuk can be found on
page 82 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
And our final witness is Ms. Ida Rademacher, vice
president, policy and research at CFED, which stands for
Corporation for Enterprise Development.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF IDA RADEMACHER, VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY AND
RESEARCH, THE CORPORATION FOR ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT (CFED)

Ms. Rademacher. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, and thank you, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. On behalf of the
Corporation for Enterprise Development, I appreciate, as well
as the others here, the opportunity to present testimony today
on this important subject.
The Corporation for Enterprise Development, or CFED, is a
32-year-old economic nonprofit that fosters social innovations
to build wealth in low-income communities and for low-income
families. We see access to high-quality credit as a fundamental
tool in the effort to help households build wealth, but it is a
tool that must be used with great care and with great
intention, and the overwhelming majority of evidence in recent
years shows that while there are many, many fundamental
barriers to financial wellbeing that American families are
struggling with today, some of the research on debt-to-income
ratios shows that access to credit is actually not probably the
top priority barrier that families are struggling with in this
case. In fact, the proliferation of alternative credit products
and accumulated debt is actually a large part of the problem.
Even a cursory review of recent data on the status of the
American household balance sheet puts us--there is
perspective--puts some perspective on this issue. Simply put,
Americans are unemployed, underemployed, and overleveraged. We
have a consumer credit problem in this country for sure, but a
lot of the problem is inadequate access to high-quality and
affordable credit, not credit in general.
We are literally drowning in debt. Just last week, the
company CardHub.com published its Q2 2011 Credit Card Debt
Study, showing that consumers accumulated $18.4 billion in new
debt in the second quarter of 2011. That was a 66 percent
increase over the same quarter in 2010, and a 368 percent
increase over the same period in 2009.
Couple this information with what we know about the
increasing ratio between household debt and income. Economist
Edward Wolff discussed the explosion of debt-to-income ratios
in his most recent analysis of household economics. Middle-
income households' debt-to-income ratios were about 67 percent
back in the mid-1980s; they rose to 100 percent debt-to-income
ratios in 2001; and in 2007, they were at 157 percent.
He further concluded that the debt buildup, to Ms. Koide's
point, was for normal consumption, not enhanced consumption.
And findings from the 2009 FINRA Financial Capabilities Study,
administered by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
Investor Education Foundation substantiates the finding, with
nearly half of survey respondents reporting facing difficulties
covering monthly expenses and paying bills. And the majority of
respondents didn't have any type of rainy day funds set aside
for financial emergencies.
With inadequate incomes and inadequate savings, the only
option for millions of Americans is to turn to credit
alternatives to finance basic consumption, but our own analysis
of consumer credit scores suggest that over 60 percent of those
consumers have subprime credit scores, so the credit product
options that are available are often sub-optimal, and the most
vulnerable households who can least afford additional financial
burden end up paying a premium for access to the credit they
need simply to make ends meet.
The ultimate lens through which we think we should be
looking at any financial product or policy is relatively
intuitive and straightforward: Does the product help a consumer
improve their financial situation long-term or does it make
their financial situation worse? A growing body of evidence
shows that many of the short-term alternative credit products
that are available in the market for cash-strapped consumers
today with either thin credit files or no or low credit scores
don't pass this fundamental principle of ``do no harm.''
Less than 2 percent of payday loans--according to recent
research by the Center for Responsible Lending--went to
borrowers with the ability to repay in the first cycle of
getting that loan. And in fact, the executive director of
TitleMax himself, in testimony, stated that the average
customer with a car title loan renews that loan 8 times.
CFED's Assets and Opportunity Initiative provides some in-
depth information at the State and local levels on the kinds of
policies that can help households increase financial stability
and build and protect assets. We support the regulation of
short-term consumer lending products. Small-dollar installment
loans, when responsibly regulated, can be a very safe product,
but we recommend capping the interest rate charged on loans,
such as payday loans, car title lending, and small-dollar
installment loans.
To date, 10 States have banned or capped all three types of
predatory loans I just mentioned. That includes the short-term
lending and basic consumer protection laws. Fourteen States do
not effectively regulate any of the three predatory loan
products. And nine States include short-term lending in their
basic consumer protection laws. All other States protect
consumers against some, but not all types of short-term loan
products.
So what can and should the Federal Government do? I will
just leave you with three broad recommendations to consider.
CFED feels these would go a long way toward helping families
truly regain their financial footing.
First, protect consumers from financial products that
exacerbate financial distress. We absolutely support the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's mandate in that regard.
Second, help families save. Credit and emergency savings
are actually substitutes at this level of the household, so
helping families learn how to save and incentivizing that
savings gives them another option when emergencies happen.
Finally, help families build good credit. I will finish
where I started: The quality of credit available to families is
all-important. We do believe that with full file reporting, as
many as 120 million consumers could build and improve their
credit score, and we should really help to end the regulatory
uncertainty and provide permission to utility and telecom
companies to report on-time payment to credit reporting
agencies, to that end.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rademacher can be found on
page 151 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I am going to begin the questioning with Mr. Gilbert. How
does an individual customer find out about BillFloat? Is it on
the Internet, or--
Mr. Gilbert. Thank you for the question. They are able to
access us through our Web site at BillFloat.com, but our
strongest point of messaging is through the billers themselves.
Chairwoman Capito. So that would be the utilities, or the--
Mr. Gilbert. The phone companies, insurance companies, the
existing entities that have relationships with these customers
who get the phone call in the call center to say, ``My bill is
due today or in a week. I won't be able to pay it on time. Can
I get more time to pay?''
And they will often get a response from the call center
reps that, ``We are not in that business. You have to go and
find credit from someone else.'' Now, with BillFloat as a
payment option in those workflows, at least there is a solution
that the utility companies know comes from a reputable company
with terms and conditions that are very clear to consumers.
Chairwoman Capito. Do you have any challenges offering
services across State lines?
Mr. Gilbert. Certainly, it is a challenge. We are dependent
on banks, based on their license and regulations, and also
State laws for direct lending we are doing ourselves.
Compliance across State lines means that we have to increase
our costs of goods for product, which does impact our product
overall.
Chairwoman Capito. So if you forward somebody's power ill--
say it is $300--then do they pay you within the 30-day period,
what interest do you charge, and--
Mr. Gilbert. Our product is a 30-day product. We charge an
interest rate of 36 percent APR based on the standards put
forth from the FDIC small-dollar loan template, which we use as
a guideline for our business as well.
Chairwoman Capito. Are there other competitors in this
space with you? I am sure there are.
Mr. Gilbert. I believe consumers have a lot of credit
options that they could access in order to pay bills. No one
has taken credit options specifically to address this problem
of bill payment.
What drove us into this space was the data point in the
2009 FDIC study which showed that 47 percent of the times
consumers get high-dollar loans, it is to pay bills. So we took
the approach, ``Let us build a product to help bill payment.''
Chairwoman Capito. I am interested in the innovation
because I think all of you all have remarked that to have a
competitive marketplace in this arena is extremely important
for the consumer to make sure that they can--hopefully give
them some sort of reasonable rates and reasonable parameters
for them to be able to pay this back.
I have a question for Ms. Koide. You mentioned the CFPB in
terms of regulating these products, and how important that you
feel that is. But, for instance, we just had the FDIC testify
that they are regulating in some of this space, too. Do you
think that there is any--not conflict there, so much as a
potential for, ``They are regulating, so we don't need to
look?''
Ms. Koide. Excellent question. I think right now it has
been interesting to see how the regulators are stepping out and
focusing on certain products, under the auspices of safety and
soundness, even if it looks like a consumer protection matter
or a consumer protection matter under the auspices of safety
and soundness. I think those things are inextricably linked; it
is hard to pull them apart.
I think the fact that we don't have a CFPB that is in full
standing with a Director in place right now leaves a bit of a
void, and so I am encouraged to see the regulators focus on
some of these products and realize that there is more that
needs to be done to understand what is underneath them and what
are the products that are coming out.
I also realize that having this new bureau, once it is
fully standing, is going to create another regulator that is
going to take positions. I think it has been very explicit in
the sort of formation of the CFPB and many of the discussions
that have happened around it how critical it is going to be
that the entity is conferring, developing rules, guidance, best
practices in coordination with the other regulators, because I
think you are hearing innovation talked about a lot here. What
is underneath a lot of that is that it is not just one entity
that is a part of the provision of the services; it is,
perhaps, a depository who sits in the back and does the
processing or provides the capital, that there are other
players in that product offering, and we have to have a
regulatory system that recognizes that complexity and
coordinates around it.
Chairwoman Capito. But at the same time, I think some of
the barriers that were talked about by one of the witnesses is
capital--the regulatory inconsistency. I am not sure we are
solving this problem, but I will move on.
I am really curious to know, and I wanted to ask the other
panel this--this will be my final question; I am back to the
Internet again--we know that financial literacy is extremely
important, but we know that Internet access and capabilities
has really grown exponentially, and certainly with the
generation behind me, it will be a way of life for all. How do
you see that as--do you see that as a plus or a minus for the
underbanked and unbanked population, in terms of trying to
reach capital? And I will ask the three of you all over there.
Ms. Guzman. I think consumers are demanding more options
based on convenience and accessibility. We find that, of
course, like you, Madam Chairwoman, the younger generation is
using strictly technology. They are using their phones as their
checking account; they are wiring money via an iPhone.
However, other options need to be available because there
are different markets, nonbank as well as traditional banking.
And then, of course, we need to look at the variety of products
and ensure that at all times, our consumers are protected. I
think all these will make the availability of access to cash
when we need it just more convenient and available so that
people don't find themselves spiraling out of control when it
comes to their finances and maintaining their obligations.
Chairwoman Capito. I am going to move on, because I am kind
of violating my own rule here.
So, Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. This hearing certainly points out
that the unbanked population is growing, the need is growing,
and the challenge is there. Quite frankly, I was not aware of
the FDIC's model program or the OCC's efforts in this area, and
the programs that came forward today, such as BillFloat,
FlexWage, salary advance on credit cards, and other things that
you talked about.
I think at the very least, this committee or some regulator
should get out where all these programs are so consumers can
know where they are to go for these services. I think that
there is a growing need; there is no question about it.
And there have been several legislative proposals that have
been put forward, one, actually, by my colleague, Mr. Baca,
today--I was not aware of it until he told me about it today--
which would create optional Federal charters for nonbank
financial institutions. And under this proposal, the OCC would
be the principal regulator and State laws in the area would be
preempted.
Can the members of the panel comment on the merit of this
proposal? Anyone? All of you? We will start at this end and go
down the line.
Ms. Rademacher?
Ms. Rademacher. Yes, thanks. So, I think, as I mentioned,
States are--
Mrs. Maloney. I can't hear you.
Ms. Rademacher. Thank you. States are, in terms of this
policy space, out in front addressing these issues. A lot of
them are on the ground seeing what is happening with consumers
in the short-term lending space.
I think it would be a real shame for a Federal charter
process to create a way around some of--create a new type of
ceiling that is actually, perhaps--and I don't know the details
of it--if it is lower than where the States have already gone
to protect their citizens,
I think that would be
something that we would want to look at very closely before we
said much. I do think that to the point of coordinating
efforts, understanding that this is a very complex marketplace
and growing more complex every day, being able to coordinate
and regulate with some consistency and open communication is
imperative, so a sense of some piece of this moving back to the
OCC but actually serving in a space where there are multiple
types of financial institutions, it raises some questions for
me, and I would want to look at that more closely.
I certainly think that, at the very least, nothing that
happens should preempt the places where States have gone with
some of the ways they are trying to protect their consumers at
the State level.
Mrs. Maloney. Ms. Manturuk?
Ms. Manturuk. Thank you.
We haven't done any research specifically looking at
preemption effects or what they would be in the consumer credit
space. I can say, within North Carolina we have a long
tradition of pretty rigorous regulation of consumer credit, and
there is pretty strong research evidence that the regulations
that we have in place right now are meeting consumers' demands.
We just finished doing some research looking at finance
company lending, which is subject to an 18 percent cap above a
certain level and a 36 percent cap at $3,000 and below. And our
research found that industry in North Carolina, with the
current regulations, is profitable for lenders and is also
meeting consumer demand. So I would have to agree that any
regulation which would preempt what we already have that is
working for us would be something to think very carefully
about.
Mrs. Maloney. Ms. Guzman?
Ms. Guzman. I like the idea of having a balance for
consumers of a regulated option that protects consumers,
offering more expanding access to options that work for them
and allowing them to make choices for their own household.
Unfortunately, well-intended legislation in States has had very
adverse outcomes for my consumers. I constantly hear,
especially in the States where they have regulated--put a ban
or a cap on the amount of times, etc.--that they have been
forced to use the more expensive bank option that has
negatively impacted their credit, which is what they are trying
to avoid to begin with. They are trying to get back on their
feet.
And so, I have to really question some of the regulations
in some States, and certainly at this time we are looking at
the Federal Government to help us protect our consumers, yet
expand options. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Gilbert?
Mr. Gilbert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
One of the biggest challenges that I have in running my
business is getting banks to work with me in order to offer my
products. When colleagues back in the startup world heard that
I was going to be testifying this morning, they started
inundating me with e-mails about my bill. I responded to them,
``It is not my bill.'' I heard about this bill for the first
time back in May, and I think it is a great bill because it can
allow entrepreneurs to get on with their business.
I also believe that uniformity will be very much helpful to
consumers, and that uniformity can be achieved in a way that is
also very respectful of the rights of States and State caps.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired, but if you would like to
give your point of view, Ms. Koide?
Ms. Koide. Thank you. I would.
I absolutely recognize the need to get banks to play more
with the nonbanks. It has to happen, because these are volume
businesses and they need volume to be able to affect the price.
I completely recognize the need for coordination among the
regulators. I need to read the bill again; it has been about a
year- and-a-half since I looked at it. But I don't know that
adding another regulator in the mix of regulators is ultimately
going to get us what we need.
Mrs. Maloney. Then, how do you force some institutions to
work with these independents to provide this?
Ms. Koide. I also wanted to say that I think we absolutely
need uniformity and clarity of the rules across the different
types of products. I think that emphasis from Congress on the
regulators--this new bureau, once it does get up and running,
is going to be working with the other regulators to create
joint guidances, for instance, on what good consumer
protections look like.
I need to look further at the bill, but I would pause on
that.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to all of the individuals participating
today.
There is a little bit of confusion for me because we do
have a problem. We are hearing that there are a number of
underbanked individuals who need these type of loans.
And then we had the regulators in earlier who were saying
we had pilot programs, but when I questioned whether they were
working, they said they don't have a conclusion as to whether
they are working because we don't have the numbers. So
hopefully, I will get some numbers that will show whether they
are working.
Mr. Grant testified that banks are having issues with the
profitability of these loans, so it tells me that--and then, of
course, I have had discussions with many banks who have said
that it is very difficult to manage these loans and make a
profit on these loans. So we have a need and we have to be able
to provide for that need.
So I would question, first, Ms. Guzman. With the States
getting away from some of these types of short-term lenders and
short-term loans, and not wanting them, do you have any
research as to where these individuals are going when there is
an emergency and they need the cash?
Ms. Guzman. The only research I have is, being that our
mission and our actions are driven through our consumer
feedback, is the feedback from our consumers. And they tell us
they are forced either to more expensive options, such as
bouncing a check. In almost all cases, their credit was
negatively impacted.
And basically, ultimately they have lost their housing,
they have had their utilities turned off, they have lost child
care, which is critical for some of our single heads of
households. It has just become basically a nightmare. It
restricts options.
And, they somehow feel very slighted, considering they are
hardworking Americans who pay their taxes, and yet they don't
have the choices that they need because government has
restricted them.
Mr. Renacci. I have seen somewhere--I can't find it here--
but I even saw that some were going offshore, doing whatever is
necessary to get the dollars.
Ms. Guzman. Absolutely. Unregulated offshore lenders always
find their way to our consumers, unfortunately.
I would just hate to see something that is not regulated on
any level make its way to our consumers. We certainly want the
options to be expanded and the access to be there, but we want
to make sure our consumers are protected, also.
And choice seems to be the number one thing that is
mentioned. They feel a sense of pride in being able to weigh
out choices and choose the option that works best for their
homes and their families.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Gilbert, are these some of the individuals
who would be the profile of your typical customer?
Mr. Gilbert. Yes. Our typical customer is a female head of
household, probably age 35, with children, one person in the
household working, and an income in the $45,000 to $65,000
range. In our consumer studies, choice is the number one
objective or the number one goal for these consumers.
But trust comes in right there. These organizations need to
be very, very clear about who they are to their customers so
trust can be earned and maintained.
Mr. Renacci. Do you have any competition from small banks
or community banks?
Mr. Gilbert. I wish we did have a lot more. We have been
working very, very hard with a number of community banks,
particularly in the State of California.
The challenge that they are finding, because they are
insured by the FDIC, is I often receive a message that there is
no space for small-dollar lending, really, in an insured
deposit system. Safety and soundness of the banks is really the
overarching concern when looking at these types of programs.
But we continue to push on, because I am quite sure that
soon enough, we will find the right bank. I also believe that
some federally chartered credit unions could be the right
partners for us over time.
Mr. Renacci. Can you give me an idea of what your default
ratio is?
Mr. Gilbert. We are seeing a default ratio of approximately
10 to 12 percent for first-time consumers and 5 to 8 percent
for returning customers.
Mr. Renacci. Okay.
Ms. Rademacher, you made the comment--you had some good
conclusions. The problem I had with your conclusions was they
would be for somebody who was not in trouble, who was not in an
emergency situation, does not have the need today for those
dollars.
What would you say for those people? Where should they go?
Because your conclusions are, we need to teach people that they
need less debt; we need to find financial institutions with
better interest rates.
All of those things are great when you don't have an
emergency. But these people are coming up with emergency
situations, which we all could have in life. What are your
thoughts on that and where should they go?
Ms. Rademacher. Sure. No, it is a great point, and I
actually knew that there would be a number of people talking
about some of the alternatives that I might have cited myself.
So I didn't spend as much time talking about where they can go
today.
In addition to the innovation in the marketplace, as with
some of the folks who are here on the panel, there are a lot of
cities and States trying to innovate, as well. They recognize
that you cannot just create parameters around the conditions of
emergency loan products without making sure that there are
alternatives available in this space. That is where the
Virginia small-dollar loan pilots are coming from.
There is certainly a lot of evidence, I think, from the
work that has been done in North Carolina as well, with the
profitability for a credit union, on the large scale, with the
kinds of emergency loans that can be offered safely and
relatively affordably to people in crisis already in existence,
but do need to be promoted there.
I think that the--
Mr. Renacci. I am running out of time, but just one really
quick question: So you believe that as long as they were
regulated properly, some of these nonfinancial institution
providers of short-term loans would be a working solution?
Ms. Rademacher. Yes. I think to the points made here,
capping the interest rate, capping the amount of churn that can
happen, or the amount of rollover that needs to happen,
understanding the needs of both the consumer and the
marketplace for a sustainable product is paramount.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Baca?
Mr. Baca. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Guzman, there has been limited effort by the Federal
Government to tap into the market and allow federally regulated
institutions to offer products to underbanked and unbanked
populations, and we are still seeing a large number of
consumers still limited to this option, and I appreciate your
personal story that you told earlier.
In your opinion, what has held back the Federal programs
from reaching out to these people who clearly still need access
to credit? And then, I want to follow up with another question,
if I can, and what are the obstacles in place that have limited
the private nonbank lenders from reaching all of the people who
need credit?
Ms. Guzman. First, it is a simple answer. Banks are the
only answer. That is what we are literally being told. My
consumers are being told, if you don't deal with a main banking
institution, you have no options. So, they go to alternative
financial services that are working very well for them.
I understand from my colleagues in the banking industry,
they don't really care about my consumers that use
alternative--that is not their job. That is not the business
they are in. They are in the business of--
Mr. Baca. Why don't they care? Why do they say that they
don't care?
Ms. Guzman. Because they are held accountable to a board of
directors for whom the bottom line demands a profitability, and
these are high-risk people who, for any reason--
Mr. Baca. But these are people in need of an emergency
loan. Is that correct?
Ms. Guzman. Yes. Or sometimes it is not just an emergency.
Someone loses a job or has a cut in hours or a cut in pay for a
period of time, maybe 5, 6 months--it is not something anyone
intends to do or I think does out of lack of responsibility.
Everybody enters into their commitments well-intended.
The problem with regulations, while they are well-intended,
is no one is asking consumers what they need. The intentions
are done.
I am a local school board member, so I do this also. I make
decisions for my constituency based on what I feel is in their
best interest. However, often State laws and other laws are
made that are actually hindering consumers from being able to
manage their finances in their household because their options
are limited and they are forced to do something that creates a
larger problem.
I think sometimes--
Mr. Baca. That is because, also, the credit card--there is
a credit card option, but the credit card option then means
that it is a higher interest rate, as well. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Guzman. Absolutely. And I have a video of my consumer
testimony I would be willing to share with all the committee
and send to your offices that shows that the Credit Card Act
negatively impacted many consumers by dropping consumers who
had good-standing credit down to a $1,000 minimum. That didn't
give them very many options to keep cash flowing in an
emergency or during a period of time when they have a tough
time making ends meet.
They certainly want, again, more access to choices so they
can identify their problem and choose the option that works for
them and their household. That is pretty much what we want them
to do so that at some point, they can work their way up to
traditional banking, and own a home, and acquire the American
dream.
Mr. Baca. My next question is for Mr. Gilbert.
Everyone is saying that competition and innovation is the
key to coming up with answers to the problems. What are the
biggest problems for these nonbank lenders to expand and fill
these needs that 50 percent of the Americans need--and I will
say 50 percent of the Americans needs--and can the current
patchwork of the State regulations allow for this?
Mr. Gilbert. I think the biggest challenge, Congressman--
and thanks for the question--is finding the right platform to
conduct business. For innovators, before one rolls out a full,
complete program across millions of consumers and potentially
multi-States, we always try to consider pilot programs, much
like the FDIC spoke about, and I think it could be very
enabling if there were pilot initiatives under any of the
agencies, or perhaps the purview of the Bureau, to enable true
pilots.
We can learn a lot from the pilots if they are run on
reasonable terms and over a reasonable period of time. And for
me, I describe reasonable as at least 2 years--the first year
to get it up and running, and the second year to get the data
and continue reporting.
I think, also, the patchwork of State laws is something
that we have to appreciate and live with in the United States,
but also respect the need for uniformity. The cost of
compliance can bring down even the most successful business.
As an entrepreneur, many will ask me, ``Why are you in
financial services?'' I could be in social networking, or sell
widgets online. This is a challenge, and that is why we are
standing up to the challenge.
Thank you.
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much.
I know that my time is going to expire, so I will yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Westmoreland for 5 minutes?
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Koide--I am not really good with names--where does your
company get its operating funds from?
Ms. Koide. We get our funding from a variety of sources. We
are an organization that began with funding from the Ford
Foundation. Our president, 10 years ago, when there was so much
focus on access to credit and realization that there are these
consumers who are out there who we don't really understand what
drives their choices and the products that they use, she sought
out funding from the Ford Foundation in order to do a pretty
comprehensive study to understand those consumers with the
objective and appreciation that ultimately scale solutions
reside in the market.
So we began with funding from the Ford Foundation, and we
have significant funding from other national philanthropic
funders. We also have resources that are generated through
roundtables that we hold. We also hold an annual conference
each year for underbanked innovators. So it is a range of
sources.
Mr. Westmoreland. No Federal, though? No grants?
Ms. Koide. No Federal money, no.
Mr. Westmoreland. And, Ida--I am going to call you that,
rather than destroy your name, but--I am assuming that you get
your funding from private sources, also?
Ms. Rademacher. We do. Primarily, the model is we have
about 80 percent of our funding from philanthropic sources.
We do have some new Federal contracts. We are partnering
right now with the Department of the Treasury to build out some
of the basic tools and data for the financial access types of
initiatives that are happening in communities around the
country--somebody mentioned Bank On initiatives. So we are
doing a number of things with that at the moment.
We are creating estimates at the local level for unbanked
and underbanked based on the FDIC's data. We are looking across
the financial institutions to look at what it means to be
sustainably engaged in this work--what is the kind of--
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay. That is fine. I just wanted to know
about the--
Ms. Rademacher. That is where I am from, yes.
Mr. Westmoreland. I found your testimony pretty
interesting. I come from a construction background, and I
actually have seen people in dire need of $200, $300, $400,
$500. You can see it in their eyes; I have seen it.
And you said that one of the things that you think the
ultimate test was, is does this product help consumers improve
their financial situation or does it make the situation worse?
Then, you go on to talk about the no credit, low credit,
whatever. And then you talk about the amount of interest that
somebody should be capped, as far as charging.
Would staying out of jail be something that would help the
financial situation or hurt the financial situation?
Ms. Rademacher. That would obviously help. I am not saying
that we should--I think the whole point of what I was trying to
say and what I--we have continued to say is that it is an
unfortunate situation we find ourselves in in America right
now, that people have to choose between immediate urgency and--
Mr. Westmoreland. No, ma'am. I couldn't agree with you
more. But if you were counseling somebody, would you tell them
that it is going to be better to go to jail than to borrow $300
from somebody? Would you tell them it is going to be better to
pay $30 in an insufficient check fund to cover a $5 check?
Are those some of the things that you would weigh when you
are looking at financial responsibility?
Ms. Rademacher. Yes. I had this conversation, preparing
this testimony, with my sister, about her experiences with
short-term lending and where she has been for very similar
reasons, the choices she has made. Nobody can knock the choices
somebody makes in an urgent place. They--
Mr. Westmoreland. --to make choices in life, but you have
to do it, so--
Ms. Rademacher. Yes. She wishes she didn't have to make
them, and she hopes in the long run she has opportunities so
she can get out of that trap.
Mr. Westmoreland. I understand. But a lot of people find
themselves in the situation where they can't, and what I have
found is that somebody who really needs $400, they are going to
either borrow it from somebody who is licensed, they are going
to borrow it from somebody who may do physical harm to them if
they don't pay it back at a very large interest rate, or they
are going to break into somebody's house or car or steal
something to go pawn to get the money.
So I think there is a place for some of these financial or
nonfinancial institutions, whatever you want to call them, that
really go into some of these areas to locate, to service the
needs where a lot of people don't. And so when I read your
testimony, I just felt that it was very, very interesting that
you are weighing what it is in the financial balance, but in
real life, a lot of those people weigh that every day between
going to jail, not going to jail, being able to go to work, or
not being able to go to work.
Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Meeks, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And let me just say, Mr. Westmoreland, I actually concur.
My own life experiences tell me that you are absolutely
correct.
There are a number of individuals out there who are not
just considering their financial situation or their financial
health, they are thinking about survival. They are thinking
about, ``How do I make it to the next day? How do I keep my
family intact?''
They are not thinking about, ``Oh, I have to have a FICO
score of 700, and I have to make sure that my financial
situation is in order.'' They are not there.
They are saying, ``How can I live to make it another day,
keeping my family together?'' And they have these options that
they have to choose from.
Now, personally, my point of view is if they had more
options on a legal way, then they will be able to make better
choices. But if we limit the options that they have--because
guess what? If you happen to have the 750 credit score and a
lot of money, you have a lot of options. The options are
limited for those who do not.
And for them, when you talk to--my family back then, if you
talk to them and you ask them, or folks are telling them, ``Get
your financial life in order,'' when they are trying to get
their life in order for the next day, they say, you have to be
out of your mind.
And if you go to a bank whose interest is not that
consumer, that is not their interest. That is not who they are
going to--they are bored with--get them off the board of that
is what they were focused on.
So to me, if there is a group of individuals or businesses
that says, ``Okay, we want to compete for this unbankable
population. We think that it is viable. We think that we could
make some money doing it. But we think that we can compete for
this population,'' the people who I know that are in that
situation will say, ``Thank you. You understand my needs. Give
me some options of people who want me because they know that I
am struggling every day to make it.''
I have somebody--I won't say who--on my staff who has been
trying to get a $500 loan to fix their car so they can go to
work. They have gone to bank after bank after bank. The banks
won't give them the money.
Finally, I know someone who gave them the money so they can
get back and forth to work. But if they had institutions that
were competing for them--but guess what? We talk about the
interest rates. I think even in that population, that
competition would draw the interest rates down if you had as
many people as you could that would be going after them, that
is how you bring the rates down.
They would be competing for them just as people in the
other end. What do they do to get people with money to bank in
their banks? They lower the rates. They give you free checking.
They find ways to try to entice you in to them because that is
the customer that they want.
It is the same thing on the bottom end. There is no
difference for those who have been on the bottom, it is just
that nobody has been competing for them. And I think it would
be wrong for us that if we have institutions that now want to
compete for that business to say, ``Nope. You can't do it. We
are going to regulate you out of the business; we are going to
end it because you are bad. You can't do it.''
And in essence, you are saying to those people, ``You can't
exist.''
I do financial literacy in my district all the time, and we
do need to teach and educate folks. But in order for them to be
able to advance into the sphere of financial literacy, they
first have to survive. So if they allow them to survive and
then teach them financial literacy, then hopefully one day they
will have some money to lend to others and compete. They can go
from one end of competition to the other end of competition,
because that is what this is really all about if you live the
life.
I have been there. I have been there, believe me. And so, I
don't just speak from theory; I speak from very real life.
I had these questions and I know I took up my time, so I
will stop there. I had a bunch of questions, but you just hear
this stuff, and because it is so close to me, I just had to
make these comments.
But I want to thank all of you for being here, and I look
forward to working with you.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for this hearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I thank all of the panel for being here today, and I
certainly thank Mr. Meeks for his passionate words there. I
think that we are all here to try and find a way to help those
who need some help with access to credit.
That is what this is all about today, and I think we need
to find a way to structure this environment so that people can
have access to it, and structure it in a way that they can
afford whatever alternatives they pick, yet allow the business
climate to be able to fund itself, make enough money so that it
can continue that service. We are all looking for that balance;
we are all looking to help these folks. And it is the give and
take, and it is the struggle we are with here.
So I know Mr. Meeks and Mr. Westmoreland made some great
points.
Quick question for Ms. Manturuk: In your testimony, your
research says that you show that there was no real impact on
the abolition of small-dollar lending in North Carolina, yet
the Federal Reserve of New York published a study, and also,
according to my information, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City published something in the Economic Review that said
whenever the payday loans were banned in Georgia and North
Carolina, households bounced more checks, complained more to
the FTC about lenders and debt collectors, and filed Chapter 7
more often than households in other States where payday lending
was permitted.
Can you tell me what the difference is between the studies?
Ms. Manturuk. I read that study probably a couple of years
ago, so I am a little bit rusty on it. My recollection was that
study didn't account for macro-level economic changes that
might have changed in the before and after climate.
Our research was aimed at actually talking to people who
were former payday borrowers themselves, and getting their
impacts and their evaluation of the impact it had on their
lives, and that is where we derived the finding. Interestingly,
when we targeted people who lived in communities where there
had been a proliferation of payday lenders, most of them did
not even realize that the option was gone, which, I think,
speaks to the fact that this really wasn't something that was
important in their financial lives.
When we focused exclusively on people who were former
borrowers themselves, though, they overwhelmingly said that
they felt that they were grateful that the option was gone. One
of the more interesting things, as one customer told us, is
that not having what she considered to be a negative option had
actually prompted her to change the way she managed her money
on a regular basis.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That is interesting. They were glad it was
gone. That is curious.
One of the things--I used to be the chairman of the
Financial Services Committee in Missouri, and we instituted a
lot of new rules and regulations with regard to payday loans,
title loans, small-dollar loans. And one of the things that we
did was put it in what I call the ``Fed box.'' I am a banker,
and on your housing forms you have a disclosure box, or we call
it the ``Fed box'' a lot of the time. It discloses all the
interest rates, and the origination fees, and any other fees
that are in this that are there.
I know that is what we did with regards to the forms there
in Missouri, and I was just kind of curious, in your experience
do you see any consumers that shop the rates? Do they shop for
rates at all?
Ms. Guzman?
Ms. Guzman. Absolutely. And their method of shopping is by
walking into a bank or a credit union and being told, ``No. We
don't have a product that fits your needs,'' or actually being
told they can apply for an option and then not qualifying for
it for a multitude of reasons.
Unfortunately, this becomes very humiliating and very
degrading. And then, when they look at their other options in
other locations, they find that it will work for them.
I don't think there is much--you don't need too much common
sense, and my consumers certainly have great common sense--they
are short on funds, but not on common sense--that you need your
money today but they are going to hold your check for 3 days at
the bank that has your account. Naturally, you are going to go
to a check casher. The same thing goes for access to funds.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That is kind of interesting, because we
haven't heard a lot of testimony today that has been a negative
about the small-dollar loan folks, but I know when I was the
chairman, because I oversaw that area, I would constantly check
with the regulators and see once if there were a lot of
complaints filed. And it was interesting to see that there were
fewer complaints filed against small-dollar loan lenders than
the banks themselves--
Ms. Guzman. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. --which tells you that they are delivering
a good service at prices that are competitive, that it is a
service that people want.
And I noticed in your testimony, Ms. Guzman, you were
talking about how they want more choices that help them get
credit back for themselves. And we had a lady who testified in
this committee at a hearing recently--several months ago--that
she used it as a way to get back her regular credit so that she
could get back and actually be able to go buy a house and start
a business.
And so while it may not be for everybody, it certainly
fills a gap for those who need some quick access to cash in
small amounts.
So with that, thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I think that concludes our hearing, and I want to thank all
the panelists from the second panel. You were very great
witnesses, with very good information.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
With that said, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:52 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

September 22, 2011


