- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO REFORM THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM, PART I

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO REFORM THE
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM, PART I

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INSURANCE, HOUSING, AND
COMMUNITY OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELVETH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 11, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-16

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-676 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing, and Community Opportunity

JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois, Chairman

ROBERT HURT, Virginia, Vice          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
GARY G. MILLER, California           MAXINE WATERS, California
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BRAD SHERMAN, California
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 11, 2011...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 11, 2011...............................................    47

WITNESSES
Friday, March 11, 2011

Brown, Orice Williams, Managing Director, Financial Markets and
Community Investment, U.S. Government Accountability Office
(GAO)..........................................................     5
Ellis, Stephen, on behalf of the SmarterSafer Coalition, and Vice
President, Taxpayers for Common Sense..........................    18
Houldin, Spencer, Chair, Government Affairs Committee,
Independent Insurance Agents and Brokers of America (IIABA),
and President, Ericson Insurance...............................    22
Jallick, Donna M., on behalf of the Property Casualty Insurers
Association of America (PCI), and Vice President, Flood
Operations, Harleysville Insurance.............................    28
McConkey, Sally, Vice Chair, Association of State Floodplain
Managers, and Manager, Coordinated Hazard Assessment and
Mapping Program, Illinois State Water Survey...................     6
Nutter, Franklin W., President, Reinsurance Association of
America (RAA)..................................................    24
Parrillo, Sandra G., Chairman, the National Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies (NAMIC), and President and CEO, the
Providence Mutual Fire Insurance Company.......................    26
Rutenberg, Barry, First Vice Chairman, the National Association
of Home Builders (NAHB)........................................    29
Sullivan, Terry, Chair, Committee on Flood Insurance, National
Association of REALTORS, and broker/owner, Sullivan Realty....    20

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Brown, Orice Williams........................................    48
Ellis, Stephen...............................................    67
Houldin, Spencer.............................................    74
Jallick, Donna M.............................................    80
McConkey, Sally..............................................    83
Nutter, Franklin W...........................................   102
Parrillo, Sandra G...........................................   112
Rutenberg, Barry.............................................   122
Sullivan, Terry..............................................   137

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Biggert, Hon. Judy:
Written statement of Allstate Insurance Company..............   156
Written statement of the International Code Council (ICC)....   158
Written statement of Lloyd's of London.......................   159
Written statement of the National Multi Housing Council
(NMHC).....................................................   161
Additional information provided for the record by Franklin
Nutter.....................................................   163
Written statement of the National Association of Professional
Insurance Agents (PIA).....................................   164
Gutierrez, Hon. Luis:
Written statement of the American Insurance Association (AIA)   166
Written statement of the National Wildlife Federation (NWF)..   169
Fugart, Hon. Craig, Administrator, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency [Administrator Fugate was scheduled to
testify but was unable to do so because of the emergency
situation with the tsunami]:
Written statement and attachments............................   174
Sullivan, Terry:
HUD's Federal Register notice from 1977 providing the history
of the NFIP................................................   194

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO REFORM
THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE
PROGRAM, PART I

----------

Friday, March 11, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing,
and Community Opportunity,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Judy Biggert
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Biggert, Hurt, Capito,
Westmoreland, Duffy, Dold; Gutierrez, Waters, Cleaver, and
Sherman.
Also present: Representatives Palazzo and McCarthy of New
York.
Chairwoman Biggert. This hearing of the Subcommittee on
Insurance, Housing, and Community Opportunity will come to
order.
Let me just say before we start that I would like to take a
minute to express the deepest sympathy for the people of Japan
as they cope with the aftermath of this terrible earthquake and
tsunami. While reports of the damage continue to surface, it is
clear this disastrous event will leave an indelible mark on the
region. My thoughts and prayers--and I am sure all of us who
are here agree--are with the people of Japan, not to mention
our hopes that the effects on Hawaii and the West Coast will be
minimal.
And I would like to note that Administrator Fugate cannot
join us today, given that he must remain at the FEMA
headquarters to monitor the developments in Hawaii, Alaska, the
West Coast, and the Pacific Territories and to coordinate
possible Federal assistance to State and local governments. So,
we understand his responsibilities, and we hope that we will
meet with the Administrator within the next few weeks.
With that, we are going to have opening statements. I will
start, and welcome the witnesses to today's hearing where we
will examine legislative proposals to reform the National Flood
Insurance Program, or NFIP.
It is critical that, well in advance of NFIP's September
30th expiration date, Congress begin a dialogue and shape a
reform measure. Millions of homeowners and businesses in
Illinois and across the country, not to mention our recovering
housing market, can ill afford the turmoil caused by a program
lapse, which occurred during the previous Congress.
That said, to the credit of my colleague, Ms. Waters, the
former subcommittee chair, much progress was made on NFIP
reform legislation, some of which is included in the draft bill
that is under discussion today.
There is no question that the program is in dire need of
reform. For many years, the NFIP has been--for lack of a better
phrase--underwater, with longstanding management and financial
challenges, and was last reformed in 2004. The NFIP borrowed
millions from taxpayers following the 2005 Gulf Coast
hurricanes and continues to be financially unstable.
Since 2006, the NFIP has been cited by the Government
Accountability Office as a high-risk Federal program in need of
fundamental reform.
It is crucial that we work to restore the financial
integrity of the NFIP so that homeowners and businesses in
floodplain areas, like many in my State of Illinois, are not
left without any protection, and taxpayers are not on the hook
for the failure of the NFIP.
We must work towards a long-term plan for flood insurance
that eliminates taxpayer risk in the near-term. Important
reforms to the NFIP must improve its financial stability,
reduce the burden on taxpayers, and examine ways to increase
private market participation.
Today, I would like to welcome guest members to our
committee, regulators, engineers, insurers and reinsurers,
REALTORS, home builders, and many other experts to examine
near- and long-term strategies for a flood insurance program
that our families, businesses, and local communities can count
on.
With that, I recognize Ranking Member Gutierrez for his
opening statement. We have agreed to limit the opening
statements to 5 minutes.
Mr. Gutierrez. Good morning, Chairwoman Biggert, and
everyone here today. I want to thank our witnesses for taking
the time to testify. We are here to discuss legislative
proposals to reform the National Flood Insurance Program.
As you may recall, we were successful in passing the Flood
Insurance Reform Priorities Act of 2010 last summer, which was
introduced by Congresswoman Waters. The bill received broad
bipartisan support. But unfortunately, the Senate did not take
it up, so here we are once again.
Since the program is slated to expire at the end of
September, I hope we can once again work together to pass this
critical, necessary legislation and not allow the program to
lapse, as it has done in the past.
Finally, as we move forward, we need to make sure
reauthorization adds stability to the National Flood Insurance
Program and to our housing market.
I look forward to all the testimonies. I would like to
introduce two statements for the record.
The first is from the American Insurance Association, Write
Your Own Flood Insurance Coalition. AIA expresses the need for
a meaningful and long-term extension and contributes to this
ongoing discussion with their recommendations.
The second is from the National Wildlife Federation, a
SmarterSafer Coalition, as it raises environmental concerns to
keep in mind as we move forward with NFIP reform this year.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I would like to see who else
on our side would like some time, as time permits.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
At this point, I would ask unanimous consent that our
colleague, Mr. Palazzo, can join our subcommittee and
participate in the hearing today.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Welcome.
And now, we recognize Representative Dold for 2 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I want to welcome you all here, as well, and thank you
for being here.
The Flood Insurance Program insures more than 5 million
residential and commercial property owners in more than 20,000
American communities. These millions of property owners and
their communities depend on this program to provide some
measure of security against inevitable flood risks.
At the same time, with this program's existing debt and
with the persistence of federally-subsidized premiums, the
program remains undercapitalized, and the program's financial
solvency is in jeopardy--all of which places the American
taxpayer at an ongoing, substantial risk.
Clearly, we need to minimize taxpayer risk by making this
program more self-sufficient and by expanding the private
sector's role in protecting against flood disasters. The
important question for us is how to accomplish these important
objectives.
One thing that also seems clear is that the strategy of
short-term authorizations and the corresponding temporary
program lapses have not worked to minimize taxpayer risk or to
expand the private sector's role. In fact, the short-term
authorizations and temporary lapses have had the opposite
effect, while also destabilizing an already fragile housing
market.
To properly reform and strengthen this program, we need to
reauthorize this program on a long-term basis, and we need to
do so promptly to avoid any additional lapses in the program.
Long-term reauthorization will allow us to create stability and
predictability for property owners, while moving towards
meaningful and necessary reforms.
We must also gradually reduce Federal subsidies that keep
flood insurance premiums artificially low, that keep private
insurers out of the market, and that keep taxpayers on the hook
for most of the flood losses. We must also consider how to deal
with repetitive loss properties to index coverage for limits
for inflation and to expand available coverages.
We need to consider policies that will limit adverse
selection and better spread risks. We need to consider giving
private market insurers some certainty and uniformity regarding
applicable law when selling and administering policies under
what is necessarily a national flood insurance market.
In the end, we need to create the conditions under which
the taxpayer risk is minimized, private sector involvement is
expanded, and policy owners are protected.
I look forward to working with the chairwoman and my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle to achieve these most
important national objectives.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I would also like to ask for unanimous consent for Mrs.
McCarthy, a member of the full committee, to participate in
today's hearing.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
I will now recognize Mr. Cleaver for 2 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking
Member Gutierrez.
The tsunami hitting Japan yesterday, or last night,
provides us with a reminder of the devastation that can be
caused by flooding. And it also is appropriately getting the
attention of the FEMA Administrator, which is why the
Administrator is not with us this morning.
Madam Chairwoman, I think that it is time that we do an
overhaul of the NFIP, because, obviously, there are concerns.
We attempted in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina to provide
some reform to the program, but we did not get very far.
Something has to be done. We are about $18 billion
underwater--pardon the pun--and the program simply cannot
continue as it is now.
We need to struggle with--and debate, if necessary--the
issue of the wind damage coverage, which was one of the
controversies when we tried to deal with this issue back in
2009.
So, I am looking forward to raising those questions about
reform to our panel this morning, and to actually find out from
them whether or not they believe that we have time to do
anything before the September expiration date, because I think,
expeditiously, maybe we can address this issue.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I would also like to submit for the record, by unanimous
consent, written statements from Allstate, the National
Association of Professional Insurance Agents, the International
Code Council, Lloyds of London, and the National Multi Housing
Council.
We will now start with our witnesses.
And I would also like to submit, without objection, the
testimony of Administrator Fugate for the record.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
And we are happy to have with us: Orice Williams Brown,
Managing Director of Financial Markets and Community Investment
for the Government Accountability Office; and Sally McConkey,
vice chair of the Association of State Floodplain Managers, and
manager, Coordinated Hazard Assessment and Mapping Program,
Illinois State Water Survey.
As you may know, you can address the dais for 5 minutes,
and then we will follow that with questions and answers.
So, Ms. Brown, if you would like to be recognized for 5
minutes?

STATEMENT OF ORICE WILLIAMS BROWN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL
MARKETS AND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE (GAO)

Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members
of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
participate in today's hearing on the National Flood Insurance
Program. As you know, floods are the most frequent national
disaster in the United States, causing billions of dollars of
damage each year.
This morning, I would like to share my thoughts on three
areas: FEMA's administration of NFIP; the proposed reforms put
forth in the discussion draft; and other possible areas for
reform.
First, NFIP serves a vital role in providing protection
against flooding to over 5.6 million policyholders nationwide.
As you know, NFIP is one of 30 programs or areas on GAO's 2011
high-risk list.
It first appeared on this list in March 2006, after the
2005 hurricane season exposed the potential magnitude of
longstanding structural issues on the financial solvency of the
program, and brought to the forefront a variety of operational
and management challenges that must also be addressed to help
ensure the long-term stability of the program.
In our ongoing work examining FEMA's management of NFIP,
our preliminary results reveal challenges in strategic
planning, human capital planning, interagency collaboration,
records management, acquisition management, and information
technology. While FEMA continues to make some progress in
addressing certain areas, fully addressing these fundamental
issues will be vital to its long-term operational efficiency
and stability.
Second, using the broad public policy goals identified by
GAO on the role of the Federal Government in providing natural
catastrophe insurance, I will share some thoughts on reforming
NFIP as outlined in the discussion draft. These broad goals
include charging rates that reflect the risk of flooding,
limiting costs to the taxpayer, encouraging broad property
owner participation, and encouraging private sector
involvement.
Successfully reforming NFIP will require trade-offs among
these often competing goals. For example, currently, nearly one
in four policyholders does not pay a full risk rate, and others
pay grandfathered rates.
The discussion draft addresses this structural issue by
phasing out these rates over time. This not only results in
rates that reflect the risk of flooding, but also can help
minimize the cost to taxpayers, and could help encourage
private sector participation.
The trade-off involves potentially losing policyholders who
may opt to leave the program, potentially increasing post-
disaster Federal assistance. However, these challenges can be
overcome by a variety of options including targeted subsidies,
tax credits, and mitigation.
The goal of encouraging broad participation in the program
could be achieved by increasing targeted outreach to help
diversify the risk pool. One way for FEMA to do this is to make
sure its incentive structure is consistent with its goals of
expanding participation in low-risk zones and areas subject to
repeated flooding, but have low penetration rates, among
others.
Encouraging private markets is the most difficult
challenge, because there is currently no broad-base private
market for flood insurance for most residential and commercial
properties.
As originally envisioned, NFIP was established as a
cooperative arrangement between the Federal Government and the
private sector, with both assuming a share of the risk. The
concepts in the discussion draft would begin to address this
issue by giving FEMA greater authority to explore alternatives.
For example, the discussion draft addresses the possibility of
reinsurance.
Finally, while the discussion draft begins to address many
of the broad public policy goals, I would like to offer a few
other areas for consideration as the reform discussion
continues. For example, leveraging mitigation programs in ways
to make them more effective including: clarifying FEMA's
authority to charge higher rates when property owners refuse or
do not respond to mitigation offers, or allowing FEMA to apply
a surcharge when mitigation offers are refused; actuarial rates
and whether they should be sufficient to pay for catastrophic
losses and any borrowing from Treasury; appropriating for any
subsidies until the full-risk rates are fully phased in; and
authorizing FEMA to map for all present flood risks, including
erosion.
Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members
of the subcommittee, this concludes my oral comments, and I
would be happy to answer any questions at the appropriate time.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brown can be found on page
48 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize Ms. McConkey for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SALLY MCCONKEY, VICE CHAIR, ASSOCIATION OF STATE
FLOODPLAIN MANAGERS, AND MANAGER, COORDINATED HAZARD ASSESSMENT
AND MAPPING PROGRAM, ILLINOIS STATE WATER SURVEY

Ms. McConkey. The Association of State Floodplain Managers
(ASFPM) thanks this subcommittee, Chairwoman Biggert, and
Ranking Member Gutierrez for your attention to the need to
reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program.
We very much appreciate your holding this hearing, and
appreciate the opportunity to comment on the discussion draft
legislation and to share our thoughts on the current status of
the NFIP, challenges the program confronts, and opportunities
to improve our Nation's efforts to reduce flood-related losses.
The Association of State Floodplain Managers and its 29
chapters represent over 14,000 State and local officials and
other professionals who are engaged in floodplain management
and hazard mitigation. All ASFPM members are concerned with
working to reduce our Nation's flood-related losses.
ASFPM believes that the NFIP has been a useful Federal
program for addressing flood losses in the Nation and it should
be reauthorized without lapse. A reauthorization of 2 to 3
years is important for the stability of the NFIP, and the
associated predictability is important for the lenders, the
housing industry, home buyers, policyholders, and the Write
Your Own insurance companies.
While a longer period of authorization is important, it
must be balanced with the need to fully consider many important
reform ideas which will need further evaluation and
consideration by the committee.
There are fundamental issues that need to be thoroughly
considered. For example, should the NFIP accommodate
catastrophic losses rather than the average historical loss
year? If so, are there realistic, affordable program
adaptations that can achieve this objective? And if not, would
it not be best to clarify that the program is not expected to
cover catastrophic losses?
The Nation must carefully balance the issue of who benefits
and who pays for develop at risk. We believe that a 2- to 3-
year reauthorization would provide the needed reliability,
while allowing time for FEMA to complete its ``rethink the
NFIP'' project, and for Congress and the committee to
thoroughly review and consider the significant policy and
legislative options and recommendations for management and
operation of the NFIP.
The report is expected out in June of 2011, and we think
this project will identify, or does identify, the tensions and
the trade-offs of various options, and needs careful and
deliberate consideration.
ASFPM identifies, and has identified, a number of concepts
which we feel should be part of any reform. First, a
comprehensive national flood risk management framework is
needed to actually reduce flood-related losses of life and
property in the Nation. We must move beyond the current NFIP
minimum approaches and achieve a fuller integration of Federal
programs.
Second, bold reforms should be considered to address
current flood insurance issues. Flood insurance should
gradually move towards being actuarially sound, to reflect
actual risk and enable market-based financial decisions.
Third, floodplain mapping has changed significantly over
the life of the program. Better technology, improved methods,
and the creation of risk assessment techniques allow for the
identification of flood hazard areas and enable the creation
and distribution of this information to decision-makers.
Technological advances will continue, and a long-term
authorization of the mapping program is needed so we can fully
utilize those advances, continuing to improve and advance flood
risk identification.
Fourth, improvements in floodplain management and hazard
mitigation elements of the NFIP should be continuously
evaluated.
With respect to the current discussion draft, we find that
the draft developed by this subcommittee includes a number of
important and helpful changes for the short term to the NFIP,
compared to the bill passed by the House last summer. We note
that these constitute revisions rather than the full reforms
that we are discussing, and we would urge that the subcommittee
plan on an in-depth consideration of the significant policy and
legislative recommendations for the NFIP during the 2- to 3-
year reauthorization period.
ASFPM appreciates that the proposal attempts to modify and
tighten previous proposals to delay the mandatory purchase
requirement of properties in areas newly mapped as floodplains.
However, as a matter of principle, if the risk is known and
documented, it is not appropriate for the Federal Government to
help people ignore their risk. Rather than delay mandatory
purchase, we prefer the subcommittee consider other methods of
addressing the affordability issue, such as the means-tested
voucher system to be handled by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
I actually grew up in East St. Louis, Illinois, where my
father owned a business. We lived and we worked in the
floodplain with no real knowledge of the risk that we faced; we
knew the levees were there, and we did count on them.
And to be abruptly confronted with the significant expense
of flood insurance would have been very, very hard on my family
and my dad's business. But to have had flood damages to our
home and to the business that were uninsured, that we could not
recover from, would have been devastating.
There are a number of aspects in the discussion draft that
ASFPM agrees with, such as the proposal to use differentiated
deductibles for pre- and post-FIRM properties.
The phase-in of actuarial rates for certain properties is a
step forward, and we agree with most of the listed categories.
ASFPM very much supports the establishment of the Technical
Mapping Advisory Committee, which should be an advisory council
to provide stakeholder input to the needs and uses of the map,
and to assist FEMA in improving its processes.
There are a number of issues that require further
consideration. While ASFPM does support a more in-depth study
of privatization, any such movement in this area must ensure
that there are continued, strong incentives for comprehensive
floodplain management, which is one of the great strengths of
the current program.
Further, we would like to suggest two other studies, which
would be in order, in addition to the privatization initiatives
already provided for in the draft: first, a study of the
feasibility of group insurance for entire communities, for
identified flood hazard areas, or for residual risk areas
behind levees; and second, an economic analysis of the overall
effect on taxpayer funds of providing flood insurance vouchers
to low-income property owners.
Also, the Severe Repetitive Loss Program is needed to
assist in reducing the approximately $200 million drain on the
National Flood Insurance Fund. And we urge the committee to
work with FEMA to identify statutory-type changes to better
implement this program and the use of demolish-and-rebuild as a
mitigation option.
ASFPM is grateful for the opportunity to share our thoughts
with the subcommittee, and hope they will be helpful as you
move forward with legislation. We will be glad to respond to
any questions, and to assist the subcommittee in any way we
can. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McConkey can be found on
page 83 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Now, we will begin the question-and-answer period, and I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brown, over the past 5 years, FEMA has paid more than
$2 billion in interest payments to service its debt, nearly $2
billion more to reduce it. But FEMA still owes $17.75 billion
to U.S. taxpayers. Many have asserted that FEMA is unlikely to
ever be able to repay its debt.
Do you foresee any scenario in which the debt can be paid,
repaid over time? And can you outline a range of public policy
options for how Congress might enable FEMA to be able to
address its debt to the U.S. Treasury?
Ms. Brown. We have looked at this issue. And the bottom
line is, as it currently stands, FEMA has been able to make
principal repayments, because they have experienced relatively
low flood loss years. And that is how they have been able to do
it.
It is not clear that it is reasonable to expect that to
continue to occur in the future in order for FEMA to be able to
make those payments. So, there is a possibility that in certain
years where FEMA experiences higher-than-normal flood years,
that they actually could see their borrowing from Treasury go
up, because they may actually have to borrow from the Treasury
in order to make their interest payment.
There are a range of scenarios that could be taken to
address this. A decision could be made to forgive the debt in
order to allow the program to start on a more sound financial
footing, provided appropriate reforms are in place.
Another way to do it would be to consider a surcharge that
FEMA could add to existing premiums, to be used to pay down the
debt. That raises questions of fairness. Is it fair for the
current and future policyholders to have to pay a surcharge to
repay the debt?
So, there are many ways to think about it.
This is not something that we have specifically studied,
but we have looked at and read a number of possible
alternatives. But this is a challenge that has to be addressed
in order for the program to be put on a more stable financial
footing going forward.
Chairwoman Biggert. GAO has also suggested that operational
and management issues may also limit efforts to address this,
NFIP's financial challenges, and meet the program goals.
Can you highlight some of those issues for us?
Ms. Brown. Yes. In the last decade, we have identified and
made recommendations to address issues surrounding the rate-
setting process and how that is handled. We have raised issues
with the quality of the data that FEMA uses to do some of its
rate-setting. We have raised concerns about the financial
management controls and the system in place.
We have had findings surrounding the oversight of the Write
Your Owns (WYOs). We have also looked at the incentive
structure that FEMA uses to incent WYOs surrounding increasing
the number of policyholders in the program and expanding the
risk pool.
We have also, in the work that we currently have underway,
we have identified a number of challenges associated with their
information technology, and investments that they have made in
a program, a technology program, that failed, that cost FEMA
substantial sums of money.
So, human capital management, identifying where they need
people, and a mechanism to make sure that the program is being
adequately managed during emergencies and outside of
emergencies, a full range of issues to be fully addressed.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And then, Ms. McConkey, given your experience in Illinois,
can you provide the committee with your point of view on risk-
based pricing and how it should work, and also, alternatives
that communities could consider for mitigating flood damage--or
risk, I should say?
Ms. McConkey. It is very important that the people who are
living at risk, know the risk and share the--and be part of the
paying for their risk. It is, we feel, inappropriate to
externalize that risk to the rest of the taxpayers, the Federal
taxpayers.
But we also understand that you have to gradually move
towards actual rates for flood insurance, and that we also need
to look at a more holistic view of our at-risk communities, and
not just consider flood insurance, or just a levee to be the
ultimate answer.
We need to look at really having more sustainable
communities, which might include a strategic retreat from the
floodplain, or buying flood easements, or other management
techniques, mitigation techniques that will really, long term,
reduce our flood risk in the Nation.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. My time has expired.
I recognize Ranking Member Gutierrez for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you very much.
I would like to yield my time to Congressman Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Ranking Member Gutierrez. I do have
some questions.
Ms. McConkey, you are a Midwesterner and grew up in the
shadows of Missouri. We have had unusual snowfall this winter,
which means that, very shortly, a mixture of the melting snow
and the normal spring rain can and does often create flooding
in Illinois and Missouri.
We are also still in the throes of a recession, in spite of
good news from time to time, but we are still in the throes of
a recession. And a large number of unemployed folk are living
in areas that are susceptible to flooding.
Do you agree that it would be difficult for many of the
people just struggling to exist, who did not purchase flood
insurance, to have to go to a private insurer at a time like
this?
There is a great deal of talking about the privatization
and what does privatization do to people who are vulnerable,
like those--you probably know some of them. Is it unfair for us
to think in terms of privatization as a way for them to protect
their homes and property?
Ms. McConkey. Actually, what we believe is that, to deal
with people with affordability issues, managed through a
program like HUD, that has experience with means-tested
systems, so that you could--
[laughter]
Actually, I can talk pretty loud.
[laughter]
We really think that it should not be handled through the
insurance mechanism to deal with the affordability, that it
should be through a means-tested program, like handled by HUD,
where you would get vouchers if you cannot afford the flood
insurance. That way, you have the protection of the flood
insurance without distorting the insurance aspect of the
program, and you have protection for individuals irrespective
of if it is FEMA flood insurance, or if it is private flood
insurance.
That is our solution.
I do not know how the rates would change with the
privatization. I cannot speculate on that.
Mr. Cleaver. No, it was not the rates as much as it is the
fact that, I guess to some degree it is. But I am concerned
about people who are just struggling right now to survive and
are vulnerable.
Ms. McConkey. Exactly.
Mr. Cleaver. But before my time expires, I am from the
Missouri side. My other concern, Mrs. Biggert--and I appreciate
very much you moving ahead, trying to do something with regard
to the flood insurance overhaul.
It seems to me, though, that there ought to be--and Mrs.
Biggert asked you the question--maybe, if this bill moves--and
I hope something moves, because I think we are dealing with an
$18 billion problem, and the fact that we have people who are
out here vulnerable.
And I would really hope that before September, we could
come up with a bill, but that the legislation ought to address
this $18 billion problem we have. I listened carefully to the
options. None of them are extremely attractive, I might add.
But we have to do something, or we will continue to meet
and talk about an $18 billion problem. And I think now is the
time for us to attack the problem. I do not think we ought to
wait.
And so, I do not know whether FEMA should send options,
maybe even more that you did not mention, or some way we need
to begin that struggle now, instead of postponing it.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I think, Mr. Cleaver, that we really are having this
hearing now, because we do need to move ahead. And we have
expected having maybe another hearing, but at least a mark-up
soon. This is a draft discussion right now, but we really
wanted to proceed.
I know that the study is supposed to come out in June. But
I think we really want to be moving ahead before then. And I
think maybe we will get an update on all of what is going on as
far as the study, too.
But it is very important that we do not let this slide. As
you know, it is much harder to do it later on and get the
Senate engaged, which has always been a problem.
[laughter]
You could say that.
I now recognize Mr. Hurt from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you all for being here. Welcome. And thank you for
your obviously significant interest in this important issue.
The chairwoman spoke of the $18 billion debt that has
accrued through this program. And I have read that the deficit,
the built-in deficit for this program annually has been $1.3
billion.
And Ms. Brown, I was wondering if you could talk about that
deficit? Is that something that has been consistent post-
Katrina, pre-Katrina? Are you able to comment on that?
Ms. Brown. I am not. This is not anything that we have
specifically looked at.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. With respect to the proposal that we are
evaluating, this draft bill, can you talk about what, in real
terms, the taxpayer subsidy is for this program? Are you able
to talk about that?
Ms. Brown. Yes. I can give a rough estimate based on the
full risk rates currently charged and the estimate for the
subsidized amount. And the current estimate is that the subsidy
basically results in those subsidized properties paying about
40 to 45 percent of the full risk rate.
We did a rough calculation based on the current policies in
force, and estimate that somewhere around $1.8 billion a year
is being subsidized. That is the amount that is lost in
premiums, if there was a full risk rate--
Mr. Hurt. And has GAO, in looking at this draft bill, been
able to determine what that might be reduced to, if you are
able to encourage the private market to come into this
business?
Ms. Brown. It depends on how that happened. The challenge
with flood insurance has been, historically, there really was
not a private market. And there was not a private market for a
number of reasons.
So, depending on how that was structured to bring the
private market in, there are a number of things that would have
to be dealt with. If you bring the private market in, and they
are able to focus on the lowest-risk properties, that would
leave the program with a very concentrated risk pool. And all
of the riskiest properties will be in NFIP. That can
potentially expose the program to greater losses, because there
would be this concentrated risk.
So, the impact that the private market would have is really
unclear until there is a better sense of kind of how that would
be structured and what role the NFIP would play in that
particular scenario.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. Obviously, one of the issues, a fundamental
issue, I think, that we all have to kind of deal with--and this
issue to me is a new one--is the issue of moral hazard. And
obviously, I would think we probably all agree that there are
places that people should not live.
Under the current proposal that we are looking at today, do
you see that the moral hazard issue--that is, encouraging
behavior, or encouraging people to do things that are not in
their best interest--would that be minimized? Or could that be
increased by the proposal that we are looking at today?
I would like an answer maybe from you, Ms. Brown, as well
as you, Ms. McConkey, if you feel like it.
Ms. Brown. The closer premiums come to fully reflecting
risk is a clear signal to a property owner that they are living
in harm's way. So, to the extent that the discussion draft
moves those premiums in that direction, it definitely would
help elevate the risk that homeowners and property owners are
exposed to currently.
Mr. Hurt. Ms. McConkey?
Ms. McConkey. I do not think I could say it any better.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Hurt.
I now recognize Mr. Cleaver for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I just have one question. Then I would like to yield the
balance of my time to the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
McCarthy.
I am still on the $18 billion. And there have been some
suggestions that perhaps reinsurance could be a way to
eliminate future debt. I would like to just get your response
to that, both of you.
Either of you?
One of you?
[laughter]
Ms. Brown. The issue of reinsurance, one of the things in
the discussion draft that was interesting is that there is an
opportunity for FEMA to do some study and pilots, and explore
the option of reinsurance.
This is something that we had looked at a couple of years
ago. There did not appear to be an appetite at that time, but I
think it is something that is definitely worth revisiting.
Because the way it currently works is, NFIP, while it is an
insurance program, it does not function, really, anything like
private insurance, because private insurers would purchase
reinsurance to cover that catastrophic level of risk.
What happened--and we saw this happen in Katrina--because,
to Representative Hurt's point, prior to Katrina, the program
was not running a deficit, and it was pretty much self-funding
up until 2005. And Treasury became the reinsurer, because any
losses over and above the amount that could be covered through
premiums, because there is no reserving mechanism, was borrowed
from the Treasury.
And what you are left with is Treasury--the program now has
this outstanding debt to the Treasury, because there was not
the opportunity for any type of reinsurance mechanism.
Mr. Cleaver. I yield to Mrs. McCarthy.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. I thank my colleague.
And may I also say thank you to the chairwoman for having
this hearing. I think it is extremely important.
I just want to give you a little background. I live on Long
Island, and we certainly have an awful lot of shoreline. So,
obviously, we have a lot of homes that need flood insurance in
case of a hurricane. And so far, we have been blessed that we
have not had that hurricane.
But I represent center Nassau County. And I am sorry that
Mr. Fugate is not here, because of questions that I had wanted
to ask him.
But apparently, what FEMA had done was go out to Suffolk
County, which has a higher level of flooding, even on heavy
rains, and took those maps, and put them into Nassau County,
the center of Nassau County, which they are saying that, on
certain areas in this particular village were a little bit
higher, even though we are not near any water.
And I stress that. We are not near any water, nor have any
of the families had any floods for over 25 years.
Is there a possibility? Absolutely. Should we look at that?
Absolutely.
But I guess the question I want to ask is, the draft
legislation, which I agree on, contains a provision to bring
back the Technical Mapping Advisory Council to address mapping
standards, made up of representations from many different
agencies familiar with mapping.
I am interested in getting your thoughts on having the
mapping process in an entire independent entity in an effort to
ensure that the most accurate data is used to update the maps.
Nassau County and Long Island, we just had our maps updated.
Just to give you a sidebar, I have a retirement home
somewhere out in Suffolk County, very close to the water. I did
not get an increase. I am not now in a flood zone. And I do not
understand that at all, because when it rains heavily, the
water from the bay comes up, basically on the lawn.
So, something is wrong here. If I am living there, then I
should be paying more, in my opinion. I shouldn't say that, but
right now, I am getting away with it.
But the people in Nassau County, in the center, in my
opinion, the maps are wrong. So, I would like your opinion on
bringing back the Technical Mapping Advisory Council, so that
we have more accurate maps.
Ms. McConkey. We very much endorse the idea, the concept of
bringing back the Technical Mapping Advisory Committee.
Actually, when it was instated in, I think it was 1994 or 1995,
through their recommendations, they actually brought out the
Map Modernization Program, which has really led to great
progress in improving the quality and the accuracy of the
maps--in most places.
So, yes, we do believe that is an important body to have as
an advisory council.
Through FEMA's Risk MAP Program, their next 5-year
initiative, they have taken certain very strong steps to
address quality issues with the mapping, and also to have
greater engagement with the community, so that there is more
ground truthing to what they are doing earlier on in the
process.
And so, I--
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. May I stop you right there? That
was one of their biggest failures. They did not let the
community know. They did not let even the counties know. They
just asked them for their old maps, which is very upsetting.
Ms. McConkey. FEMA has addressed a lot of problems in that
regard with their Risk MAP process, where it is very clearly
prescribed to anyone who--and actually, the group that I
manage, we do the digital flood insurance rate maps. We do the
engineering studies for Illinois counties. We have done 78 of
our 102 counties. So, we are actually--I am involved in that
process.
I read the rules, because that is what we are supposed to
do. And through the Risk MAP process, there really is strong
community engagement, early on technical meetings, so that
there is ground truthing of what you are doing. And then, FEMA
has also set up--and I apologize, I may not have the right
phrase--but sort of an arbitration, an independent arbitration
panel, for when there are appeals to the maps.
So, I think they have listened. They have heard about these
problems, and that Risk MAP makes great strides in addressing
the accuracy and the outreach issues.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Ms. Brown, anything?
Mr. Cleaver, would you like your time back?
Chairwoman Biggert. I think his time has expired.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Oh, sorry.
Chairwoman Biggert. I now recognize Mr. Dold from Illinois
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. McConkey, we are delighted that you are here from
Illinois. Obviously, the chairwoman, ranking member, and myself
were delighted to have another person from Illinois here on the
panel. So, thank you so much.
Ms. McConkey. Thank you very much for the invitation.
Mr. Dold. Ms. Brown, in the past you have noticed that
Congress has noted that repetitive loss properties constituted
a significant drain on the NFIP. Do you have any suggestions on
the repetitive loss properties and how to make them less of a
liability?
Ms. Brown. Yes. This is also an issue that we have looked
at over time. And while great strides were made with amendments
that were made in the 2000s to address repetitive loss
properties, the number of properties has continued to increase.
And we looked at February numbers, and they are continuing to
increase.
There are a couple of things that we would propose be
considered that deal with mitigation offers and what happens
when those offers are refused or not responded to, and in terms
of allowing FEMA, perhaps, the authority to apply a surcharge
above a--rate for those properties, if the homeowner chooses to
refuse or not respond to an offer.
And also, really focusing some attention on the mitigation
programs and determining if there are ways to make them more
efficient and effective as a way to address the issue of the
repetitive loss properties.
Mr. Dold. And just following up on my colleague on the
other side who had talked about reinsurance, you currently are
not using reinsurance right now. Is that correct?
Ms. Brown. In FEMA? No.
Mr. Dold. They are not using it. Is there any question that
you are able, that FEMA is able to use it?
Ms. Brown. That I am not sure about, if they could if they
wanted to. Right now, the mechanism is for them to rely on
borrowings from Treasury.
Mr. Dold. Would, perhaps, additional insight or authority
from Congress be necessary to let them do that? It is certainly
a common practice out there in the insurance industry, in order
to try to protect from catastrophic losses.
And certainly, when we look at those areas that are
particularly hard-hit, or those that continue to be hit again
and again, it would seem to me that, potentially, at least
having the mechanism or vehicle available may be something that
they might want.
Is that something--what is your take on that?
Ms. Brown. My take on whether they could do it now, this is
why I really wish Mr. Fugate was here to address that question
specifically.
But in terms of that being an option to be considered, I
think that is definitely one of the options that needs to be on
the table and discussed in terms of reforming the program going
forward.
Mr. Dold. Okay.
And, Ms. McConkey, a question for you on the vouchers. You
had talked a little bit about vouchers before. Can you give me
any sort of an idea on how you anticipate, or how you would
like to see something like this, how it would be administered?
And do you have any idea what the costs of that would be?
Ms. McConkey. To answer your last question first, no. The
cost of it is a study that we recommend be initiated through
this draft legislation.
The voucher system we envision as something to be managed
through the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
because they have experience with means-tested voucher systems.
FEMA does not.
But this way, it would allow for people to get the message
about the risk that they have with their home, and yet not be
burdened in these times, or because families who really are
just operating on the edge would not be burdened with the cost,
that we would pick that cost up.
It also provides them with fuller protection than no
insurance at all. If you have insurance, then that means you
have money to pay off your mortgage. But if you were relying on
disaster assistance, you are still obligated for that mortgage.
You really are not covered.
So, it really provides lower-income people with greater
coverage. The voucher system, as we said, we believe it should
be means-tested. And that is the extent of my knowledge on
that. We would have to do some more research to give you a more
thorough answer.
Mr. Dold. Okay. And with just the short amount of time that
I have left, you talk in your testimony before about--or at
least in testimony in the past--about floodplain coverage going
from the 100-year to potentially expanding it beyond that in
terms of a 250- or even a 500-year event.
Do you have any idea how much of the country would be
covered under those instances?
Ms. McConkey. That is something that I don't think that
anybody could just estimate without some research on it.
Going beyond the 100-year, looking at the 500-year, would
be something to consider as a residual risk area. Probably, you
could estimate the amount of floods--the difference between
100-and 500-year floodplain acreage, based on current FEMA
mapping, if it was all digital. You might be able to get some
estimate.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Capito, do you have any--
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I think I will
save my questions for the second panel. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. Mrs. McCarthy, would you like to claim
your time?
Okay. Then we will go to Mr. Palazzo from Mississippi.
Thank you for joining us.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you for having me.
Good morning. I appreciate the courtesy provided by the
House Financial Services Committee to allow me to participate
in this morning's very important hearing.
Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert. I ask consent that my full
statement be included in the record.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Palazzo. I represent Mississippi's 4th Congressional
District, which is the only district representing the
Mississippi Gulf Coast.
FEMA has served as a partner to our State, and we applaud
Administrator Fugate's continued leadership to the agency. The
National Flood Insurance Program is critically important to
South Mississippi and any area exposed to flood risk.
As floods continue to be among the most costly natural
disasters in the United States, I urge the committee to closely
consider reforms offered by Administrator Fugate to the NFIP,
and to pass a long-term reauthorization of NFIP.
Madam Chairwoman, in the absence of Administrator Fugate, I
would like permission to submit my questions for the record to
him.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection. All members'
requests for questions will be put in the record.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you.
I would also be remiss if I did not mention that the high
cost of wind insurance is a major factor preventing coastal
residents from building homes and attracting new industry. I am
committed to a bipartisan effort to resolve this with the goal
of providing coastal residents with needed cost relief and
comprehensive coverage.
I look forward to working with the Financial Services
Committee to find solutions to our problems.
Thank you again, Chairwoman Biggert, for allowing me to be
here today, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy, do you have any questions? Or we will move to
the next panel.
I would like to thank the witnesses. This has been very
informative and very helpful to us. And thank you so much for
being here.
Ms. McConkey. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. And I might--for those members who will
have written questions, the record will be open for 30 days for
submitting questions for written response.
And we will now move to the next panel.
If we can do this very quickly, I might mention that the
Floor is estimating that we will have votes between 11:45 and
12:15, so, we do want to move as expeditiously as possible.
If the panel can take their seats, and they know where they
are sitting?
All right. I would like to introduce our second panel:
We have Stephen Ellis on behalf of the SmarterSafer
Coalition, and vice president, Taxpayers for Common Sense in
Washington, D.C.
Then, we have Terry Sullivan, chair of the Committee on
Flood Insurance, National Association of REALTORS, and owner
of Sullivan Realty in Spokane, Washington.
Spencer Houldin, chair, Government Affairs Committee,
Independent Insurance Agents and Brokers of America; and
president, Ericson Insurance Services in Washington Depot,
Connecticut.
Frank Nutter, president, Reinsurance Association of
America, Washington, D.C.
Sandra Parrillo, chair of the National Association of
Mutual Insurance Companies and president and CEO of Providence
Mutual Fire Insurance Company, Warwick, Rhode Island.
Then Donna Jallick, on behalf of the Property Casualty
Insurance Association of America and vice president, Flood
Operations, Harleysville Insurance, Harleysville, Pennsylvania.
And last but not least, Barry Rutenberg, first vice
chairman, National Association of Home Builders, Washington,
D.C.
Welcome to you all. As you heard, I am sure, please limit
your testimony to 5 minutes. And after that, we will have the
question-and-answer period.
So, Mr. Ellis, if you would like to begin for 5 minutes,
you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN ELLIS, ON BEHALF OF THE SMARTERSAFER
COALITION, AND VICE PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS FOR COMMON SENSE

Mr. Ellis. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Biggert,
Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee. I am
Steve Ellis, vice president of Taxpayers for Common Sense, a
national, nonpartisan budget watchdog.
Thank you for inviting me here today to testify. I would
also like to recognize the people who are affected by the
tsunami, and also how it accentuates the importance of both
FEMA and the National Flood Insurance Program.
Taxpayers for Common Sense has long advocated for reform of
the National Flood Insurance Program. And with only $3 billion
in annual revenues offsetting the $18 billion the program is in
debt to Treasury, all have recognized NFIP is fundamentally
flawed and must be reformed. The question is: How?
Any reauthorization of the National Flood Insurance Program
must make significant changes to put it on sounder financial
footing with more actuarially sound rates and accurate maps.
The discussion draft of the reform legislation being
circulated by the committee is a good start. It responsibly
tackles rate and subsidy issues, creates a mechanism to
increase confidence and accuracy in flood mapping, and does not
stick taxpayers with the tab of bailing out a failed program.
However, we are concerned with concerned with provisions
that could inhibit adoption of updated maps, add a new business
line to the program and mandate annual coverage limit increases
that will ensure the program's liabilities actually increase
each year. We look forward to making this good start an even
better final product.
TCS is allied with SmarterSafer.org, a coalition of free
market, consumer, environmental, insurance industry, and
taxpayer groups in favor of environmentally responsible,
fiscally sound approaches to natural catastrophe policies that
promote public safety. The depth and breadth of the coalition,
some of which are at this table, underscores the importance of
reforming NFIP.
I would like to submit for the record SmarterSafer.org's
principles for reform.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Ellis. But to summarize quickly and clearly, those
principles are: maps are accurate and up-to-date; there are
risk-based rates; any subsidies should be explicit and targeted
only to those who truly need them; and mitigation is encouraged
as a tool to reduce risk. Taxpayers for Common Sense strongly
endorses those basic principles to better protect people,
property, the environment, and the taxpayer.
I would now like to talk about flood insurance and the
draft legislation from the taxpayer perspective.
NFIP does not charge truly actuarially sound rates. The
program's goal of fiscal solvency is defined as charging
premiums that will generate enough revenue to cover a
historical average loss year. That means catastrophic loss
years are largely left out of the equation.
The program covers any fiscal shortfalls by borrowing from
the U.S. Treasury, which is a significant subsidy in and of
itself, especially since the loans are virtually interest-free.
The program contains an enormous cross-subsidy as well.
The draft legislation will provide a mechanism to move
towards more actuarially sound rates for many properties. The
graduated phase-in of rates for newly mapped areas are
responsible both for the homeowner and the programs. The
legislation also stipulates that most properties have their
rates increase by 20 percent annually until they are paying the
estimated risk premium rate.
In addition, the draft legislation directs that subsidies
not be available to lapsed policies.
These changes move the program in the right direction. What
appears to remain unchanged are subsidies to pre-FIRM and
generally repetitive loss properties that do not meet any of
the specific criteria. It is not clear how many properties or
the potential loss that this represents, but it is an area that
must be reformed. These properties have been subsidized for
decades.
The Nation's floodplains are dynamic. Shifting from the
impact of development, weather patterns, and topographical
changes, flood maps must be up-to-date, accurate, and based on
the best available science.
We support the envisioned Flood Mapping Advisory Council to
develop new standards for flood insurance rate maps that will
incorporate true risk, be graduated, and reflect realities on
the ground, both man-made and natural.
The direction at FEMA that implements the new protocols is
also critical. The council and the development of new mapping
standards should not, and will not, delay the ongoing FEMA map
modernization efforts. That program is critical to the long-
term fiscal viability of the program.
We appreciate that, unlike previous legislation, the bill
does not automatically delay the implementation of new maps or
slow walk rate increases. However, the draft legislation could
delay or undercut new maps by giving the administrator
authority to suspend flood insurance purchase requirements for
newly mapped Special Flood Hazard Areas.
Insulating people from the changes related to the maps on
paper does not change the geological realities. Their property
is at risk.
There are some troubling expansions in the draft. One is
the creation of a new insurance product for business
interruption, and another, the loss of use of a personal
residence. Another would enable coverage limits to annually
increase by some inflationary measure.
With the flood insurance program so heavily in debt, it
does not make sense to expand the coverage provided.
TCS supports the privatization study called for in the
legislation and encourages FEMA to pursue the private risk
management initiatives. Also, FEMA should be authorized to
develop a catastrophic reserve.
Communities and individuals should be helped to reduce
their flood vulnerability, including stronger standards for
floodplain management and mitigation.
On balance, the draft legislation is a good step forward to
reform the troubled Flood Insurance Program. We look forward to
working with the committee and Congress to move the program in
the right direction and off the backs of taxpayers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis can be found on page
67 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sullivan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY SULLIVAN, CHAIR, COMMITTEE ON FLOOD
INSURANCE, THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS (NAR), AND
BROKER/OWNER, SULLIVAN REALTY

Mr. Sullivan. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez,
and subcommittee members. Thank you for inviting me to testify
today regarding legislation to reform the National Flood
Insurance Program.
My name is Terry Sullivan. I am the designated broker of
Sullivan Realty in Spokane, Washington. I have been active with
the National Association of REALTORS for the last 17 years of
my 40-year career as a REALTOR.
Currently, I serve as chair of NAR's Land Use Committee. I
am honored to represent the views of more than 1.1 million
REALTORS engaged in all aspects of residential and commercial
real estate.
As you know, flooding claims more lives and property than
any other natural disaster in the United States. It happens
anywhere, along rivers where snow melts or rain falls, as well
as the coastlines. Without the National Flood Insurance
Program, 5.6 million home and business owners across the United
States would not have access to affordable flood insurance.
Since the year 2000, the program has averted $16 billion in
property loss in the 21,000 communities where flood insurance
is required. In short, the program saves taxpayers money.
Chairwoman Biggert, thank you for your leadership and for
drafting the legislation to reauthorize the NFIP for 5 years.
This would end the current stop-gap approach that has led to
nine extensions and five lapses in the program since 2008. A 5-
year reauthorization would provide needed certainty for the
real estate markets to recover from the longest recession since
the Great Depression.
The many extensions and shut-downs have immeasurably
undermined real estate and investor confidence. Just one of the
lapses delayed or cancelled more than 47,000 home sales in June
of 2010 alone.
We are pleased to see the bill would add coverage options
for business interruption and loss of residential use. Coverage
which has been updated since 1994 would be indexed for
inflation.
Finally, the bill would ensure that repetitive loss
properties have an insurance rate that reflects their loss
history, a provision we strongly support.
All of these reforms will encourage participation, increase
the funds for NFIP, help property owners recover from flooding,
and decrease future Federal assistance when underinsured
properties suffer flood loss.
While we understand the need for tough reforms to
strengthen the program long-term, we remain deeply concerned
about provisions to return to a time when taxpayers relied on
private insurers to administer the program. It did not work
then, and it would not work now.
Madam Chairwoman, this is HUD's Federal Register notice
from 1977. It provides the history of NFIP and how we got to
the government program we have today. With your permission, I
would like to have it included in the record along with my
written statement.
NAR is strongly opposed to the private risk initiatives or
bills, including H.R. 435, to end the NFIP.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you.
The bottom line is the private market will charge too much.
Today, the 4 companies that write only 200,000 private policies
would have to ramp up by 3,000 percent to the NFIP's 5.6
million current policies. The private insurance markets simply
cannot guarantee either affordability or availability of flood
insurance.
In conclusion, NAR believes that Congress should reform the
program, not end it.
Once again, on behalf of the entire membership of the
National Association of REALTORS, thank you for providing us
this opportunity to share our views on a vital program, and I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan can be found on
page 137 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you very much.
And now, Mr. Houldin?

STATEMENT OF SPENCER HOULDIN, CHAIR, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS
COMMITTEE, INDEPENDENT INSURANCE AGENTS AND BROKERS OF AMERICA
(IIABA), AND PRESIDENT, ERICSON INSURANCE

Mr. Houldin. Good morning, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking
Member Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Spencer Houldin, and I am pleased to be here
today on behalf of the Independent Insurance Agents and Brokers
of America, known as the Big ``I,'' to present our
association's perspective on extension and reform of NFIP.
I am the president of Ericson Insurance, a second
generation insurance agency with offices in Connecticut and New
York.
Since 2008, I have served as chairman of the Government
Affairs Committee for the Big ``I,'' and have represented the
State of Connecticut on the Big ``I's'' board since 2006.
The Big ``I'' is the Nation's oldest and largest trade
organization. An association of independent insurance agents
and brokers, we represent a national network of more than
300,000 agents, brokers and employees.
Many of these agents serve as a sales force for NFIP,
working with the Write Your Own companies. It is from this
unique vantage point that we understand the capabilities and
challenges of the insurance market when it comes to insuring
against flood risks.
We think this hearing is especially timely, in light of
severe storms and flooding that are currently occurring in the
Northeast and this morning's events on the West Coast. In fact,
my firm fielded nearly 75 calls this week when clients
experienced water in their homes up in Connecticut.
We commend the subcommittee for looking at this very
important issue.
The Big ``I'' believes that the NFIP provides a vital
service to people and places that have been hit hard by natural
disaster. The private insurance industry has been and continues
to be largely unable to underwrite flood insurance, because of
the catastrophic nature of these losses.
Therefore, the NFIP is virtually the only way for people to
protect against the loss of their home or business due to flood
damage.
Prior to the introduction of this program in 1968, the only
financial remedy available to consumers after flooding was
Federal disaster assistance. Since then, the NFIP has filled
the private market void and created a reliable safety net.
It is also important to note that for 2 decades, up until
the 2005 hurricane season, the NFIP was self-supporting.
With that said, we do recognize that the program is far
from perfect, and calls for Congress to shore up its financial
situation.
For this reason, the Big ``I'' is very encouraged by
Chairwoman Biggert's draft legislation, the Flood Insurance
Reform Act of 2011. In the past, the Big ``I'' has released a
12-point plan to modernize the flood program, and we are happy
to see that a number of these recommendations have been
incorporated in the proposed legislation.
The first of these is a long-term reauthorization, which we
strongly support. As you know, in recent years Congress has
relied on numerous short-term extensions. Last year alone, the
NFIP expired on three separate occasions, only to be
retroactively extended by Congress each time.
While the Big ``I'' is grateful for this action, we
strongly believe that long-term extension is critical to
provide marketplace stability.
Additionally, for many years the Big ``I'' has asked
Congress to begin phasing out subsidies found in the program.
We are pleased that Chairwoman Biggert's draft legislation
addresses this for many properties.
The Big ``I'' welcomes and supports Chairwoman Biggert's
ideas on phasing out subsidies for commercial building, second
and vacation homes, homes experiencing significant damage or
improvements, repetitive loss properties, and homes sold to new
owners.
Additionally, the Big ``I'' welcomes the draft
legislation's proposal to increase the amount FEMA can raise
premiums in any given year. Currently, FEMA can only increase a
premium a maximum of 10 percent on a property. The draft
legislation would propose to increase this to 20 percent, which
would allow the program to move even more properties towards
actuarial rates.
The Big ``I'' is also pleased that the draft legislation
has chosen to modernize NFIP by increasing maximum coverage
limits by indexing them for inflation, and by allowing FEMA to
offer the purchase of optional business interruption and
additional living expense coverage. The inclusion of optional
business interruption coverage is particularly important to Big
``I'' members and their commercial clients, because it
reimburses them for lost income due to their inability to
operate due to flood loss.
As I speak, we have a popular rib restaurant in my town
that has been shut down since Monday. Their property was
flooded, as was the road in front of their business. They are
losing thousands of dollars a day in revenue. But still, their
normal expenses, including payroll and mortgage, continue.
It is an uninsurable loss today, and one that is
detrimental to a small business. With another 2 inches of rain
last night, there is a good chance they will not be open for
another week.
The Big ``I'' also supports strongly the option for a
consumer to purchase additional living expenses. If their home
is not habitable due to a flood loss, they need funds to
provide alternative living arrangements.
In closing, the Big ``I'' is very pleased that the
subcommittee is conducting today's hearing, and appreciative of
the opportunity to testify. Adopting the reforms found in the
draft legislation would help make the NFIP more actuarially
sound and more effective at serving both consumers and
taxpayers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Houldin can be found on page
74 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Houldin.
Mr. Nutter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANKLIN W. NUTTER, PRESIDENT, REINSURANCE
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (RAA)

Mr. Nutter. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. My name is Frank
Nutter, and I am president of the Reinsurance Association of
America.
Reinsurance is critical to insurers and State-based
property insurance programs to manage the cost of natural
catastrophe risk. It is a risk management tool for insurance
companies to improve their capacity and their financial
performance, enhance financial security and reduce financial
volatility.
It can serve the same function for the National Flood
Insurance Program.
As it currently operates, the NFIP is not an insurance
program. But it should be, and it can be.
The fuller application of risk-based rates and an
appropriate risk-bearing role for the private reinsurance
sector would transform the program. By doing so, the NFIP could
also achieve the goal of protecting taxpayers and the Treasury.
It is a commonly held belief that a private sector risk-
bearing role in the NFIP is unachievable. On behalf of our
community, the reinsurance community, we would challenge that
suggestion.
We commend the Chair's discussion draft regarding
protecting taxpayers with risk-based rates. The subsidized
rates were introduced early in the program as an inducement for
communities to come into the program, and it was a successful
strategy. But the number of subsidized properties has actually
risen in recent years.
In addition, the subsidized rates have facilitated the
development of environmentally sensitive coastal areas,
including those at high risk to flood loss, and compromised the
use of the natural floodplain to mitigate damage.
Repetitive loss properties, according to the GAO, account
for only 1 percent of the policies, but 25 to 30 percent of the
losses.
In addition, statutory caps on rates may be popular with
beneficiaries, but the caps distort risk assessment by
builders, local officials, property buyers, and policyholders.
And they increase the cross-subsidy from low- or no-risk
persons and taxpayers to those living in high-risk flood areas.
And again, we commend the draft in this regard.
The NFIP should plan for extreme events, but does not. FEMA
represents that 75 percent of its policies are actuarially
sound. Sound insurance pricing would reject this
representation, because the NFIP does not incorporate a
catastrophe factor for infrequent yet severe loss years, but
relies on the average annual loss model for its pricing.
This pricing model is ill-suited for natural catastrophe
risk, whether it be in the private or public sector. Because of
the pricing model, the NFIP has neither adequately planned for,
nor priced for extreme event years.
The GAO points out the program should operate like an
insurance entity. If it did, it could reduce or eliminate
taxpayer exposure to future debt by laying off risk to the
private sector through reinsurance and catastrophe bonds.
The private sector role in the program now is appropriate,
and it relates to the Write Your Own program, which has
provided the NFIP with a valuable marketing arm and
administrative capability.
For a variety of reasons, a private insurance market for
flood risk has not developed. We believe, however, that a
private reinsurance risk-bearing role for the NFIP can be
established, and that the NFIP can address its volatility and
extreme event exposure and reduce the dependence on taxpayers
and the Federal debt through risk transfer to reinsurance and
private capital markets.
Both financial sectors have significant capacity and
believe flood risk can be reinsured or transferred. Such a
transfer introduces a private sector rating verification model
into the NFIP, thus providing an incentive and guidepost for
risk-based rates.
We have offered two approaches to do this. The first is a
traditional, transactional reinsurance approach. As with most
State property insurance plans, fair plans and windstorm pools,
nearly all private insurers address their volatility through
the purchase of reinsurance.
As with these other governmental entities and private
sector insurers, the NFIP would work with modelers,
underwriters, and brokers to provide the market with an
evaluation of its risk portfolio, determine what types of risk
are amenable to risk transfer, and then seek coverage in the
private sector.
Should the NFIP find the bids unattractive on a price or
coverage basis, it would not go forward with the placement. The
NFIP, therefore, would be in the same place as it is now--
dependent on public debt. If the placement were successful, the
private sector would provide financial relief to taxpayers.
As is reflected in the discussion draft, no study is
necessary to evaluate this alternative, but it can be pursued
at this time with a full opportunity to evaluate proposals.
The second option that we have highlighted exists in the
current draft, and that is the reauthorization of a reinsurance
pool.
Section 4011 of the NFIP legislation adopted in 1968
provides for the Director of FEMA to encourage and arrange for
appropriate financial participation and risk-bearing by
insurance companies, to assist insurers to form, associate or
join a pool, on a voluntary basis, for the purpose of assuming,
on such terms as may be agreed upon, financial responsibility
as will enable such insurers, with Federal financial
assistance, to assume a reasonable portion of responsibility
for claims under the Flood Insurance Program.
The provisions of the statute authorizing the pool have
long been dormant, yet they remain a viable mechanism for the
creation of another pool, this time to reinsure the National
Flood Insurance Program, capitalized by those insurers that
voluntarily wish to provide capacity. The Director and those
participating insurers would enter into negotiations over the
risk-sharing formula, and could individually subscribe capacity
on an annual basis.
This proposal does not change the Write Your Own program.
FEMA remains the insurer of the flood risk at the consumer
level. But it transfers flood risk from taxpayers to the
private sector, and allows those insurers that wish to
participate in the risk to do so through a standing facility.
These two approaches--a traditional property catastrophe
reinsurance program and/or the reauthorization of the standing
facility--are both complementary and not exclusive to each
other. The existing statutory authority may well be sufficient
to move forward without delay.
We look forward to working with the committee and the
Congress on the reform to the Flood Insurance Program, and the
reintroduction of a private sector reinsurance role in it.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nutter can be found on page
102 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you very much.
Ms. Parrillo, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SANDRA G. PARRILLO, CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANIES (NAMIC), AND PRESIDENT AND CEO OF
THE PROVIDENCE MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY

Ms. Parrillo. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Biggert,
Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.
My name is Sandy Parrillo, and I am president and chief
executive officer of the Providence Mutual Fire Insurance
Company, one of our Nation's oldest insurance companies.
We began as a small fire insurance mutual in 1800, and
today provide personal and commercial insurance protection to
more than 65,000 policyholders in New England, New York, and
New Jersey. The Providence Mutual employs approximately 75
individuals, is represented by more than 300 independent
agents, and is based in Warwick, Rhode Island.
I am here today as chairman of the National Association of
Mutual Insurance Companies to present our views on the National
Flood Insurance Program. NAMIC represents more than 1,400
property and casualty insurance companies ranging from small
farm mutuals, to State and regional insurance carriers, to
large national writers.
NAMIC members serve the insurance needs of millions of
consumers and businesses in every town and city across America.
Collectively, NAMIC members cover more than 50 percent of all
homes in the country.
I would like to begin by thanking the committee for its
hard work on producing a discussion draft of proposed reform
legislation. We are encouraged that the draft reflects the
input of many of the relevant stakeholders, and has the stated
goal of protecting taxpayers and policyholders.
It is our opinion that the NFIP is in serious need of
reform. In order to achieve this goal, NAMIC believes that the
best option is optimizing the current framework by implementing
significant reforms that address the existing weaknesses.
The program's flaws are significant. Subsidized premiums
have been charged on a non-actuarial basis. Some estimates of
the subsidies are as high as 60 percent.
This has been incentivized poor land use and over-
development near desirable waterfront locations. In addition,
the take-up rates for those in need of coverage remain
extremely low. Under 30 percent of those who need flood
insurance purchase it.
The NFIP was created in 1968, because of the absence of a
viable private flood insurance market. The unconventional
nature of flooding makes it virtually impossible to pool risk
among a large enough population for private insurers to be able
to offer a viable and affordable insurance product.
The public-private partnership that eventually emerged
between the Federal Government and the Write Your Own companies
has the potential to offer an answer to a seemingly insoluble
problem.
We believe that, with the right mix of reforms, the program
can begin to address the problems of adverse selection, moral
hazard and financial instability that has plagued it in the
past.
We recommend a package of key reforms designed to achieve
five essential objectives.
First, to charge actuarially sound rates. The NFIP must
begin charging risk-based rates, if it is to have any chance of
being a solvent program. These rates should reflect the true
cost of providing coverage. Under the current structure, there
is no chance that the program will ever repay the sizable debt
it accumulated in 2005.
We recognize that the move to actuarially sound rates is
likely to be painful, due to the higher premiums that will have
to be charged in some instances. For those property owners who
need assistance, flood vouchers might be offered on a means-
tested basis to help mitigate the cost.
However, any subsidies that the government believes are
necessary must be independent of the NFIP and fully
transparent. Subsidies cannot continue to be hidden within the
insurance mechanism. And homeowners should be fully aware of
the real risks and costs of where they live.
Second, update and improve the accuracy of flood maps.
Flood maps must be updated based on the best available science,
with the goal of ensuring that NFIP flood maps accurately
reflect the risks caused by flooding. Putting off the adoption
of updated flood maps does a disservice to those citizens,
property owners, rescue workers and land development officials
living and working in flood-prone areas, who, in the end, risk
losing their homes and their lives. We recommend adopting a
non-political, balanced and credible process for updating the
maps.
Third, to improve the take-up rates. Insurance is
inherently dependent upon the law of large numbers. Thus, the
insurance mechanism works best and is the most affordable when
everyone participates in the program.
Currently, only 20 to 30 percent of individuals exposed to
flood hazards actually purchase insurance. The program must
take steps to increase these numbers dramatically in order to
properly pool the flood risk and achieve financial soundness.
Fourth, discourage repetitive loss properties. According to
the CBO, there are currently 71,000 NFIP-insured repetitive
loss properties, which represent just 1.2 percent of the NFIP
portfolio, but account for 25 to 30 percent of the total claims
paid between 1978 and 2008.
Something must be done to deal with this issue. Quite
simply, American taxpayers should not be forced to subsidize a
small subset of NFIP policyholders who continue to rebuild in
high-risk areas.
Finally, improve the management and correct operational
inefficiencies. The NFIP must have quality information
regarding its policyholders if it is to operate efficiently. We
must develop and institute clear procedures for monitoring
contracts and claims records, effectively communicating with
lenders, and triggering enforcement actions for non-compliance
with mandatory purchase requirements.
We believe these reforms are necessary and achievable. I
have included more detailed policy proposals for each of our
five key objectives in my written testimony. And as the process
moves forward, we stand ready to work with the subcommittee to
address the insufficiencies in the current program.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Parrillo can be found on
page 112 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And Ms. Jallick, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DONNA M. JALLICK, ON BEHALF OF THE PROPERTY
CASUALTY INSURERS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (PCI), AND VICE
PRESIDENT, FLOOD OPERATIONS, HARLEYSVILLE INSURANCE

Ms. Jallick. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member
Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the excellent draft legislation on flood
reform. The proposed changes address many of the major flaws in
the current program.
Thank you also for considering it in a timely fashion; 5.6
million people depend on this program to protect their homes
and businesses. And thank you for the bipartisan leadership you
have demonstrated on flood reform over the last several years.
My name is Donna Jallick. I am the vice president of flood
operations for Harleysville Insurance, one of the largest Write
Your Own flood insurance private partners. Harleysville is also
a member of the Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America and the Write Your Own Flood Insurance Coalition.
I have been working with the Federal flood program for 15
years. Last year, Congress allowed the NFIP to expire 4 times
for a total of 53 days. And there have been 10 short-term
extensions in less than 3 years. Lapses hurt consumers,
millions of real estate professionals, and our business.
Private Write Your Own insurers have been leaving the
program in droves, in part because of the lack of stability in
the program and the confusion for consumers. When the program
lapses, insurers have to decide whether to keep collecting
flood premiums and whether we can afford to put our name behind
a program that may or may not be continued in the same form by
Congress. It creates significant liability and vulnerabilities
for all stakeholders.
The lack of program stability also makes it difficult to
administer the program and to explain it to consumers. Our
disconcerting message must be: buy flood insurance, because we
think the program will be renewed. And we have a guess as to
what we think the rates might be when it gets extended
retroactively.
We already require agents to spend months training to
understand and explain the NFIP to consumers. Lapses and short-
term extensions increase this expense.
Five years is a good proposed extension.
The available amount of protection for consumers under the
flood program has not been increased for 17 years. The draft
would index flood coverage for inflation. That is a good start.
Federal flood rates, which are currently a fraction of what
the private market would consider, even for low-risk
properties, would be appropriately increased under the draft
legislation.
Rates for coverage in many high-loss and environmentally
sensitive areas would particularly be increased closer to
expected loss costs. This approach still leaves a government
subsidy, but is a very good start toward reducing that subsidy,
and it is a proposal that we strongly support.
We also applaud the proposal to consumers by adding living
expenses and business interruption to the available coverage.
People forced from their homes need immediate cash for shelter.
The proposal makes Federal flood coverage more closely near
private coverages that protect individuals and business
consumers, and helps them move forward quickly.
Just as important as the good provisions in the bill is
streamlined operations. The number of private insurance
partners serving consumers in the flood program has dropped
from 150 to 70 that are actively writing flood insurance over
the last 6 years.
While Harleysville has worked very hard to provide our
policyholders with affordable protection, for many insurers,
program revenues have been outweighed by growing administrative
costs. They are leaving the NFIP.
The draft does not add too many additional requirements to
the NFIP. Please keep the bill streamlined to ensure the
program will remain standing.
Thank you for the bipartisan committee's draft, which
addresses the critical vulnerabilities in the NFIP, and will
greatly strengthen flood protection for millions of consumers.
The Write Your Own flood partners support you, and hope that
you will be able to keep a straightforward bill with long-term
extension and no further lapses.
Harleysville and PCI stand ready to be of any assistance
desired.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jallick can be found on page
80 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And finally, Mr. Rutenberg for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BARRY RUTENBERG, FIRST VICE CHAIRMAN, THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF HOME BUILDERS (NAHB)

Mr. Rutenberg. Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member
Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Barry Rutenberg, and I am a home builder from
Gainesville, Florida, and first vice chairman of the board of
directors of the National Association of Home Builders.
NAHB commends the subcommittee for addressing reform of the
NFIP. Builders strongly support a 5-year program
reauthorization as the best way to provide a steady foundation
on which to build program revisions and ensure that NFIP is
efficient and effective.
For several years, NFIP short-term extensions have created
a high level of uncertainty in the program, causing severe
problems in already troubled housing markets. During these
periods, there were delays or canceled closings due to the
inability to obtain flood insurance for mortgages. Often, new
home construction was shut down or postponed due to the lack of
flood insurance approval, adding unneeded delays and job
losses.
NAHB believes this reauthorization will ensure the Nation's
real estate markets operate smoothly and without delay.
The availability and affordability of flood insurance gives
local governments the ability to plan and zone their
communities, including floodplains. These zoning standards
allow homeowners the opportunity to live in a home and location
of their choice, even when the home lies in or near a
floodplain.
Home builders depend on the NFIP to be annually
predictable, universally available, and fiscally viable. The
NFIP creates a strong partnership with States and localities by
requiring them to enact and enforce floodplain management
measures, including building requirements designed to ensure
occupant safety and reduce future flood damage.
The partnership depends upon the availability of up-to-date
flood maps and a financially stable, Federal component, and
allows local communities to direct development to the needs of
constituents and consumers.
Unfortunately, the losses and devastation suffered with the
2004 and 2005 hurricanes and the 2008 Midwest floods have
severely taxed and threatened the solvency of the NFIP.
While these tragedies have exposed shortcomings in the
NFIP, we believe that reforms to the program must not be an
overreaction to these historic circumstances. The NFIP is not
just about flood insurance premiums and pay-outs, but the broad
program that guides future development and mitigates future
losses.
A financially stable NFIP is in all of our interests, and
Congress' efforts have the potential to greatly impact housing
affordability and the ability of local communities to control
their growth and development options.
A key tool in the NFIP's implementation, the right maps, or
FIRMs, have been recognized by Congress to be inaccurate and
out-of-date. FEMA has been successful in digitizing most of the
FIRMs, yet many are not using the updated data. Because of
this, large discrepancies remain.
We believe continued congressional oversight is necessary.
We commend the proposal to establish the Technical Mapping
Advisory Council, and hope it will foster more collaboration.
Beyond fixing the maps, NAHB also supports increasing
coverage limits to better reflect replacement costs and
offering various insurance options for consumers, and even a
possible minimum deductible increase.
The NFIP must continue to allow State and local
governments--not the Federal Government--to dictate local land
use policies and make decisions on how private property may be
used. FEMA must also better coordinate its activities with
other Federal agencies who have oversight of other Federal
programs.
In my written statement, I discuss FEMA's recent
requirements of ESA compliance for certain property owners.
Additionally, before any reforms are enacted to change the
numbers, location or types of structures required to be covered
by flood insurance, FEMA should first demonstrate that the
resulting impacts on property owners, communities, and local
land use are more than offset by the increased premiums
generated and the hazard mitigation steps taken.
NAHB urges Congress to ensure construction requirements
remain tied to the 100-year standard. Should Congress change
the Special Flood Hazard Area from a 100-year standard to a
250-year standard, it would require more homeowners to purchase
flood insurance and would impose mandatory construction
requirements that increase costs and impact resale values
significantly.
This would also affect FEMA by requiring modifications to
ordinances and policies, all at a time when FEMA has admitted
its lack of resources to provide current services.
I thank you for today. NAHB looks forward to working with
the committee on this valuable program.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rutenberg can be found on
page 122 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Unfortunately, if you look at the clock and you see those
two white dots up there, that means that we have votes, and we
have about 7 minutes left for voting. These Floor votes may
take 45 minutes to an hour, but we do want to have the
opportunity to ask questions. I hope all the members will come
back, briefly.
So, the subcommittee stands in recess and will convene
immediately following the Floor votes.
[recess]
Chairwoman Biggert. The committee will reconvene. Now, we
will get started, so that we do not delay you any longer than
necessary.
And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nutter, first, do you believe that the private
reinsurance market has a willingness to provide reinsurance of
the NFIP's flood risk?
And second, to put together a reinsurance program for NFIP
to place in the reinsurance market, what data would be
appropriate for FEMA to provide? And is that really necessary?
Mr. Nutter. Madam Chairwoman, the reinsurance market is
very interested in exploring this with the NFIP. The
reinsurance market routinely provides reinsurance for insurance
companies, but it also provides it for other government-related
programs. The California Earthquake Authority buys something
like $3 billion a year in reinsurance capacity. State wind
pools do.
So, there clearly is an appetite and a desire to look at
catastrophe risk. It is a common use of reinsurance.
I will supply for the committee's staff, if you would like,
a more detailed set of metrics that would be appropriate for
this.
And what I would say is that you would expect that the
program, working with the private sector, would want
information related to the types of properties that are
insured, the insured values, any mitigation in the area--the
kind of things that even the layman would understand would be
necessary to fully evaluate the risk--and then to make a
recommendation to FEMA and the NFIP about how to structure a
program that would be successful when placed in the market.
Chairwoman Biggert. Please submit for the record the data
that is--
Mr. Nutter. Thank you. I will.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Thank you.
Mr. Ellis, in reviewing the subcommittee's discussion
draft, can you elaborate for us how it would reduce the burden
on taxpayers? And can you provide us with specific
recommendations to improve it in this regard?
Mr. Ellis. Sure. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
No, we definitely have. I think this bill is a very
constructive start in this process. And certainly, the areas
where we are going to allow the rates to actually increase, one
is that it would go from a 10 percent maximum annual increase
to a 20 percent maximum annual increase.
Also, the fact that it increases the deductible for pre-
flood insurance rate map properties to $2,000 is something that
would help protect taxpayers and reduce some of the subsidy for
pre-FIRM properties.
And then, lastly, as you start moving to the special flood
hazard properties and essentially the provisions to try to
reduce the subsidies by allowing the rates to increase 50
percent in the first year and then 20 percent each year after
that--all of those factors really start moving the program in a
much more actuarially sound--or much more fiscally sound, and
off of the backs of taxpayers.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And then, for anyone who cares to answer, why has there
been a decrease in the number of companies participating in
NFIP? Do you think that any primary insurance companies would
ever be willing to include flood insurance in the basic
homeowner's policy with regard to properties outside the 100-
year floodplain?
Ms. Jallick. I would certainly be willing to take that
question.
Chairwoman Biggert. Ms. Jallick?
Ms. Jallick. The main reason carriers have been leaving the
National Flood Insurance Program is, number one, the profit
margin is very slim.
We receive approximately 30 percent for administering this
program. Out of that 30 percent, we pay our agents 20 percent.
We then pay State premium taxes of 2 percent, which leaves us 8
percent to manage this program and to pay for all of our costs.
Not only that, the program is very, very technical in
nature. And a lot of carriers have felt that, because of the
complexity of the program, they do not really have the
expertise to remain in the program.
Because of the litigation that has been ensuing over the
last few years, they feel like the exposure that they are at
due to the litigation is not worth remaining in the program.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
At this time, I yield back the balance of my time.
And Mr. Sherman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I thank the chairwoman.
I also thank my colleague from Los Angeles for letting me
ask questions first.
I think it is in the national interest that we have people
insured. You can do this by mandates, or subsidies, or by
Federal involvement. Or you can sit back and watch them be
uninsured.
The reason that we want to see them insured is apparent to
those who are soft-hearted. When the disaster happens, you hate
to see people uninsured. No one has ever accused me of being
soft-hearted.
But if you are hard-hearted, every time we have a major
disaster, we have an extraordinary or supplemental
appropriation that comes right out of the Federal budget
increases the deficit. And so, it is in the government's
interest to make sure people are insured.
That being said, we are here to talk about flood insurance,
and I represent a desert. I look forward to seeing how this
program can be expanded or used as a model for earthquake
insurance. I represent, for example, Northridge.
So, I am anxious to see this program work effectively, even
if it costs the Federal Government something to make sure that
people have insurance, both in terms of actuarial cost, or in
terms of the Federal Government being involved, providing
capital at its lower rates, etc.
You may say, that is Federal Government involvement we
should not have. But I have been here a while. And every time
there is a disaster, all of a sudden, nobody is talking about
the deficit. Nobody is talking about the growth of the Federal
Government. Everybody is talking about how to help people who
are uninsured.
Ms. Jallick, as you know, the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has been going through the process of updating the
floodplain maps. And there have been questions about the
process of developing the maps, and the impact they will have
on local communities.
Some homeowners who have never had to buy flood insurance
will now have to do so. And homeowners who are currently
mandated to buy coverage may not have to in the future, causing
confusion in a lot of areas.
What would you do to fix the mapping issues? And do you
have any thoughts on why the floodplain remapping has been a
problem?
Ms. Jallick. That is actually a very good question. And I
feel your pain. And I feel the pain of all of the property
owners who have been moved to a Special Flood Hazard Area.
I think that this is something that is being addressed in
the bill. And it does need to be explored, because there are
definitely areas that have been removed from the floodplain
that should still be in it.
Mrs. McCarthy spoke earlier this morning--she is from Long
Island--about structures sitting right on water that were
removed from the floodplain, hers being one of them. There are
definitely areas for improvement for risk mapping.
I feel that the council that has been put together that is
mentioned in this bill is an excellent start. And there are
many experts who will be able to properly address this issue
and lend us all some insight as to how we can come up with
better risk mapping than what we currently have.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
I now have a question for the record that I would like
anyone to respond to after some thought when you go home
tonight or tomorrow, or until the record closes. And that is:
What should we be doing to make sure that people have the
earthquake insurance that they need, both to help them as
individuals, to make sure that lenders are willing to loan?
You can tell people not to build in a floodplain. You
cannot tell California not to build near an earthquake fault,
unless you want to be a 49-State country.
So, what do we do on earthquake coverage? I would like to
hear your considered views for the record on that, if any of
you think you can provide some enlightenment.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Westmoreland, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, ma'am.
Most of you all are in the business world. How long do you
think it would have taken you all to sit down and try to come
up with a remedy for losing $18 billion in about 4 years? Would
you all have thought about that anywhere down the road?
We are just a little late, I guess, in trying to do this. I
think, since 2005, this program has gone in the hole about $18
billion. I think it has paid off a couple of billion since
then.
The government does not seem to sense that losing money is
a problem. But it is to all the taxpayers of this country, and
so, we have to do something to remedy this. But we do not want
to do anything that does not make sense.
We have two speeds up here: do-nothing; and knee-jerk. And
too many of our solutions come from the knee-jerk type thing.
But Mr. Ellis, I wanted to ask you, is there any type of
program that any of the environmental groups or conservation
groups have about going in and buying some of this property
that may have had a total loss that is adjacent to a wetlands?
Or is there any type of program that you all are aware of, or
that you all are thinking about trying to create that would do
that?
Mr. Ellis. Speaking for SmarterSafer, the coalition, we are
a budget group. But there are environmental groups in that
coalition. And certainly, there have been interests both after
major disasters to purchase properties and buy out the owners,
and then--at the value the home was prior to the disaster--and
then using that for conservation or other things along those
lines.
There was a separate program that was created years ago
called Challenge 21, that was looking at that.
So, I would certainly think that that tool and mitigation
are certainly appropriate areas for FEMA and for this program
to get involved in, and actually could pay dividends in the
long run.
Mr. Nutter. Mr. Westmoreland?
Mr. Westmoreland. Yes.
Mr. Nutter. Do you mind if I add to that?
The current program, the National Flood Insurance Program,
does have funds allocated for mitigating property losses,
including purchasing properties that are repetitive loss
properties. And then, the Pre-Disaster Mitigation program that
FEMA has does allocate money as a percentage of the overall
payments for disaster mitigation for just this purpose.
I think our view would be that maybe FEMA has not been as
aggressive as it could be in utilizing those funds, and we
certainly would encourage the Congress to consider enhancing
those funds to achieve the goal that you mentioned.
If I could also answer the comment--it was not really a
question--you asked at the beginning about planning?
I represent the reinsurance industry. And nearly all
insurance companies and most State insurance plans, like the
California Earthquake Authority and others, do, in fact, plan
for the outlier year, the severe loss, infrequent year, by
buying reinsurance to protect them against that. And that is
what we are recommending that the flood insurance program do,
as well.
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay. Talking about the repetitive
losses, I think it is 2 percent of the policies are for the
repetitive, but 25 percent of the losses is on the repetitive.
What would some of the insurance companies' idea be for
remedying that, when 2 percent of your premiums is covering 25
percent of your losses?
Ms. Parrillo. Congressman, may I answer that?
I represent a primary insurer. And I would like to remind
us of the phrase and the old adage that ``once bitten, twice
shy.'' And this is what has happened with repetitive loss
properties.
Looking at it as a primary insurer, if we insured flood
losses on a property, and some natural disaster came in and the
property was destroyed, if the property was rebuilt in the same
location with no mitigation, I would be not inclined to insure
that property a second time.
And I would suggest that we need corrections in the
National Flood Insurance Program to do that. We do not want to
allow, to have people rebuild in areas that, under the same
circumstances, will have these repetitive losses. It is simply
not fair to the American taxpayer.
There are folks who wish to do so. If they wish to rebuild
in these areas, they need to be charged actuarially sound
rates. If they want to absorb that risk, they need to pay for
that risk.
They need to pay for it, not the American taxpayer.
Mr. Westmoreland. Yes. I could not agree with you more.
Mr. Rutenberg, I come from a homebuilding background, too.
And a lot of times, you are faced with having a lot that has a
lot of contour to it, let us say. And part of it is in a
floodplain, a 100-year floodplain, or whatever, but the floor
level may be 15 feet above the flood level.
My experience has been that the homeowner still had to buy
flood insurance, even if the floor level was at a level that it
would be impossible to flood. Has that hindered you? Or have
you found that in any of the subdivisions, or whatever, that
you have done business in?
Mr. Rutenberg. Yes, Congressman. We do find that it is an
issue for some people. But other people are willing to say, if
I want to be on this lot--or normally, there is a nice view, or
something else, that they will pay the premium. And we have to
work with our county to build it in a way that will ensure that
it is not a burden in the future.
I think I might, if I could quickly add that, in many of
the new developments that we are doing, in my area we now build
for an 18-inch rain storm event. We have other developments
that have no retention areas whatsoever, or somewhere in the
middle, and we are all paying the same.
And perhaps in the future we should be looking at whether
or not we should be charged based upon the risk. And if you
have that much capacity for stormwater, then maybe that is a
lower risk.
I would also suggest that, if you are looking for things to
do, that we seem to have a few people available to work on
mitigation. And for that 1 to 2 percent, there may be a program
we want to do, a lower interest rate program, or something on
that order, for people to go ahead and modify their homes out
of their own money, spend their money. And that would reduce
the risk to the program.
Mr. Westmoreland. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rutenberg. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Westmoreland. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I would note for the record that one town in Illinois, due
to repetitive loss, moved the town to higher ground. So, I
think there are various ways that we can take care of that.
I would now recognize Ms. Waters of California for 5
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I am sorry that our FEMA representative had to leave, but
certainly had to leave for a good reason. I had a number of
questions that I would have liked to have asked.
Chairwoman Biggert. Maybe we will try and get him back at a
later date.
Ms. Waters. Okay.
Let me talk about my bill, H.R. 1026. It would restore
stability to the Flood Insurance Program by reauthorizing the
program for 5 years. It would also address the impact of new
flood maps by delaying the mandatory purchase requirement for 5
years, then phasing in the actuarial rates for another 5 years
and make further improvements to the program.
That is a little bit different from your bill, Madam
Chairwoman. But I think we are both committed to working to see
how we can find the best solutions.
I would just like to ask the panel--I do not want you to
take sides, but I want to find out--what about the time, 2
years as opposed to 5 years? What do you think makes good sense
and is reasonable, and would help us to get everybody into the
program at the correct rates, and basically help us to
stabilize this program?
Can I get a response from anyone? Give me your thoughts.
Mr. Ellis. Congresswoman Waters, we would be concerned to
have a longer delay, such as is envisioned 5 years, and then
slowing in the rate increase, just because the people are in
the floodplain. We are essentially denying them some of the
information that they are actually in the floodplain. And we
want to give them the tools, and some of that is the rates and
understanding of that.
And so, basically freezing the maps or denying them to go
into place does not really help the communities.
I would much rather pursue an approach, such as in the
draft legislation, that would phase in the rate increase, so it
is not a shock to the system. And then, if there are people who
are unable to pay, who are truly needy, then we should have,
outside the rates, certain subsidies to enable them to purchase
flood insurance.
I think that is a better way to go, Congresswoman, and
something that would be responsible to the taxpayer and to
the--
Ms. Waters. Based, then, over what period of time?
Mr. Ellis. I am amenable to the timeline that is in the
draft legislation. It could be a year that they would--say that
you do not have to do the purchase, and then they extend it for
a year, and a year after that, up to 3 years.
I would rather see briefer and no delays, and just try to
deal with the rates. But I am amenable to that sort of balanced
approach.
Ms. Waters. Anyone else?
What about the question of the cost to the taxpayers with
subsidies?
Mr. Ellis. The subsidies are there right now. We have a
program that is $18 billion in the hole. I certainly think that
we are going to have to deal with this issue to try to have
affordability for insurance for people who are truly needy, and
something that is outside the program.
I am not sure what the costs would necessarily be, but I
think it is important that we get people the accurate maps. And
we have these tools, which some of it is knowing that they are
in the floodplain, or what type of floodplain they are in.
And the second thing is knowing what it costs and what the
true cost of living in harm's way is. And that gives them some
decision-making to deal with about where their home is, or
mitigation measures they could take that would reduce the cost
or reduce their vulnerability.
Ms. Waters. Let me, Madam Chairwoman, just say, in addition
to my concern about the time for phasing in people with the
correct actuarial rates, I am concerned about too many
communities in this country that are improperly, incorrectly
mapped, and the ability of individuals and communities to
oppose the mapping and how we are going to resolve that.
And what impact does that have on the delays that I am
speaking about?
I want the mapping to be as accurate as it possibly can, to
avoid people being in the situation where the mapping is
incorrect, the flood zones that are created or identified
through the mapping, or are not proper.
I just went through one of these in my district where,
luckily, the community got together and just worked very, very
hard, and got it changed. But I do not know how much of that is
out there, and whether or not if we need to also think about
that as we do a delay of getting the program on track.
Chairwoman Biggert. If the gentlelady would yield?
Ms. Waters. Yes, I yield to the Chair.
Chairwoman Biggert. I think that, actually, Congresswoman
McCarthy was here and had very much sort of the same concerns
and some maps that she believed were really mistaken. It
sounded like that. So, this is an issue. And I think the first
panel replied that there is an appeals process that people
should take advantage of.
But you are right. We need to make sure that is correct.
And I think that we have in this draft attempted to address
that issue, and that mandatory purchase requirement would be
suspended for 1 year with the possibility of 2 additional 1-
year suspensions provided that FEMA makes a finding with
respect to the flood risk mapping on a community-by-community
basis.
Ms. Waters. You are talking about when they are in the
appeals process?
Chairwoman Biggert. No, I am talking about what is in--now
I am talking about what is in the draft legislation that we
have been talking about.
Ms. Waters. That deals with the incorrect mapping issue?
Chairwoman Biggert. That is correct. Yes. So, I think that
there is something in there that you will like--
Ms. Waters. Yes, I would like to talk further with you
about it, if I may, because I am told that if you get a study,
that costs money, that individual homeowners can do studies,
and the communities can do studies. But it costs money to do
that.
And I am not so sure--
Chairwoman Biggert. If I might again?
Ms. Waters. Yes.
Chairwoman Biggert. We also have a mapping council in the
bill, so that this can be done, other than having the
communities having to do their own study.
But I do not want to take any more time--
Ms. Waters. Okay. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman from Virginia, our vice
chair, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Welcome. Thank you all again for being here and for helping
us sort through this important matter.
As I said during the first panel, it seems to me our
primary responsibility, or a primary responsibility as we look
at this, is, obviously, trying to figure out how we minimize
the impact to the taxpayer and be good stewards of our
responsibility that way.
And then, I think also it is incumbent upon us in
Washington to not promote policies that create moral hazard.
And obviously, I know that is of great interest to you.
I have a question, maybe for Mr. Ellis, and then maybe Mr.
Houldin and Ms. Parrillo. And Ms. Jallick, I would like to hear
the perspective from your quarter.
But my question is: What is our goal here, and what is
achievable?
Are we able to minimize the impact, if this bill goes
forward? Do you think that this will be effective in minimizing
the impact of subsidies to the taxpayer?
We have heard different figures, $1.3 billion of taxpayer
built-in subsidy, $1.8 billion. And that is obviously on top of
the $18 billion debt that has accrued.
And then, secondly, I think, addressing the issue of moral
hazard, will we be encouraging or discouraging to the maximum
extent possible homeowners from making decisions that not only
threaten their property--and that is, obviously, your concern
as members of the insurance industry who are here, is the
property issue.
But obviously, as we see in Japan, it is not just property.
It is also lives. And so, I was wondering if you could address
kind of the big picture or where we are going with this.
Mr. Ellis. Sure.
Mr. Hurt. And how do we measure our success?
Mr. Ellis. That is always critical, I think, with any
government program, is trying to figure out how to measure
success, Congressman Hurt. And I think that what we are trying
to do, or what we would like to see at Taxpayers for Common
Sense, and then also at SmarterSafer.org, is to move this
program into a sounder fiscal footing.
So, to move it to where first, people actually know the
risk. And part of it is having accurate and up-to-date flood
maps, so that they actually know where they are living, or
buying a home.
Second, that they understand the cost of that risk, that
they are actually purchasing insurance that is commensurate to
the risk that is actuarially sound, so that they have also that
tool, sort of an understanding of where they live. And then
also, how to mitigate or reduce that risk.
And lastly, and very important for our group, is trying to
remove that risk off the back of the taxpayer and putting it
back on to the policyholders where it logically belongs.
And so, I think that, we created this program in 1968, and
we are stuck with it. And there is not a private market--a
large private market anyway--in flood insurance.
We are going to have to deal with this program and try to
move it towards a more actuarially sound basis and also try to
use it as a tool to help people out--not just help them out in
buying flood insurance, but help them out of harm's way--to
give them those tools and that information to reduce their risk
and also reduce the impact on the American taxpayer.
Mr. Houldin. Congressman, I agree with the actuarially
sound concept. I will not go into that further.
But as somebody who sells the policy to the consumer on a
daily basis, I think we actually need to make the program more
attractive, because the more people that we get to buy the
product, the larger the number is, the bigger the risk pool.
And so, one of the components of the draft legislation that
I feel--as somebody who sells to the consumer every day--is
very important is the loss-of-use coverage for the residential
property, where we could actually have some coverage for them
to live elsewhere if there is a flood loss, and the business
interruption on the commercial side.
Because right now, when you are trying to sell this product
to the consumer, there is a lot in the bill--or a lot in the
policy--that a lot of coverage that is not there, that I think
would make it more attractive.
Those components, although we are expanding the policy to
some degree, we can make actuarially sound right off the bat.
And I think that the consumer will find it a much more
attractive program.
Ms. Jallick. I am sorry. Go ahead.
Ms. Parrillo. Thank you, Congressman. There are two things
I would like to address.
First, as a representative of the National Association of
Mutual Insurance Companies, we believe that the program is
necessary. There is not a private market that is available at
this time to be able to insure those properties. But it does
need to be reformed. It does have significant weaknesses.
The first thing I would like to talk about is the take-up
rates. In my testimony, I testified that less than 30 percent
of people who are in those floodplains actually purchase the
insurance.
First of all, they may not purchase it. If they do,
purchasing a new home, they have a federally-backed mortgage,
they are required to have flood insurance. They do, and it
lapses. There need to be penalties there to ensure that does
not happen.
As my colleague here talked about the law of large numbers,
that is what the insurance mechanism is, how it is predicated
on that basis. We need to have enough people in there who will
pay a little, so we will be able to spread the risk across a
larger base. It will keep the prices reasonable and affordable.
The second thing I would like to talk about is the idea of
the actuarially sound rates. And I will take that up. I think
that is an absolute necessity to this program.
And there are two points I would like to make about the
actuarially sound rates. First of all, the NFIP was formed on
the basis, in 1968, of gradually moving toward actuarially
sound rates for all properties in the program. Here we are 40
years later, and we are not close to that.
We need to be able to be disciplined in the program to be
able to get to that point, be it 2 years or 5 years.
Secondly, these subsidized rates, as they are in effect
right now, apply to all properties, to all property owners,
regardless of their ability to pay. If you own a beautiful
property, a waterfront, and you are well established, and you
can well afford to pay for the cost to insure that property for
flood insurance, you are paying the same rate as that
individual who is in a property, perhaps of lesser means.
Maybe they have been there 40 years and they are on a
pension. They are paying the same rate. We feel that is
fundamentally unfair.
So, that is why we are proposing, to move toward
actuarially sound rates should be supported by some type of
means-based testing for those folks--now, again, not through
the Flood Insurance Program. If you bury that quote, that
subsidy in the Flood Insurance Program, the insurance
mechanism, it is hidden to all. It needs to be transparent.
So, it needs to come outside of the Flood Insurance Program
and deal with those individuals who truly need the assistance
of government. And the others who do not, who can pay for it
themselves and choose to live in those properties, they should
absorb the costs themselves.
Ms. Jallick. I would like to comment first on the fact that
I do not feel that we are stuck with the National Flood
Insurance Program. I think we should all be extremely fortunate
that we do have the National Flood Insurance Program.
The National Flood Insurance Program has worked in the
manner that is was designed to work. It was designed to protect
people for a general condition of flooding. The rates were
designed based on an average loss year.
Therefore, when you look at a catastrophe like Katrina, the
bill was never designed to fully make the program actuarially
sound with something like a Katrina.
The NFIP did not fail during Katrina. The levees broke. The
system is not broke.
The most important goal here is for this program to
continue to protect the 5.6 million people who currently have a
flood policy in place. This bill goes a long way towards
reducing the Federal subsidies and the moral hazard, and
addressing lingering concerns, such as mapping, which is a true
concern.
Mr. Nutter. Mr. Hurt, do you mind if I add one more comment
to that about the actuarial rates?
Chairwoman Biggert. One minute.
Mr. Nutter. The program does not include a factor for
catastrophe loss years like 2005, but it should. The reason you
have all this Federal debt is because it does not plan for and
it does not price for all of that.
So, if you want to send the right signal to the
policyholders who live there, but if you also want to protect
taxpayers, you really do need to factor in that rate. Or as I
have suggested on several occasions, the program needs to be
purchasing reinsurance as a way to protect against the outlier
year.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
The gentleman from Missouri is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. I just have one question, Madam Chairwoman.
I disagree with your statement, Ms. Jallick. I think there
were some things broken other than the levees in the Gulf.
Shortly after Katrina, the Chair, Ms. Waters and I, along
with, I think, three other Members, went to the Gulf. We held
hearings in New Orleans and in Biloxi.
Katrina was not partisan. We lost a Republican Senator's
home, and the home of a Democratic Member of the House.
And the thing that I think has to eventually be addressed
is this whole issue of wind. Gene Taylor, Congressman Gene
Taylor, only had his steps remaining on the lot where he lived.
And I guess the question is: How do you determine whether
the house was washed away by the flood, or whether the house
was blown away by the wind?
And it seems to me that what was broken was that it
provided a lot of insurance companies with a way out. They just
declared, you do not have wind insurance, and your house is not
here because of the flood.
It seems to me that is something that has to be repaired,
as secondarily to the repair of the levees.
Ms. Jallick. In 99 percent of the cases, the two adjusters
who are assigned to assess the damage will be able to determine
the difference between wind and water. It is very rare when the
professional adjusters in the field cannot make that
determination.
Adding wind to a policy would just add more debt to the
taxpayers. Whereas this particular bill, I feel very strongly
that it, while not a perfect bill, is a bill that can get
enacted into law--
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. I support the bill. I want to deal with
what I was trying to deal with, which is, we have a problem.
If you are saying that there can be concrete evidence and
proof on whether it was flood waters or wind, why were we
having so many controversies if was so easily determined?
Ms. Jallick. Again, I do believe, 99 percent of the time,
you do have the ability to distinguish between the wind and the
water.
And on a very rare occasion--and again, Katrina is
something that was not foreseen, not expected. And hopefully,
we can take some of the missteps that we feel happened during
Katrina and learn from them, and put things into law going
forward that will help to shore up any type up misconceptions
between the wind and the water.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Ms. Jallick. And the expert council that is designed in
this bill should be able to assist with that, as well.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. Stivers from Ohio is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I would like to thank the witnesses for being here and
sharing your expertise.
It seems to me that we all know that the Flood Insurance
Program has to do a better job of pricing risk, number one. The
flood insurance program also has to--we have to decide how much
risk we want to give the taxpayers, number two, and whether we
want to have the taxpayers have a lot of risk.
The third issue, I think, is how we deal with broader
participation. We need to all recognize that there are people
who live in areas that probably should be participating in the
Flood Insurance Program who are not participating.
And then the fourth issue to me personally is, I think we
need to figure out how we can encourage growth of the private
market over time, not necessarily immediately, and I do not
think it will happen immediately.
I would like to kind of hit those one by one.
And I know that some of your written testimony talks about
pricing risk. I have a real concern about the government's
ability to price risk. It just has shown, not just in the Flood
Insurance Program, but in many programs in many ways, that the
government does not do a very good job of pricing risk.
Do you have any specific recommendations--any of you--that
would help the government do a better job of pricing risk?
Mr. Nutter. Mr. Stivers, Frank Nutter. We represent the
reinsurance market.
And the point that I have made about two suggestions we
have made is that, if you introduce the private reinsurance
market into the program, you have introduced into it the risk
assessment mechanism that the private reinsurance market does,
which it does routinely for catastrophe risk, for earthquakes
and tsunamis, and floods and windstorm.
And I have made two proposals. The first is that the
program actually go into the market and seek to lay off risk
into the reinsurance market on the basis of a data analysis
between the NFIP and appropriate brokers.
And second, there is a pooling mechanism in the existing
legislation that has been dormant for 40 years--35 years. And
while I am not suggesting it be reinstituted, I am suggesting
that it does provide an opportunity for the private sector on a
reinsurance basis to participate through a pool with the
program. And again, it would have that interaction with the
private sector risk pricing, risk assessment mechanism.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you.
And briefly--that was a pretty good answer--does anybody
else have any other ideas, suggestions? Yes?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, Congressman. I would just like to add that
part of it--you are right. Government is never going to be that
good at pricing risk, just simply because it is not good
politics, necessarily. Charging people would actually cost--
Mr. Stivers. Terrible politics--
Mr. Ellis. So, part of the way to guard against that is to
make sure that we do not expand the program, so we do not add
in wind insurance, or we do not actually add in, as has been
suggested and is in the draft, coverage for business
interruption or other areas that could be insured separately,
just because we know that government is inherently flawed in
that.
And so, the more that we expand the program, or even
increase annually the levels that are available in insurance,
we are crowding out the private market, and we are putting the
government potentially more on the hook at not pricing risk
adequately.
So, some of it is just, do not make it worse.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you for that.
Let us talk a little bit about encouraging participation--
and I cannot read your name, I apologize. I know you talked
about the lack of participation.
Are there proposals that would--you could pass a law that
says everybody has to get it. We passed a law in the 1930s that
said nobody could drink--or the 1920s--and people drank. So,
passing a law will not necessarily mean compliance.
What I am curious about is how do we get more compliance of
people who should be buying flood insurance to buy flood
insurance, as opposed to just saying it is mandatory? Which,
obviously, it is maybe a start, or part of it. But I do not
think that alone is the solution.
Ms. Parrillo. I think the bill does a very fine job in
going down the road of ensuring compliance with it. There are
mandatory purchase requirements regarding properties that are
backed by federally-backed mortgages. And there needs to be a
continued enforcement on it.
Within the National Flood Insurance Program, they need to
be able to track better those properties that have flood
insurance, and in the event they allow those policies to lapse,
to be able to institute any type of remedial action or
penalties to ensure that it is done.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. Let me ask you, let us say my house
is paid off. I do not have a mortgage. How do we enforce that?
Ms. Parrillo. I do not think you can enforce that. But I
would suggest that a prudent person would want to protect their
largest financial asset. And that may not be a position for the
National Flood Insurance Program, but one of understanding the
risks that we all have.
And I know my colleagues, as independent agents, will
counsel our clients that the exposures that they have, and to
properly protect those exposures.
Mr. Stivers. Let me let somebody else weigh in, because I
only have a limited number of time. Thank you.
Mr. Houldin. I just wanted to mention that anything that a
consumer wants to purchase, they are going to purchase, if it
is an attractive product to purchase. And right now, the
program has a lot of unattractiveness to it. I hear it every
day.
When I explain the program to a client, it is like, no, I
do not think it is something I need.
I think this bill does a lot towards making the policy and
the coverages much more effective.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am sorry. I am
out of time.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Without objection, Mr. Cleaver is recognized.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you for your generosity, Madam
Chairwoman. This will be very short.
I gave up caffeine for Lent, and so I have a headache.
[laughter]
And I have to get on an airplane. And I have a double
headache, because I am on this wind versus the flood.
Can somebody explain to me what you did to determine
whether a house was blown away or washed away?
Because, as I am sure you know, there were throngs coming
to us about that issue. And as I said, we saw steps remaining,
the only thing remaining--can you measure something on the
cement? Help me, somebody.
Ms. Jallick. If the structure is no longer there, then the
wind and water adjusters are going to work very closely
together and look at the proximity to water lines, perhaps. Was
there a surge that had occurred, which then definitely would be
the cause of loss was water? If there was a tornado, or through
wind-driven rain that it was determined that the house was
destroyed by wind?
But they would pull weather reports. They would do a lot of
investigation to make that determination, call in engineers if
need be.
Quite frankly, there are going to be times when maybe they
cannot make that determination. And at that point, then, we
would expect that the wind and the water carrier would then
split the cost of the damage.
And it is very unfortunate when that happens, but it is
also extremely rare when it happens.
Mr. Cleaver. Not in Katrina.
Ms. Jallick. Very rare.
Mr. Cleaver. Not in Katrina.
Ms. Jallick. But again, Katrina was not a normal event, as
well.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Rutenberg. May I answer that?
Chairwoman Biggert. Who was speaking? Go ahead.
Mr. Rutenberg. You can quite often tell by the construction
and by the date of the construction, because as we have been
evolving the construction techniques and the building codes,
the newer homes are much more protected against wind than the
latter ones. And depending upon the area and the code that it
was built on, there are often very good clues. Then, again,
that goes to the insurance professionals.
You should know from the viability of the NFIP that the
newer houses are being built to much higher standards. And
therefore, the risks are diminished.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
I would like to ask you, any of you who could offer
suggestions, how would Congress structure assistance for
certain homeowners, whether we want to do, say, means-testing
or modest-income homeowners outside of NFIP?
So, if you have a suggestion, if you could submit that for
the record, I would appreciate it.
And as I mentioned earlier, during the coming months, our
subcommittee intends to mark up legislation and implement
several reforms that will improve the financial integrity and
stability of the program. And I think legislation will require
an examination of ways to decrease the role of taxpayers and
increase the role of private markets in flood insurance.
So, more specifically among several provisions, our reform
measure will aim to improve flood maps to a fair and
transparent process, phase in adequate rates for risk, increase
program flexibility to better serve homeowners, and enhance
local communities' ability to enforce building codes.
So, NFIP reforms must enhance the program and protect both
taxpayer and policyholders.
And with that, I would really like to thank all of the
witnesses. I think you really have highlighted a lot of issues
and explained it to a lot of our members who have not been
through flood insurance before. So, this has been very helpful.
I really appreciate it.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:26 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 11, 2011

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
