- OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL HOUSING
FINANCE AGENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 1, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-88

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-629                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania, Vice Chairman          Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          MAXINE WATERS, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JOE BACA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas   JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
December 1, 2011.............................................     1
Appendix:
December 1, 2011.............................................    35

WITNESSES
Thursday, December 1, 2011

DeMarco, Edward J., Acting Director, Federal Housing Finance
Agency.........................................................     7
Haldeman, Charles E., Chief Executive Officer, Freddie Mac.......     6
Williams, Michael J., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Fannie Mae.....................................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
DeMarco, Edward J............................................    36
Haldeman, Charles E..........................................    46
Williams, Michael J..........................................    57

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Neugebauer, Hon. Randy:
Written statement of Federal Housing Finance Agency Inspector
General Steve A. Linick....................................    68
Fincher, Hon. Stephen:
Written responses to questions submitted to Edward J. DeMarco    75
Written responses to questions submitted to Charles E.
Haldeman...................................................    76
Written responses to questions submitted to Michael J.
Williams...................................................    77

OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL HOUSING
FINANCE AGENCY

----------

Thursday, December 1, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:55 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy Neugebauer
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Neugebauer, Fitzpatrick,
Pearce, Posey, Renacci, Canseco, Fincher; Capuano, Waters,
Miller of North Carolina, Himes, and Carney.
Also present: Representatives Miller of California,
Garrett; and Green.
Chairman Neugebauer. This hearing will come to order. We
will have opening statements by each side. We remind all
Members that their entire written statement will be made a part
of the record.
Also, I ask unanimous consent that Mr. Garrett and Mr.
Miller be allowed to sit in with this subcommittee. They are
not members of this subcommittee, but they are members of the
full Financial Services Committee. If there is no objection,
then so ordered.
We will start with opening statements, and I will begin.
This hearing is really about, I think, three things. One is
stopping any wasteful spending that might be going on in the
Enterprises, because about 3 years ago and about $170 billion
ago, the American taxpayers inherited the opportunity to own
two mortgage companies, and they weren't willing investors. And
so, one of the things that we want to make sure of is that we
are being good stewards of their money and their investment;
and more importantly, in the future, of making sure that down
the road, we get the taxpayers out of the mortgage business so
that they are not on the hook.
The second thing is a part of what is going on within the
Enterprises to begin to shrink the footprint that these two
Enterprises have, because as long as these Enterprises, along
with the FHA, dominate the mortgage market, it is going to be
extremely difficult to bring private capital back into the
mortgage market. In fact, today the American taxpayers
basically dominate, are on the hook for almost every mortgage
that is originated in this country. And quite honestly, I think
the American people find that an area that they are not very
interested in.
I think the third thing, too, is what kinds of things are
going on corporately within the entities that would begin to
shrink that footprint so that we do create the space they need,
but, more importantly, looking forward towards an exit
strategy, because long term, I think it has been indicated by
both the Administration and other Members of Congress that we
don't think it is in the best interests of the American
taxpayers to be in this business long term.
We are going to hear testimony today from the two CEOs as
well as their conservator about what is going on inside the
entities. There are some troubling things that have surfaced,
and we want to have an opportunity to discuss that, and
expenses that some people feel are extravagant. Some people
feel that at this time, where these entities are bleeding and
losing money and having to have infusions by the American
taxpayers, there ought to be a very frugal attitude within the
Enterprises.
Also, I think we want to learn more about the relationship
between the conservator and the two entities and how that
interaction is taking place, and the coordination, and, more
importantly, what kinds of plans and measures are in place so
that we begin to ascertain if we are, in fact, making progress
in this area.
So I think this is a very important hearing for the
American taxpayers, and I look forward to hearing from the
witnesses in their various testimonies. I appreciate their
coming today. With that, I now yield to the ranking member, Mr.
Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the gentlemen for being here today and enlightening us on a few
of these issues.
I want to be clear. From my perspective, I think that the
original missions of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are absolutely
essential. I cannot envision an America going forward without
something to take that place, either by the same name or a
different name. But I am talking about the original mission,
not the mission that ended up getting us in trouble. I don't
see them as profit-making centers. I don't see them doing
anything other than simply helping the middle class afford to
get into homeownership. That is all they were meant to do. They
did it successfully for a long time, and then they lost their
vision, as far as I am concerned. Basically, bottom line, they
got greedy, and they got sloppy, and the oversight people got
greedy or allowed greed and got sloppy.
My hope is that you are rectifying that, but some of the
things that I have seen during this period have troubled me.
And for me my interest is, yes, the short term of it, what is
going on now, but I don't want to give those people who never
liked the concept of Fannie and Freddie the ammunition in order
to be able to kill the middle class going forward.
So for me, the transition is pretty important. I have been
vocal on certain things that have happened, and I may be vocal
again today. But I want to be clear as to what my interests
are. My interests are making sure that when we get out of this
mess: number one, we don't repeat it; and number two, we have
something left standing in some category that will be able to
ensure that the middle class will be able to continue to afford
a home.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
I also want to ask unanimous consent that the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Green, be allowed to participate in this
hearing. We appreciate his attendance as well.
I now recognize Mr. Fitzpatrick, the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, for 2 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
hearing, and thanks to the panel as well.
Recent media reports and subsequent work from your office
and the subcommittee have brought to light some practices that
deserve, I believe, the subcommittee's scrutiny here today, and
I look forward to expanding some of the facts. There is
documentation of some rather shocking expenditures at Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.
While we certainly understand the need to be able to
operate effectively and to staff the GSEs with talented
individuals, I am sure you recognize that our constituents are
on the hook for hundreds of billions of dollars. There is some
justifiable outrage when they read about lavish parties, hefty
compensation packages, and conferences costing hundreds of
thousands of dollars, so there are a lot of questions that need
to be answered.
As you may know, I have introduced legislation to
statutorily cap the amount of money the GSEs can get from the
Treasury. I believe it is necessary because the American
taxpayers deserve assurance that there is an end to this line
of credit. But for the time being, of course, it is their money
that is being spent sponsoring these events and buying these
meals.
If there is justification for these expenses, I think that
the taxpayers are willing to consider that. I suspect, however,
that this may just be business as usual, and unfortunately,
after requiring an almost $200 billion bailout, business as
usual is just not acceptable anymore. So I look forward to the
testimony to get a better understanding of the matter.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Canseco, is
recognized for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling this very important hearing.
Despite the false narrative told by the majority party of
the previous Congress as to the roots of financial crisis, more
and more Americans are coming to realize just how big of a role
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac played in the economic boom and bust
that we all still are trying to recover from.
Today, taxpayers have been forced to bail out Fannie and
Freddie to the tune of $170 billion, and some project that
amount could at least double. Before 2008, many Americans were
unaware of the incredible risk that was building up on the
balance sheets of these two entities, but since hearing about
recent extravagant bonuses being paid to executives and legal
fees to former executives being put up on the taxpayer tab, it
has become very clear to the American people that Fannie and
Freddie all along have played by a very different set of rules.
To be sure, FHFA and Acting Director DeMarco are to be
commended for many of their efforts, including resisting
Administration pressure to further politicize the GSEs and
doing all that they can to limit taxpayer losses. Yet, there is
still room for improvement, as a recent FHFA Inspector General
report highlighted that too much deference has been given to
Fannie and Freddie decisionmaking.
We must recognize the GSEs function only by reason of the
American taxpayers, and that current compensation practices and
legal fee reimbursements are an inappropriate use of taxpayer
money. I look forward to today's hearing closely examining
FHFA's oversight of Fannie and Freddie, and listening to our
witnesses on this very important matter. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, the ranking member of the Capital Markets
Subcommittee, Ms. Waters from California, is recognized for 2
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
convening this hearing. I think it is important that this
Congress continues to conduct robust oversight on both the GSEs
and their conservator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency. I am
sure that Mr. DeMarco is a little tired of coming before us at
this point, but I appreciate him again joining us here today.
I understand that the main focus of this hearing is
administrative expenses at the GSEs, executive compensation,
the fact that Fannie and Freddie were sponsors of a Mortgage
Bankers Association conference a few months ago. These things,
of course, are important for Congress to scrutinize in the
course of our oversight over the GSEs, but I think by focusing
so heavily on these issues, we run the risk of playing
``gotcha'' and neglect to focus on bigger issues; for example,
whether the Enterprises are for loan modifications that are
consistent with FHFA's statutory mission to maximize assistance
to homeowners in order to minimize foreclosures.
As you know, Mr. DeMarco, I have talked with you quite a
bit about principal write-downs, which I consider just
absolutely essential to getting a handle on stabilizing our
housing market, not just because they could provide the most
sustainable modifications to borrowers, but because significant
research suggests that they could actually, again, as I said,
stabilize the wider economy and provide better long-term
returns to taxpayers. I hope that we have a chance to discuss
this again in more detail.
I also think that this committee should pay increased
attention to buy-back settlements entered into between GSEs and
the banks who originated and sold them loans. We need to be
sure that the Enterprises are getting the best possible deal
for the taxpayer and not leaving money on the table in order to
maintain business relationships with banks, as one FHFA
Inspector General report recently suggested.
I would also applaud Mr. DeMarco for the nearly $200
billion lawsuit against 17 financial institutions for alleged
violations of Federal securities laws and common law in the
sale of private-label MBSs to the Enterprises. I appreciate his
rigor in trying to recoup losses borne by the taxpayer, and
ultimately I think that pursuing these claims will result in
lower losses to the American public.
So I look forward to hearing particularly from Mr. DeMarco
today, and I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
And now, the gentleman from California, Mr. Miller, is
recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Miller of California. Chairman Neugebauer, I want to
thank you very much, and Ranking Member Capuano, for allowing
me to be part of this hearing today. I think this is a very
important hearing, and it is very timely. And I think we need
to look at facts when we are debating any issue of importance,
especially the financial sector of this country and the housing
sector specifically.
Before 2007, GSEs were consistently profitable. Nobody
wants to talk about that. Fannie Mae had not reported a full-
year loss since 1985, and Freddie Mac never had a loss once
they became shareholder-owned. And GSE default rates have
always been lower than the private sector's.
Now, much of the debate is about people worried about
taxpayer exposures to the mortgage finance system that includes
any kind of a government backstop or government guarantee. But
let us look at what the problem is today. When we lent banks
money with the first part of TARP, we charged them 5 percent
interest. We are charging Freddie and Fannie 10 percent
interest. And much of the losses in Freddie and Fannie today
are paying that 10 percent interest to the government today.
But if you look at the data on mortgage default rates, it
is very clear what went wrong. Everybody messed up: 38.7
percent of subprime ARMs are seriously delinquent; 26.5 percent
of subprime ARMs are seriously delinquent; 5.4 percent of jumbo
primes are seriously delinquent. On the GSEs, 4 percent of
Fannie Mae loans are seriously delinquent, and 3.5 percent of
Freddie Mac loans are seriously delinquent. That is bad, but
they are still outperforming the private sector regardless of
how bad it is. Now, to say let us throw the baby out with the
bathwater, and let us blame them for all the losses is
unreasonable. Let us go back and say, what did they do wrong,
and how do we fix it?
It is a huge problem, but to say we are just not going to
deal with them at all is unreasonable. A large number of
foreclosed properties are putting pressure on the marketplace
today. If we could stop the foreclosures from being placed in
the market today, you wouldn't have market values plummeting
like they are today.
I have introduced a bill to deal with that. In fact, I
introduced a bill this last year that Barney Frank, and
Chairmen Bachus and McCarthy all cosponsored, allowing the
banks and GSEs to hold those foreclosed properties, lease them
up to 5 years, and let them go slowly on to the marketplace
rather than forcing downward pressure on a marketplace like we
are today.
So before we make any drastic moves and recommendations,
let us say what went wrong, how do we fix it, and who is
performing the best? Have Freddie and Fannie made mistakes?
Absolutely, without a doubt, but they are still outperforming
everybody else. So that has to be part of the debate. You can't
say, they are awful, let us get rid of them, when they are the
best performers in the marketplace. If you are going to deal
with the worst out there, let us make subprime ARMs illegal,
let us make prime loans illegal, let us make subprime loans
illegal, because they are performing worse than Fannie and
Freddie. But that is unreasonable. That is the private sector.
We do need to make sure the private sector dollars come in
to take the market share of the economy and to take the risk
out there, and the goal is to get market share to the private
sector. But let us not say that the conduit for those private
markets dollars are Fannie and Freddie and they should just be
put aside without an alternative. They need to go, but there
needs to be an alternative for them that takes them back to
their original goals and guidelines.
But I am looking forward to the testimony today, and thank
you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me the time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And I will remind all Members again that if you have an
opening statement, you can submit that for the record.
Now, I would like to introduce our panel: Mr. Charles
Haldeman, who is CEO of Freddie Mac; Mr. Ed DeMarco--and it
says in my script here that you are Acting Director, and I am
going to take out the ``Acting'' part, Ed, because after 3
years, I think you are the Director--Director of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency; and Mr. Michael J. Williams, president
and CEO of Fannie Mae.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here. I ask you to limit
your opening remarks to 5 minutes. Your full testimony will be
made a part of the record.
Mr. Haldeman?

STATEMENT OF CHARLES E. HALDEMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
FREDDIE MAC

Mr. Haldeman. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
speak with you today. My name is Ed Haldeman, and I am the CEO
of Freddie Mac.
I recognize the importance of this hearing. With a country
living through the worst housing crisis since the Great
Depression, I understand why the oversight of Freddie Mac is so
important.
Let me be clear. Freddie Mac is mindful of the taxpayer
support we have received, and we take very seriously our
obligation to use the support prudently and efficiently. With
this in mind, I will discuss with you how we are running the
company under conservatorship.
Let me begin by saying that the Freddie Mac of today is a
new company. We have a new management team. The management team
running Freddie Mac today is not the one we had
preconservatorship. For example, I became CEO in August 2009,
almost a year after Freddie Mac entered conservatorship, and 14
of our 18 management committee executives have been changed
during my tenure. We have a new emphasis on strong credit
standards. We focus on safety and soundness and responsible
lending, purchasing higher-quality loans with lower loan-to-
value ratios and higher credit scores.
We have a new approach to expenses. We take seriously our
obligation to reduce spending responsibly wherever possible. We
project that by the end of 2011, we will have reduced annual
general and administrative spending by more than $150 million
below 2009 levels.
We have a new approach to the retained portfolio. We
reduced the size of the retained portfolio by almost 25
percent, which is beyond what is required of us. We have a new
approach to executive salaries. We reduced overall compensation
by 40 percent for the top 10 percent of our officers. We have
an enhanced focus on assisting families in need, helping
575,000 families avoid foreclosure since 2009. Finally, we have
a new culture, one that emphasizes leadership and
accountability.
All of this has contributed to significantly improved
results in our new book of business. Our preconservatorship
business has generated the vast majority of our credit
expenses. In contrast, our book of business since 2009 has
generated income well above credit expenses. The improvement in
quality is dramatic. Our serious delinquency rate for the 2006-
2007 book of business is approximately 10 percent. In contrast,
the serious delinquency rate of the new 2009-2011 book of
business is about one-fortieth of that, or approximately one-
quarter of 1 percent. We have achieved all of this while
providing more than $1.1 trillion in critically needed mortgage
liquidity, financing homes and rental housing for more than 5.8
million American families since 2009. We also enabled over 4
million homeowners to refinance, saving them collectively about
$10 billion during the first year alone.
Clearly, we could not have achieved these results without
support from FHFA, Treasury, and the American taxpayer. But I
want to make clear that the ultimate beneficiary of that
support is not private shareholders, but homeowners, renters,
and the housing finance system. In all these ways, since
conservatorship, we have a new set of priorities and a
fundamentally new company.
In closing, as CEO of Freddie Mac, I believe strongly that
one of the most important things we can do for the housing
market is to clarify the future of the secondary mortgage
market. That clarity is important to investors, important to
lenders, and important to families who own or hope to own a
home. That clarity also will help achieve our shared goal of
attracting more private capital to the mortgage market. Without
that clarity, it will become increasingly difficult to maintain
the stability of our company. This, in turn, will make it
increasingly difficult for our company to play its important
role in maintaining the stability of the housing market. For
all of these reasons, I hope that Congress will resolve this
important issue sooner rather than later.
Thank you again for this opportunity to speak with you
today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Haldeman can be found on
page 46 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. DeMarco, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD J. DEMARCO, ACTING DIRECTOR, FEDERAL
HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY

Mr. DeMarco. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member
Capuano, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for having
me here.
As requested, my written statement provides updates on a
range of topics regarding FHFA's oversight of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, or the Enterprises as I will refer to them, and
the Federal Home Loan Banks. I would be pleased to discuss any
of those issues with you.
In the few minutes that I have, though, I would like to
provide you with a general overview of how the conservatorships
have evolved over the past 3 years. FHFA placed Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac into conservatorship less than 6 weeks after the
Agency itself was created, and before FHFA had any meaningful
opportunity to build its own infrastructure or implement its
new authorities granted in the legislation that created FHFA.
While conservatorship is meant to be short term, it has
turned into a multiyear event. I would like to recap it in the
form of a multichapter story, a story we are still writing.
Importantly, however, the final chapter of this story needs to
be written by Congress.
Chapter one was the establishment of the conservatorships
themselves in September 2008, with the Treasury support
agreements, the Board and executive management changes, and the
effort to assure employees and market participants alike that
the companies were open and operating so that America's housing
finance system would continue to operate. From day one, FHFA
made clear it was entrusting day-to-day operations to the new
company management, but reserving for itself key strategic and
critical business decisions.
The next chapter began in earnest in early 2009 with the
effort to establish a uniform, robust loan modification program
to assist borrowers in troubled, mostly nontraditional
mortgages. Development of both the HAMP program and the
Enterprises' proprietary modification programs continued
throughout the year. These activities are fundamental to
various aspects of FHFA's conservatorship mandates, including
mitigating losses on the Enterprises' preconservatorship book
of business.
The last half of 2009 and the first half of 2010 were
dominated by the actual implementation of these programs,
working through the backlog of delinquent mortgages and trying
to provide people with the capacity and the desire to stay in
their homes the opportunity to do so.
In the next chapter, attention turned in the second half of
2010 to emerging issues in mortgage servicing, and especially
foreclosure processing. This year, FHFA made a significant
advancement in the cause of addressing these issues by
implementing its Servicing Alignment Initiative, thereby
improving the clarity, simplicity and consistency of Enterprise
mortgage service and standards and responding to the identified
deficiencies.
Most recently, we announced major refinements to the Home
Affordable Refinance Program, or HARP, in an effort to reduce
the credit risk on the Enterprises' preconservatorship book of
business by enhancing the opportunity for underwater borrowers
in seasoned loans to refinance at today's lower rates.
Unlike these chapters, each of which is focused on working
through the preconservatorship book of business, the next
chapters will be more forward-looking. As we go into 2012, I
anticipate FHFA building on the steps we have already begun to
improve the future mortgage finance system. Several of these
steps are described in my written statement, but there will be
more to come to actually implement these and other changes.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that the final
chapter is for Congress and the Administration to write. The
ultimate resolution of the conservatorships and the future
legal framework for the country's housing finance system needs
to be determined by lawmakers.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for this opportunity, and I
look forward to responding to the committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeMarco can be found on page
36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, Mr. Williams, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. WILLIAMS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, FANNIE MAE

Mr. Williams. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano,
and members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to
speak with you today about FHFA's oversight of Fannie Mae, the
company's current condition, and our financial outlook.
I understand why Congress is interested in these issues,
and I appreciate the importance of these issues to both
Congress and to our country. As CEO, I am responsible for
ensuring that we fulfill our important mission and act as good
stewards of the taxpayers' unprecedented investment in the
company.
Let me begin by discussing how we work with FHFA to operate
the company effectively in conservatorship. When Fannie Mae was
placed in conservatorship, FHFA replaced the CEO and the Board
of Directors, who then recruited a new management team. FHFA
delegated responsibility for running the day-to-day operations
to management with oversight from the Board. In turn, FHFA
retained key responsibilities as conservator.
As we managed the company in the interests of our primary
investor, the taxpayer, we have taken actions to strengthen
Fannie Mae and limit losses on the legacy book of business:
first, we are funding the market and building a strong new book
of business; second, we are making strategic investments to
minimize losses; and third, we are substantially reducing our
expenses. These are exactly the actions that will enable us to
achieve the goals of conservatorship and protect the taxpayers'
interests.
As the leading provider of funding to the mortgage market,
Fannie Mae's role has never been more important. We have helped
6 million homeowners to refinance into a safer, lower-cost
mortgage; we have enabled 1.7 million homeowners to be able to
purchase a home; and we have provided financing for nearly 1
million units of quality, affordable rental housing.
We are building a new book of business with appropriately
conservative underwriting standards that will enable
sustainable homeownership. The new book is now almost half of
our overall book of business, and these are high-quality loans
that we currently expect to be profitable over the life of the
loan.
In addition to funding the mortgage market, we are reducing
credit losses. The substantial majority of the company's credit
losses are attributable to single-family loans purchased or
guaranteed from 2005 through 2008. It is important to
understand that we cannot reverse past decisions with respect
to these loans. We will, however, continue to manage them
aggressively to limit taxpayer exposure, and we have made
measurable progress.
We built one of the Nation's largest foreclosure prevention
operations to help families avoid foreclosure, stabilize
neighborhoods, and limit credit losses. We made a prudent
decision to hire 1,800 people, many in our Dallas loss
mitigation operation, and dedicated them to these activities.
As a result, we have helped nearly 1 million families to avoid
foreclosure.
When foreclosure is the only option, we help stabilize
communities by maintaining and improving the properties we
acquire and selling them to new owners. We pay careful
attention to expense control. Our core administrative expenses,
which exclude these investments in loss mitigation, are down 16
percent this year. Our personnel costs are also down 14
percent, and we have eliminated positions at all levels of the
company. These are examples of decisive actions we have taken
to manage Fannie Mae responsibly in conservatorship.
Finally, let me address the company's financial outlook.
According to FHFA's October 2011 report, we may have positive
net income as early as 2013. This is before the payment of the
dividend to the government. This is largely the result of
actions we have taken to reduce credit losses while building
that strong, new book of business.
However, our current annual dividend obligation is $11.3
billion. That exceeds the company's annual net income for any
year in its history. While we expect to return to operating
profitability, we do not expect to earn profits in excess of
our annual dividend obligation to the Treasury.
In closing, I am confident that we are making sound
business decisions that protect the interests of the taxpayers
and will assist struggling homeowners. We are reducing costs
where appropriate, and we are investing where necessary to
achieve the goals of the conservatorship.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams can be found on
page 57 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Also, I would ask unanimous consent that--without
objection, that we submit the written testimony from Inspector
General Steven Linick of FHFA. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
And now, for the question period.
One of the things that I think, Mr. Williams, that you
mentioned is that you have had a reduction in your payroll
expenses of about 16 percent. Did I hear you say that?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Congressman, this year.
Chairman Neugebauer. Is that overall, or is that one
particular area in which you have had a reduction in 16
percent?
Mr. Williams. We have reduced our core administrative
expenses, which exclude those credit loss mitigation activities
by 16 percent, Congressman.
Chairman Neugebauer. But I believe if you look at your
numbers in the two Enterprises, total payroll is actually up in
both Enterprises. You are saying in one area you are reducing
them, but in other areas you are increasing them; is that
right?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we made strategic investments in
loss mitigation because we felt that was in the best interests
of the taxpayer to reduce credit losses long term.
Chairman Neugebauer. I just want to be careful because I
don't want--one of the accounting methods that we use around
here is if we decrease in one area and we increase the other,
we always just want to talk about the areas that we are
decreasing; we don't necessarily want to talk about the areas
where we are increasing.
But one of the things that I think is troubling to many of
us is when we look at, for example, the budget here, and the
fact that we would--I think in Congress we expect under
conservatorship, particularly the word ``conserve,'' and to
begin to look at ways to minimize additional advances from the
Treasury, because, as you pointed out, they are kind of
expensive. But, the little things here that lead me to wonder
what is going on in the bigger picture is that I see that we
have in your budget $5.1 million in meals and social activities
for employees. And I think for those kinds of things to show up
in the budget, it would appear to me that the Enterprises are
being a little bit tone deaf to exactly what is going on.
You are on the front line of understanding how a lot of
families across this country are going through some hard times.
And then we look at some of the other activities, and I think
some of my other colleagues are going to talk about that, but
really what--that, I believe, is a symptom to me, and I am
hoping it is only a symptom, that the Enterprises really feel
like what is in order here is business as usual.
Now, I am impressed, and I wouldn't expect anything other
than the asset quality for your new origination to increase. It
should. But one of the things that concerns me is as we have
this business-as-usual mentality, is that it basically
continues to crowd out, I think, the ability for the private
sector to come in. And quite honestly, one of the reasons that
your numbers are getting better is because of the sheer volume
of business, because basically the Enterprises are getting a
majority of the business. I believe if you were getting more
traditional levels of business, the advances would have been
much higher.
So, Mr. Williams, what do you say to the American people
that, yes, we are being stewards of your money, but the
evidence in some cases points otherwise?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we do believe we are being good
stewards of the money. We have consciously gone out and reduced
expenses, gone after other areas where we can reduce losses,
where we can reduce our expenses and cut costs. We have taken
our compensation level for executives down by 50 percent. We
have reduced the number of senior officers by 30 percent. We
are going through all areas of the company where we can reduce
our expenditures and do this in a timely fashion. We do believe
it is important to invest in our loss mitigation areas so that
we can continue to help homeowners and reduce our long-term
credit losses.
Chairman Neugebauer. So do the Enterprises have a
conservator plan; in other words, this is how we are going to
operate, these are things we are going to do in our loss
mitigation area, this is the way we are going to reduce our
footprint, this is our overall strategy? And how do you
interface with Mr. DeMarco in executing that plan?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we interface with Mr. DeMarco
quite frequently, I can assure of you of that. We meet
regularly. We are aligned on the goals of the conservatorship,
which is to stabilize the companies, to make sure we provide
the needed liquidity to the market that is needed at this
critical time in our country, and also do everything that we
can to help homeowners and reduce credit losses going forward.
Chairman Neugebauer. I just want to--you have answered part
of my question. The first part of the question was, do you have
an actual conservator plan that you are operating under so that
we have specific goals and objectives of what you are trying to
accomplish?
Mr. Williams. We have a number of initiatives that we are
working on.
Chairman Neugebauer. Initiatives--I want to know if there
is a plan, a written plan of your mission and your goals and
the direction you are headed with this Enterprise?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we do have goals and objectives
that are completely aligned with the conservator's--
Chairman Neugebauer. Is there a written plan?
Mr. Williams. A written plan?
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes. It is a yes-or-no question.
Mr. Williams. I cannot tell you there is a written plan.
Chairman Neugebauer. So there is no written plan.
Mr. Williams. There are goals and objectives that are
aligned with the conservator's plan.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Ranking Member Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Haldeman, you have been doing this for a while, and you
come to it with a fair amount of experience. I would like to
ask you, 10 years from now, after we do whatever we do, and
when this is done, do you envision this country having some
entity that plays the role that Fannie and/or Freddie play
currently in the mortgage industry?
Mr. Haldeman. By your introductory comment that I have been
doing this for a while, you didn't mean at Freddie Mac?
Mr. Capuano. You are familiar with the industry.
Mr. Haldeman. Yes, the financial services industry,
absolutely. I have been with Freddie Mac since August of 2009.
It is--I talk to our employees a great deal about the future,
because as you can imagine, they have a lot of uncertainty,
insecurity, and anxiety about the future, and what I say is, I
can't imagine our country without a secondary mortgage market.
Could you imagine us going back to the time when the originator
holds the mortgage for 30 years? I certainly can't. I think we
will not go back to those times.
I think we will always have a secondary mortgage market.
And what I say to employees is that we have talent, we have
expertise, we have infrastructure, we have technology, we have
relationships, and I think the country should find a way to use
that in the secondary mortgage market.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. DeMarco, do you agree with that, again,
looking in your crystal ball 10 years from now, based on your
knowledge and experience?
Mr. DeMarco. Yes, Mr. Capuano. Clearly, a country that has
a $10 trillion or $11 trillion single-family mortgage market is
going to need plumbing that will allow local lenders that are
making mortgages of an average size of, let us say, $200,000,
but that aggregates up across this country to $10 trillion or
$11 trillion--it is going to need plumbing, it is going to need
the infrastructure to connect global capital markets to be able
to get that size and capacity down to local lenders.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Williams, do you agree or disagree with
that?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Congressman, I do agree.
Mr. Capuano. The reason I ask is because in the final
analysis, the day-to-day activities, what you are doing, we are
going to talk about that today, but when everything is said and
done, as I said in my opening statement, I am interested in
making sure that the next generation of middle-income people
can afford to buy a home in a reasonable way. Again, hopefully
they will hit good scores and everything else, and reasonable
people will be able to buy a reasonable home.
I will tell you that some of the activity that has happened
doesn't help that. And it is not about the specifics of what
you have done within the Agency, but you understand you are no
longer operating in private companies, you are now operating in
the public world.
And I would like to ask you, Mr. Haldeman, do you know the
total salary and bonuses paid to your highest-paid employee
this past year? I am not looking for a name, just a number.
Mr. Haldeman. Highest paid, you mean the top paid, top--
Mr. Capuano. Just one. Who made the most money?
Mr. Haldeman. At Freddie Mac?
Mr. Capuano. Yes.
Mr. Haldeman. Yes. It was me.
Mr. Capuano. Other than you.
Mr. Haldeman. Yes, I know.
Mr. Capuano. How much?
Mr. Haldeman. Other than me, it was approximately--it was
somewhere between $3 million and $3.5 million.
Mr. Capuano. Between $3 million and $3.5 million.
Mr. Williams, do you know, again other than you?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Capuano. How much would that be?
Mr. Williams. It would be between $2.8 million and $3
million.
Mr. Capuano. So, in the $3 million range.
And do you understand that after what Freddie and Fannie
had been through--it was before your watch, I am not trying to
lay this on you--do you understand the outrage that the
American people feel when we are looking at an agency that has
gotten us to the brink of difficulties--gotten us in
difficulties, beyond the brink--and has gotten a lot of
taxpayer funding? And it is awfully hard, for me it is
impossible, to understand why an individual working for an
entity such as yours, not a private company, has to make that
kind of money.
I am not against people making money. God bless them. But
go into the private market. It is almost impossible for us to
understand. I had to vote for a bill the other day to limit
these kinds of things because, honestly, I am outraged, and not
about the individual. That is why I don't want names; I am not
looking to lay it on anybody. But in this situation, that kind
of activity, the kind of activity--$5 million on meals and
entertainment. I think meals and entertainment, within the
normal course of events, is a reasonable business expense. You
should be able to serve coffee at your breakfast meetings. That
is fine by me. But it is outrageous to my constituents and to
me when I turn around and I defend the purposes of the agencies
every day, and I will continue to do so.
And I will agree with my other colleagues that you didn't
do anything worse than anybody else, but you did--not you, but
your predecessors did it, and we now have to dig you out of it;
it is our obligation to society. But I guess what I am saying
is in order for people like me to be able to help meet that
vision--not help you or your current employees, although I am
not against anybody, that is not my goal. My goal is for the
next generation to have someone like you doing what you try to
do now, and you are making it tougher.
Mr. Haldeman. Congressman--
Mr. Capuano. Go ahead, Mr. Haldeman.
Mr. Haldeman. I totally get the outrage. I get the outrage
about executive compensation in total; I get the outrage about
compensation at Freddie Mac in particular. I understand exactly
what you are saying, and I struggle with it all the time, too.
Let me tell you about the dilemma, and maybe you can help
me resolve the dilemma. I came here in August of 2009, and
there was not a CEO of Freddie Mac, there was not a chief
operating officer, and there was not a CFO. It felt to me that
the right thing to do was to do everything we can to try to
keep the machinery together, to keep it operating, to keep it
functioning well, to not have mistakes and not have it go down
the drain.
And there are many, many functions that have to be
performed at Freddie Mac that require very specialized
expertise where we have to get a CFO who is capable of running
any complicated bank in the country. We have to have investment
people who can run a $700 billion portfolio. If you are running
a $700 billion portfolio, and you make a mistake that is one-
tenth of 1 percent, it costs you $700 million. So these are
very sophisticated things, very complex, and I felt we needed
to pay that kind of compensation, which troubles me and
troubles you, in order to get people so that we wouldn't have
those kinds of mistakes.
Mr. Capuano. I appreciate it, and if I could just finish
up, because I know I am over my time.
That is a fair and reasonable explanation, but if you were
to make that decision, it would have helped and would help
going forward for you to present to us and the general public
not just your thinking, but also backing up as to determining
so that I can sit here and say, do you know what? Like it or
not, that is what a person in this position makes across the
world. There are plenty of companies that can do that or not,
or they don't. So as opposed to simply picking a number and
being outraged at a number, I will then be able to say, well,
it is in the ballpark, everybody in those positions makes this
kind of money, and at least it is defensible. At the moment, it
is nothing more than a number in an agency that has caused this
country a lot of trouble.
And for me, the most important thing to come out of this
hearing is that you walk away knowing that you live in a
fishbowl now, and you have to act as if there is a fishbowl if
you want the end that we have all discussed.
And I apologize for going on, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
your indulgence.
Chairman Neugebauer. Now, the chairman of the full
Financial Services Committee, Chairman Bachus, is recognized.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DeMarco, I do believe you may have the toughest job in
Washington. And I realize that the reasons for that have been
beyond your control and really to a certain extent beyond the
control, Mr. Haldeman, of you and Mr. Williams.
You work for the two GSEs that were recipients of the
largest bailout in the history of the country; maybe AIG is
close. And there is outrage at the failure of Fannie and
Freddie and a lot of outrage about the activity that went on.
Gretchen Morgenson's book outlines many of the problems.
I also recognize that as I saw the case with that new AIG
president and the General Motors president, they took a lot of
slings and arrows for what their predecessors did. And so, I do
have sympathy for you.
I think we all have to realize, though, that the world has
changed, and Members of Congress are realizing that on many
occasions, and altering our behavior. And I think that is a
good, positive thing because we have to restore the confidence
of the American people. And my legislation, I believe, does
that. Now, does it have a negative of making it more difficult
to hire capable people? It probably does.
I do say this: I think that anyone considering a top
management or executive position at either one of the firms
would have to think, do I want all the baggage that comes with
that? Because they are going to forever have on their resume
that they were at Fannie or Freddie. People are not going to
pay attention to the dates or the facts or any of that. And I
had a discussion with Mr. DeMarco yesterday where he pointed
out to me that many people are not taking these jobs because
they are concerned about liability issues. Why take a job for
$200,000 if you might have an exposure to $5 million worth of
legal expenses or lawsuits or even criticism which damages your
reputation? And I told him that I think this Congress ought to
work with him.
So I apologize to you and to the employees who are there at
Fannie and Freddie that in many cases, you are being
sacrificial lambs for those who came before you.
But as far as compensation, I think we are just going to
have to change our ways. I think we are just not going to be
able to--as highlighted in today's paper, we are not going to
be able to go to Chicago and spend two-thirds of a million
dollars at a reception even if it benefits the business.
I thought one of the most unfair criticisms was when we
criticized the presidents of Ford and General Motors for flying
here in their corporate jets and wanted to know why they didn't
get in their cars and drive here from Detroit, Michigan. And
the next time, they drove here from Detroit, Michigan. Now,
that is going too far. I thought that was ridiculous, and I
still do.
So I will promise you, but I will say this, and I will
close with this, some of the salaries are for people, and they
are good people, they have been there, but they were there
before, and they are still there. And at a certain point, I
think that the decision just had to be made, do they want to
stay on for these new--whether we pass this legislation, do
they want to stay for that? And I am hopeful we will get good
public servants.
But we will work with you on the liability issues and other
issues because those do need to be addressed, and I, for
instance, would not take a job for $200,000 that had a legal
exposure of millions of dollars, particularly with the grief
that would come with working at your companies right now for
things that went on long before you agreed to come in and try
to fix things.
So I would hope all members of the committee will not--
their outrage needs to be able taken out on the failure of this
Congress years ago not to beef up regulation. And it is up to
this Congress if we want to limit salaries to do so, and that
is why I filed this legislation. It is not up to you to refuse
salaries for your employees and potential employees. So thank
you very much.
Chairman Neugebauer. The Chair recognizes Ms. Waters from
California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Mr. DeMarco, I mentioned that I wanted to talk about
principal write-downs. I want to talk about REO and the REO
pilot program that was in the papers today, but I have to get
to something else first.
In August, Fannie Mae paid $500 million to Bank of America
to purchase the servicing rights to more than 400,000 mortgages
in its portfolio. According to your staff, Fannie initiated the
purchase to allow it to transfer the servicing of the mortgages
to another, presumably better servicer, to improve borrower
outcomes and minimize losses to Fannie going forward. To be
honest, I understand that Fannie had a contract with Bank of
America, and that it would be more expensive to sue them for
poor performance, but I am not happy that Fannie had to
purchase the servicing back from a company that was doing such
a poor job.
My question is this: Does Bank of America continue to get
service business from Fannie and Freddie, and, if so, why would
the GSEs give businesses to a company whose servicing has been
found to be so problematic that Fannie had to buy back loans in
order to properly service them?
Mr. DeMarco. I am not too happy about it either,
Congresswoman, but it was respectful of the existing business
contracts that were in place. It was a prudent market
transaction that was made, and it did get to exactly what you
said. It was designed to both minimize or reduce potential
losses to Fannie and Freddie, and improve borrower outcomes by
getting these high-risk mortgages in the hands of a servicer
that had a better demonstrated capacity to work with these
kinds of difficult situations to get the borrower into a better
outcome.
And so it met our mandate of trying to minimize
foreclosures, and maximize assistance to borrowers, and also
reduce our credit losses. It did reflect existing contractual
arrangements at the time, and this is something that we are--I
can assure you we are looking at those sorts of contract terms
on a go-forward basis.
Ms. Waters. Are they still getting new business from you?
Mr. DeMarco. Bank of America is still a major originator of
mortgages and seller of mortgages to Fannie and Freddie, so
yes.
Ms. Waters. There is some kind of contradiction in that,
isn't there?
Mr. DeMarco. There are some difficulties here.
Ms. Waters. So why do you continue to give them business?
Mr. DeMarco. They are a significant originator, and we are
dealing with the problems with the mortgage servicing part
through the business terms that exist today with regard to
servicing contracts.
Ms. Waters. I am concerned about the servicing business. As
a matter of fact, we were beginning to focus, and I have been
focusing for a long time, on services. They are at the crux of
this problem that we have, not just with you, but with
everybody. But I want to know why they are still doing the
servicing. Just because they are the originators?
Mr. DeMarco. That is something that they own. They have
those servicing rights, and those servicing rights have been
transferred. There has been a tremendous amount of work done by
both companies to go into Bank of America, work with Bank of
America on enhancing the way they go about doing the servicing.
And we have an important initiative that we have, the servicing
alignment, is to get greater clarity not just to Bank of
America, but all servicers about the steps that they are
supposed to follow in order to provide remediation when a
borrower goes delinquent. This is not just a single-institution
problem, this is an industry problem, and we are all very
challenged by it.
Ms. Waters. I agree. But I spent some time getting
permission from some of my constituents to help work with them
to try to get loan modifications, and it just so happens that
Bank of America was the servicer. And I spent hours on the
telephone. I can't tell you what I went through. So I do
understand that.
Quickly, before my time is up, the REO pilot programs. You
told me you got the ideas back. You told me we were going to go
out to bid. I like the idea of the financing part of this, but
I hope you are not going to be financing speculators to come in
and get big blocks of REO properties, are you?
Mr. DeMarco. We are really focused on doing this in a way
that is targeted at individual geographic markets. We want to
make this as competitive as possible so that local investors
can also be meaningful participants. That is important to us as
conservator, because I think the more competitive we can make
these transactions, the greater value that we will realize for
taxpayers. And by inviting and creating an environment in which
local equity participants and people with local market
knowledge participate, I think that helps to give a greater
probability that we are going to have folks who are really
dedicated to seeing good outcomes in those local communities.
And it also gets that local community knowledge into the game.
So that is all part of what we are trying to build into our
review of these.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
And we want to work very close closely with you to
understand the program so that we can articulate it in our
communities that have been so devastated by these foreclosures,
and people want to participate. So we will work with your
people.
Thank you very much. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. DeMarco. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Chairman Neugebauer. Now, the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that we all appreciate the efforts that the
Enterprises have made so far to reduce expenditures. Hopefully,
we can agree that there is still more to be done. Chairman
Bachus was mentioning earlier in his remarks about--I think he
was referring to a New York Times article or column,
Morgenson's column--it might have been in today's paper--
entitled, ``Fannie and Freddie, Still the Socialites,'' which
reviewed, as this subcommittee also reviewed, Enterprise
expenditures relating to an industry conference that was held
in October in Chicago. The conference was only 2 days long, but
the tab was pretty hefty.
According to the article, the Enterprises spent, combined,
about $700,000 at the 2-day conference, including $74,000 in
dinners alone. Freddie Mac spent nearly $50,000 on just two
dinners, and Fannie Mae spent nearly $25,000 on two dinners.
So my question is for Mr. Williams and Mr. Haldeman. Given
the extraordinary taxpayer support that has already been
received, about $170 billion, how do you justify these expenses
to my constituents in Bucks County or to the taxpayers of the
United States generally?
Mr. Haldeman. Maybe I will start. And, Congressman, I think
we have to begin by saying, you are right. We can do a better
job. But let me talk about top-line spending before I get to
the individual line item because it was where the chairman
started.
As I indicated, I came to the company in August of 2009,
and one of the things that I started to talk about right away
was that we needed to consistently bring down our total
spending of the company year after year after year. And that is
precisely what we have done at the top line. If you take our
total spending to run Freddie Mac for 2009 and compare it to
where we are now, we have reduced that top line of spending by
$150 million a year. That is almost 10 percent, and that is not
one subset, Mr. Chairman, or one line item, it is the total
spending of the company. And we brought it down in 2010, and we
are bringing it down in 2011, and we are going to do the same
thing in 2012. And that is how I have managed the company at
the top.
Within that, we have division budgets, and I monitor those.
But there is some ability of managers below me to make
decisions on spending, and I don't think we did as good a job
as we should have on that MBA program. Do I think it is a
legitimate business expense and it was good that we sent a lot
of people there? Absolutely. And it is a very, very efficient
way to interact with and educate a broad range of seller
servicers. Literally, every seller servicer in the country
comes to that one location in Chicago, and it is the most
efficient way I know of to make sure that we can educate them
about our credit policy and what we expect from them on the
servicing side.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Do you understand the outrage of the
taxpayers when they read that in the newspaper?
Mr. Haldeman. I do. Yes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. It is one thing to attend a conference. It
is another thing to sponsor a conference which you do with
taxpayer dollars
Mr. Haldeman. And we did not do it perfectly. Since I have
been there, each year when we have done--we have attended the
Mortgage Bankers Association, and we have brought our spending
down year by year. I think we have to do it faster. And there
were some things that were done that we are going to take care
of next year.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I appreciate it.
Mr. Williams, given that Fannie Mae is in conservatorship,
do you have discretion as to how to spend those dollars, the
dollars that I am referring to on the conference? And were
these dollars budgeted?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, I do appreciate your concern as
well as the committee's on the topic. We have taken this
seriously. In fact, we have, since conservatorship, reduced
sponsorship and attendance at these conferences by over 50
percent.
Why we felt this was a good business decision was that this
was a conference that was going to be attended by over 3,000
industry participants. It gave us the opportunity to hold over
200 meetings with industry players that would allow us to
address the important issues facing not only the industry, but
are also important to the conservatorship, such as servicing
alignment, the rollout of HARP 2, servicing compensation,
increasing guarantees and many other strategic issues.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Could Fannie Mae have held those meetings
and accomplished those meetings without spending $74,000 on
dinner in 2 days? Could you have gone to Chicago without the
dinners and held the meetings?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we held many meetings during the
course of those days. The dinners were, too, part of it in
which it gave us an opportunity to meet with industry players.
We will do a better job, but we felt this was a very good
business decision.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. DeMarco, do you believe spending
$74,000, as we have talked about here this afternoon, does that
advance the interest of the conservatorship?
Mr. DeMarco. Mr. Fitzpatrick, attendance at the conference
certainly did. Certain individual expenditures probably could
have been done away with and still met the essential business
proposition of meeting with the entire industry and conducting
a tremendous amount of business and business education in one
place. So attendance and being an active participant was
certainly meeting the conservatorship goal. I wouldn't want to
say that every individual expense was necessary, no, sir.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Miller is recognized.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. DeMarco, you and I have
discussed on many occasions Fannie and Freddie's or FHFA's
policy of not reducing principal in modifying mortgages. And I
provided you two economic studies, one by the New York Fed, the
other by Amherst Securities, that examined the arguments and
reached different conclusions. They concluded that foreclosures
usually resulted in a 50 to 75 percent loss of principal, that
reductions in principals of 10 to 40 percent to get an
underwater homeowner back to even usually resulted in better-
performing loans, and I provided you those studies. They
concluded that it makes good economic sense for the creditor to
reduce principal to get an underwater homeowner back above
water. And you have said that your private analysis reached a
different conclusion.
Given the importance of this question, why have you not
made that private analysis public?
Mr. DeMarco. I think I will be making it more public on
this point, Mr. Miller, in response to continued inquiries from
you and others. But if I could address these two studies that
you raised.
The first, the Amherst study, when I first started reading
it, I started to get a concern, well, wait a minute, maybe
there is something going on here. Then as I went through it, I
realized that what was meant by ``principal forgiveness'' there
wasn't just writing off principal, it also included principal
forbearance, and that was actually part of what was going on
there.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. DeMarco, that is not
true. The study actually says specifically that principal
reduction is--this is a quote from the study: ``It is
reasonable to think that the success rate on principal
forgiveness would be better than forbearance, as the borrower
is closer to being re-equified.'' That is not a word you hear
very often.
So it does appear that the study does specifically address
the differences between forbearance and--it may not have
statistics that could distinguish it, but they concluded that
actually principal reduction would more likely result in a
performing mortgage than forbearance.
Mr. DeMarco. I have in front of me here the results on our
modified loans and the redelinquency rates, and this also goes
to the--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Isn't it like 44 percent?
Mr. DeMarco. The redelinquency rates? Let me tell you for--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. According to Freddie's
reports, the mortgages from 2 years ago that were modified, 44
percent are now 3 months past due. Is that incorrect?
Mr. DeMarco. That is incorrect. I am looking at 9 months
after modification, we have 60-day delinquency rates of 15
percent. That means 85 percent of these loan modifications are
still performing 9 months after they were made permanent. This
is down substantially. It used to be up in the 40 percent
range, sir. You are quite right about that, Mr. Miller. It used
to be up in the low forties at 9 months later, but it has
dropped from that all the way down to 15 percent. Right now,
what we have for loans that were originated in the first
quarter of 2011, 6 months later were down to less than 10
percent redefaults.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. The last time you were here,
I asked you about the settlement by--it was actually by the
Bank of New York Mellon as the trustee for Bank of America
mortgages, essentially put back claims, and the provisions in
that requiring that Bank of America refer out the servicing of
those mortgages. It is hard to conclude from what you said
earlier and from this settlement that anyone regards Bank of
America as doing a very good job of servicing. And you said
that the agreement did not actually require principal
reduction, which is correct. But it does specifically say, does
it not, that servicers must consider all loss mitigation
options, including principal reductions?
Mr. DeMarco. It may, Congressman. I don't recall the
precise wording. I did recall correctly, I am glad to hear you
say, that it did not mandate that.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. It doesn't mandate it, but it
says it doesn't consider anything to reduce their losses,
including modification. There have been stories in the last
couple of days at the OCC's required self-audits by the various
OCC banks that they are servicing, and approximately 5,000--
close to 5,000 appear to be of servicemembers in violation of
the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act. Do you know if either of
those were Fannie or Freddie mortgages?
Mr. DeMarco. I don't know, but I do know this has been an
important issue, Congressman. And it is one that we have worked
on with Mrs. Petraeus at the CFPB and with the Department of
Defense, and Fannie and Freddie have provided updated clarity
and communication to their seller servicers regarding that. And
their standards actually were already quite satisfactory to the
CFPB and to the Defense Department. But it did appear as though
there was confusion on this point, and we have already acted to
get improved communications. I don't know whether Mr. Haldeman
or Mr. Williams want to comment more on that?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. Chairman, I know that the
light is red, but, Mr. DeMarco, you said that we would shortly
be hearing more on the subject of principal modification and
your own analysis. Are you going to be providing your study to
the public, and if so, when? And why have you not done it
already?
Mr. DeMarco. I have certainly explained this numerous times
in committee hearings, and I have provided written
communication before to quite a number of Members of Congress
on it, including you. I just this week got yet another much
more detailed request, and we are evaluating that request. It
has quite a number of components to it, and we have tried to be
responsive to all Members of Congress when they request
information from us.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. But your analysis has to be
in writing. You don't just talk about this over the water
cooler. You have this in writing.
Mr. DeMarco. We have done the analysis, Mr. Miller, and we
will get it out to folks.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Pearce, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Haldeman, you had talked, on page 2 of your testimony,
about helping families avoid foreclosure. Can you kind of
expand on what you are doing there?
Mr. Haldeman. Yes. Since 2009, we have worked--helped,
benefited 575,000 families, and that would be all inclusive of
all the various tools that we use to try to help families. So
it would be traditional modifications, HAMP modifications,
forbearance plans, short sales, deed in lieus, a whole range of
tools that we use to try to keep people in their homes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you.
Mr. DeMarco, on page 5, you mention that you are bringing a
lawsuit against 18 institutions to recover certain losses, and
you are bringing those lawsuits because you feel that the
institutions did not act fairly in the relationship; is that
correct?
Mr. DeMarco. It has to go with the securities disclosures
that these institutions had on security instruments that were
purchased by Fannie and Freddie. And we believe we have
evidence supporting that the disclosures of what were the
characteristics of the loans in those securities did not match
what was actually there.
Mr. Pearce. I don't have exact documentation, but it looks
likes Mr. Johnson may have ended up with $100 million, $10
million a year for 10 years; Mr. Raines maybe $28 million.
There may be indications that certain accounting techniques
were used so that they would accelerate their bonuses. Have you
brought any actions against previous Directors, previous CEOs?
Mr. DeMarco. This predates me, Congressman, but the
predecessor--one of the predecessor agencies to FHFA, the
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, did bring such
a civil action against--
Mr. Pearce. Did we get any return?
Mr. DeMarco. We did. I don't know the numbers offhand,
Congressman. This was all made public at the time. But we can
get that to you. And, yes, there were penalties associated with
that, with each company.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you.
Mr. Williams, I should know a little bit better. I don't,
though, so if you would help me out. Do you have a board of
directors that you answer to?
Mr. Williams. Yes, we do, sir. They were installed--
Mr. Pearce. Can you pull your microphone up a little
closer?
So you answer to a board of directors. Are you publicly
traded?
Mr. Williams. There are shares, sir. But the real
shareholder, all rights of the shareholders have been conveyed
to the conservator, and the conservator is the person who
appoints both the board of directors and approves the
management team.
Mr. Pearce. How much were your losses during the last 12
months? Roughly, just roughly.
Mr. Williams. Roughly $15 billion. And bottom line--
Mr. Pearce. Did you have to go to a--did you have to float
a bond series or something like that? Did you have to go to the
bank? How did you make up those operating losses?
Mr. Williams. The funds that are needed to provide the net
worth for the company are provided by the U.S. Treasury upon
request from the conservator.
Mr. Pearce. Now that is, I think, my problem with your
testimony when you declare that we are a private business. I
don't know any other private business that could go to the bank
and get funds. They have a possibility of going bankrupt. If
they are mismanaged, then the market takes care of that
mismanagement. And I am not sure that the market is being
allowed to take care of anything right now, which causes me to
say it is acting much more like a government agency than a
private business. So if you have observations about that, I
would welcome them. But for me sitting on this side of the
desk, it sounds like you are much more a government agency. In
other words, we see agencies all the time overspend their
budgets, and they just come back for more. So just that one
clarification is critical for me.
Mr. DeMarco, have you run tests about how you could start
selling off parts of your mortgages, get private investors in
there? In other words, when you all are taking--you are taking
certain steps, forbearance or whatever, the help--as Mr.
Haldeman suggests, have you compared what would happen, the
costs stream to the agency, if you just accepted bids from the
outside to take blocks of loans compared to what you are having
to do to make those loans start processing? In other words,
there is a lot of money out there that would invest, I think,
at the right price.
Mr. DeMarco. Right. I think that is right, Congressman. I
can say several things about that. First, both companies have
been shedding assets. Certainly, there are retained portfolios.
That is, what they are financing on their own balance sheet has
been declining over the last few years, and there is a whole
programmatic system in place for that to continue. There have
been efforts to sell outside of that progression, identify
opportunities to sell blocks of assets and realize value.
My exchange with Congresswoman Waters about real estate
owned is also to your point of looking at efforts to take
assets off the balance sheets of Fannie and Freddie and get
them back into private hands on a more rapid basis. And then
finally, on a go-forward basis, we are looking at several ways
of having more of the credit risk that Fannie and Freddie are
taking on right now on a new business production in identifying
ways to have some portion of that credit risk actually be
financed by private capital and have private capital bear a
portion of that credit risk. And I believe in the coming year
you are going to see actual--more executions that follow that
approach.
Mr. Pearce. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Now, the gentleman from Delaware, Mr. Carney.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing today.
I have three lines of questioning that I would like to
explore. The first really is just to go back to Mr. Pearce's
question about the recovery efforts on security disclosures and
representations that were made. There was some reference to
that in the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report that was
presented here some months ago, and in that report, they talk
about moneys that were recovered through that process. Could
you update us on those recoveries?
Mr. DeMarco. I am sorry sir. I am not familiar with the
particular--
Mr. Carney. Dollar amounts?
Mr. DeMarco. The dollar amounts or, frankly, what exactly
the FCIC had. I can speak to the fact that we have filed these
lawsuits with regard to certain private-label mortgage-backed
securities that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have purchased where
we believe that there are deficiencies in the securities
offerings that were part of those transactions. We are seeing
this emerging in the marketplace. There have been more and more
lawsuits filed by all sorts of different parties regarding the
securitization process for private labels.
Mr. Carney. Does Fannie or Freddie do that separately or
independently?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we have a separate activity that
is based on our loss mitigation unit that goes back and looks
at loans from that period of time, from 2005 to 2008 in
particular, and looks at whether those loans should be
repurchased because they did not meet our underwriting
guidelines.
Mr. Carney. Right. There is a warranty, right, and
instrument that says if they didn't meet the underlying
guidelines, that they could be repurchased, right?
Mr. Williams. Correct.
Mr. Carney. So how aggressively are we pursuing those
representations?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, I believe we are being very
aggressive. We have stood up as part of the conversation that I
was having with the chairman about the growth in our loss
mitigation activities. That is one of the big areas that we
have grown because we are going back and looking at all the
loans that we have--
Mr. Carney. Is there a way that we can get a report on
that? Or is there public information available on that? That
would be helpful. You can answer that later because my time is
ticking.
You have talked a little bit about your foreclosure
prevention efforts. Is there something that we can do or other
programs or changes in existing programs that would facilitate
your efforts?
Mr. DeMarco. I think at this point we have--a lot has
changed with these various programs, and a lot of programs have
been put in place. We need to give them time to work. I think
things like the recent changes to HARP.
Mr. Carney. The changes to HARP, are some of those
changes--would they be appropriate for HAMP as well in terms of
some of the streamlining that was in HARP?
Mr. DeMarco. They are really targeted at two really
different sets of situations.
Mr. Carney. I know that, but there were kind of
administrative tightenings and changes that were put in place
in HARP, as I understood it, that maybe could apply to HAMP.
You don't think so. Okay.
Mr. Haldeman. Congressman, the way that I would answer that
would be that over the course of time, the HAMP program has
become more aligned and more efficient. That was not the case
in the spring of 2009.
Mr. Carney. So that is happening as an administrative
matter?
Mr. Haldeman. Precisely right.
Mr. Carney. Perfect.
Lastly, I would like to ask Mr. DeMarco, I guess, what you
think of--or it was Mr. Haldeman who mentioned that one of the
big questions out there is to clarify the future of the
secondary mortgage market. And, of course, there has been a big
discussion within this committee and members of this committee
and pieces of legislation, what to do with Fannie and Freddie,
unwind them, and so on and so forth. Of course, we had the
Treasury Secretary in here months ago presenting the
President's White Paper, which presented a series of options
from complete privatization to some hybrid model.
Could you share with us your opinion on what the future
ought to look like, Mr. DeMarco?
I will let you each have a shot at it, I guess.
Mr. DeMarco. I would say simply, Congressman, that I really
do believe that this is a critical public policy matter for
lawmakers to decide, and the essential decision point for
lawmakers is out of a $10 trillion or $11 trillion single-
family mortgage market, what portion of that mortgage market
warrants the American taxpayer standing behind that set of
mortgages as the ultimate credit guarantor of the mortgages?
And then on the other side, that leaves the rest of that $10
trillion or $11 trillion single-family market to be financed
through normal financial mechanisms, through private financial
institutions, exercising private credit assessments and putting
private capital at risk.
Mr. Carney. How would you answer that question?
Mr. DeMarco. I think that the answer is that it is going to
be a mix of both. Clearly, I don't see the FHA program or VA--
as credit guarantee programs will certainly exist. One of the
things Congress could do is make determinations about adjusting
the mission and the potential market scope of those programs
and leave the rest to the private sector. Or it could go
further, and it could say in addition to FHA/VA, there are some
other portions that will have an ultimate government guarantee.
My experience over time as a career civil servant is that
over time, government credit guarantee programs get a little
hard to manage and keep the pricing associated with the risks
that are involved. So it is a challenge. But on the other hand,
we certainly have seen that the private sector can be
challenged in assessing credit risk as well.
Mr. Carney. We saw that, didn't we?
I would like to hear from the other two, but I don't have
any time left. So I appreciate your answers to my questions.
Thanks.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller of California. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have often asked the question, what went wrong, and when
did it occur? Mr. Williams, you are the first one to publicly
answer that question without being asked. You said that in 2005
to 2008, the bad loans were written. And if you know when they
were written, you know what caused them, and you know how to
fix them. I am assuming both sides have fixed the problem that
occurred between 2005 and 2008. Is that a statement of fact?
Mr. Haldeman. I believe we have, and it is a different
credit policy.
Mr. Miller of California. That has been a debate I have
always tried to engage somebody in, and nobody would ever
answer.
The other question was raised by my good friend Maxine
Waters and others, accountability on the part of lenders. I
have always believed that has to be paramount. If lenders write
bad loans, they don't have proper oversight, use underwriting
standards that are unreasonable, they should buy the loans
back, and perhaps if they do that enough times, they will stop
doing that.
But one structure I have always felt was confusing and
should never have occurred was a hybrid model of Freddie and
Fannie, whereby the taxpayers are on the hook, and the private
sector made the money. We guaranteed it as a government, and
the private sector made all the profits. That is unreasonable.
But I do like what I have heard, and I agree with it. There
has to be some facility as a conduit for the flow of private
sector dollars to the secondary market. I think that has to
occur in the future. Probably 15 percent of the money we
receive in this country for loans comes from other countries,
and if there was not a government guarantee, those funds would
not be coming to this country, and many of the investors who
invested in Freddie and Fannie and bonds would not make the
investment if there was not a guarantee on those loans.
But a question that I have great concern over is the
situation you are in today. And if you aren't required to pay
this 10 percent dividend, Freddie and Fannie, what would your
assets be today and possibly in the future? What would they be?
And would you still be borrowing from the Treasury if you
weren't required to make this huge payment?
Mr. Haldeman. I can refer you to an analysis that FHFA
completed and published in October of 2011 where they took a
look at the future draws, dividend payments for Freddie Mac
going into the future, and they have three different scenarios
that they look at tied to many things, but including house
prices, how severe, whether we will have a double-dip
recession, whether housing prices will go down. There are three
scenarios. And under two of those scenarios, including the most
likely or the base case, Freddie Mac will not need any
incremental draw after 2011, and that is despite paying the 10
percent dividend that you cite.
Mr. Miller of California. If you weren't paying the 10
percent today, what would your assets be currently? And would
Treasury be on the hook for anything?
Mr. Haldeman. Yes, they still would be, Congressman. But
maybe one way I can say that, do the math off the top of my
head, which is dangerous. Our draw thus far is $72 billion. We
have paid $15 billion. These are all round numbers. We have
paid $15 billion in 10 percent preferred dividend. If I use
your interest rate, which I remember from your opening remarks,
of 5 percent, that would have saved $7.5 billion. So instead of
$72 billion, it would have been $64.5 billion, I think is the
math. So, we still would have been substantially in a draw.
Mr. Miller of California. If you had that $15 billion back
right now, how much would you be drawing?
Mr. Haldeman. It would be $72 billion minus $15 billion.
Mr. Miller of California. But what you have already
received, would you need more funds this year or next year if
you hadn't paid that $15 billion back?
Mr. Haldeman. I am hesitant to answer that. But even having
paid the 10 percent interest, we are not going to have any--
under the base case, we won't have a draw on 2012--
Mr. Miller of California. So your assets would be $15
billion rather than considering a draw that you are not
getting. So we are taking what liquidity you have away from you
by charging you 10 percent.
On Fannie, the same question, Mr. Williams. If we didn't
charge that 10 percent that we are charging in interest today,
would you still need to go to the Treasury right now for
additional funds?
Mr. Williams. Congressman, we have paid over $17 billion in
dividends. Referring to the same report as Mr. Haldeman noted,
as we move forward, payment of the dividends will be the
largest part of our draw, but we will continue to draw.
Mr. Miller of California. So if you didn't have to pay
that, your draw might be very close to zero?
Mr. Williams. In the future.
Mr. Miller of California. And that is something this
Congress needs to consider, that we charge the banks 5 percent.
We are charging Freddie and Fannie 10 percent, so we are almost
dooming the failure, because every dime they take in that would
be profit, they are giving back to the taxpayers in interest,
and then we are making them borrow more money to charge them
more interest on. It seems like a never-ending circle that we
have caused to happen.
But I guess the big thing is I think there needs to be some
form of facility to do what you do, whether Freddie and Fannie
is wrapped into a facility or whatever we do, to guarantee the
flow of money. But if there was no facility there, Mr. DeMarco,
to do this, is the private sector going to fill that position
today?
Mr. DeMarco. It would take an adjustment period for the
private sector to be able to do so. I do believe it could, but
it would take an adjustment period.
Mr. Miller of California. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your
time and patience.
Chairman Neugebauer. Now, to the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you as well, Ranking Member Capuano.
And to the witnesses, I thank you.
Do you have in the GSEs any ARMs that have not adjusted?
Mr. Williams. As I look at our products, sir, it is
predominantly--
Mr. Green. I can barely hear you.
Mr. Williams. Our products are predominantly 15-, 20-, and
30-year products, so I would look at it and say in terms of
ARMs products, it is a small portion of what we have, and I can
probably follow up and give you a number at a future point.
Mr. Green. It is a small portion. Would you guess that to
be 10 percent or more?
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Williams, some of our Members up
here are having a hard time hearing. If you would speak louder
and a little clearer, please?
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope that is
better.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes, it is.
Mr. Williams. As I was saying, Congressman, our product set
is predominantly 15-, 20-, and 30-year products. We will be
happy to follow up with you on percentage.
Mr. Green. ARMs--I understand that you are saying fixed
rate. Is that what you are saying? I am talking about
adjustable-rate mortgages.
Mr. Williams. Congressman, that was my point, that most of
our products are fixed-rate, 15-, 20- and 30-year products.
Mr. Green. Okay. Mr. Haldeman, would you respond, please,
sir?
Mr. Haldeman. Yes. ARMs are a smaller percentage of what we
do. But if I understand your question correctly, there still
would be some that have not adjusted yet because some of them
adjust, for example, in the fifth year. So there would be some
that have not yet adjusted, if I understand your question
correctly.
Mr. Green. And, Mr. DeMarco, permit me to ask you this: I
know you have exhibited some frustration in terms of dealing
with the servicers, and I appreciate your frustration. Like the
Member from California, I, too, have had my level of
frustration dealing with the servicers. Notwithstanding all of
the laws that we have passed to limit their liability and
encourage them to do things, given that we seem to be in a
position to write down principal that is not being written
down, let us put that aside and just talk about refinancing.
What is the situation with refi?
Mr. DeMarco. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac together have
refinanced about 9 million loans in the last couple of years,
and we introduced this Home Affordable Refinance Program in
early 2009 and made some major enhancements to it just a month
or so ago. And what this program is designed to do is it is
designed to help those borrowers who have a Fannie Mae or
Freddie Mac-owned mortgage where they are underwater on the
mortgage or near underwater, and some of these people were
having a hard time being able to refinance. We have enhanced
their opportunity to be able to refinance their mortgage. So we
expect that this is going to contribute to some additional
refinances for people who have previously been unable to do so.
Mr. Green. The question has been raised as to why not
refinance without being underwater? There are many persons who
can pay the current interest rates, but they can't handle the
higher rates that they have now. And these are hardworking
people who qualified, but they just can't do it. Why would we
have to wait until they are underwater to refinance?
Mr. DeMarco. Oh. Well, I am sorry, Congressman, I didn't
mean to leave you with that impression. For those that are not
underwater, I think there are really quite ready market
mechanisms and lenders willing to refinance them. And
certainly, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would be pleased to have
those mortgages refinanced.
But there is not a market impediment to them being able to
exercise that right due to normal functioning of the way our
markets work. There was an impediment for borrowers who had a
current loan-to-value ratio above 80 percent, and we have, I
believe, taken some pretty good steps to remedy that. But those
who already have at least 20 percent equity in their home today
shouldn't have an impediment to refinancing.
Mr. Green. I understand. And I have gone through the refi,
and I know that it is not as easy as one might think.
The point that I am making to you is this: If we know that
people are currently making payments that are much higher than
they would make if they got a refi, why would we not encourage
the refi of these loans before they get in trouble and try to
get them into a payment that they can afford?
Mr. DeMarco. Mr. Green, it is a fair question. We are
certainly not discouraging it, and I believe we are encouraging
it, and the opportunities are there. But if you are seeing, in
your community or in the marketplace, impediments that we
should be addressing, I would be happy to take a look at that,
because certainly, I agree with you.
Mr. Green. Mr. DeMarco, if I may, the equity that you
called to our attention, that becomes an impediment. Let us
assume that they don't have the 20 percent equity, but a refi
would allow them to stay in the home. Why don't we consider
simply refinancing to get through these loans that are creating
problems for us?
Mr. DeMarco. The HARP program is designed to deal with
those. But there have been proposals made, why don't Fannie and
Freddie simply take the mortgage; and if it is 6.5 percent,
just cross out the 6.5 and put 4.5 or 4 percent, send a letter
to the borrower saying, hey, you are now at this lower interest
rate? That is not permissible. That would be a violation of
several things. But creating a market opportunity for that
borrower to be able to refinance is something that we have done
and we are trying to encourage, because I would certainly agree
with you that that would enhance both the borrower's situation
as well as Fannie and Freddie's position as guarantor.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one additional
liberty?
Chairman Neugebauer. Very quickly.
Mr. Green. All right. Thank you.
In doing this--and I understand that you are separated from
certain other entities that do these things--but would
congressional assistance put you in a position so that you
could do it? Would that create a problem for you? If you had
something from Congress, would Congress be of assistance in
this area? Could Congress be of assistance?
Mr. DeMarco. I would be happy to go back and think about
it. Offhand, I can't think of any particular thing. I think
that what we have done in the HARP program is meaningful.
Congress could certainly be of assistance in figuring out what
the end game is with respect to the conservatorships. That
would certainly be helpful.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. DeMarco, I want to kind of go back to this plan issue.
Did you know that for 2011, Fannie Mae is, I think, planning to
spend $6 million on advertising, and Freddie Mac is going to
spend $600,000?
Mr. DeMarco. The specific numbers, no, sir. I do have an
understanding with them, and they should speak for themselves,
that the company's advertising is focused on the immediate
question of informing the marketplace, borrowers, and servicers
with regard to the changes that have been made in loss
mitigation programs, and to encourage the outreach with regard
to loss mitigation so that borrowers who are in troubled
mortgages know that there is a place to go and there is a path
to follow to be able to get assistance.
Chairman Neugebauer. I think my point is one of them has
about $2 trillion worth of business on the books, the other one
has about $3 trillion worth of business, but a tenfold
difference. I think what this hearing is about today is--Mr.
Williams says there is really not a written plan. Mr. Haldeman,
do you have a written plan on where you are going with Freddie
Mac?
Mr. Haldeman. We are working with our board and FHFA on a
3-year plan going forward.
Chairman Neugebauer. But we are 3 years into this
conservatorship. So I think what I want to say--one of the
points of this hearing and one of the things from my personal
perspective is I think it is time for the entities to come
together with some strategic plan, be able to begin to look at
how we are spending the money that we are getting, because we
are going to continue to advance. I think the last report that
you made, Mr. DeMarco, said that could go up to $230 billion to
$300 billion. We are at $170 billion now.
And I think, Mr. DeMarco, you are the boss. These guys work
for you. And I know you have more of a hands-off approach on
that, and you feel like you have hired capable people. But our
job is--the people sitting up here--is to make sure that we
begin to minimize to the greatest extent possible the
additional money that the taxpayers have to put into these
entities. And what I would like to see is for you all to have
some comprehensive plans, talking about reducing the
footprints, talking about internally, the culture within that,
of making sure the employees understand that they are not on
somebody else's dime right now. They are on the American
taxpayers' dime.
And I would hope that we could see some fruits from that as
we move forward, because I hope you were a little embarrassed
by the fact that these headlines were not very flattering and
don't give a lot of confidence to the American people. And it
overshadows maybe some of the better things that you are doing
on behalf of the taxpayers. But little things matter. And right
now, $10 million, $5 million, $600 million, $600,000, those are
real numbers to the American people.
And so, I would hope in the future that we can see some
comprehensive strategic planning, and then I think it would be
very helpful for the three of you then to come back sometime
after the first of the year and lay out some strategic plans so
that we all have a vision and make sure that the conservator
and the Congress and the conservator and the entities
themselves are all on the same page. And quite honestly, right
now I am not sure that I have the confidence that we have that
connectivity.
Mr. DeMarco. Thank you for those comments, Mr. Chairman. We
will take them to heart, and I will commit to you that you will
see a plan that outlines in a more comprehensive way where we
are going in the next chapters with conservatorship. But I must
hasten to add that while I will be pleased to develop that,
make it available not just to the subcommittee, but to the
public so the American taxpayer can see that, I will continue
to make my request and state my willingness and desire to work
with the entire Congress and the Administration to see the
final chapter of this written so that we can bring this to an
end.
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you.
Ms. Waters?
Ms. Waters. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Earlier, I spoke with Mr. DeMarco about my concern about
their having to pay Bank of America to take back the servicing
because they were doing such a bad job. I have another issue
here. In September, the FHFA Inspector General reported on a
$2.87 billion settlement entered into by Bank of America and
Freddie Mac. The IG found that Freddie only reviewed troubled
loans for bank repurchase claims 2 years after origination,
even though an FHFA senior examiner and Freddie Mac's internal
auditors noticed that the housing boom loans' foreclosures
peaked 3 to 5 years after origination. The IG said this shift
in foreclosure patterns among housing boom loans means that
most troubled loans are not being reviewed regardless of their
potential for viability for repurchase claims. In fact, Freddie
Mac has not reviewed for repurchase claims over 300,000
foreclosed loans originated between 2004 and 2007. These loans
have an unpaid principal balance exceeding $50 billion.
The basic point that the IG was making was that Freddie
could have left money on the table when it settles with banks
over loans that weren't originated according to their
standards. Further, the IG said that an internal Freddie memo
said that one advantage of pushing through the settlement was
that it would improve Freddie's business relationship with Bank
of America. I don't even know why you all want to continue to
do business with Bank of America.
But anyhow, what do you think of this IG report or
preserving ongoing business relationships and appropriate
criteria by which to gage whether a settlement is appropriate?
Before this IG report, the Congress knew very little about the
multibillion-dollar settlements entered into between banks and
Fannie and Freddie. Can you commit to Congress that you will
consistently provide the type of transparency that this IG
report provided as you enter into future settlements? Talk to
us about this, Mr. Williams.
Mr. DeMarco. If I may, Congresswoman, it was Freddie Mac. I
would be happy to address this since the IG report was
addressed to FHFA.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Please do.
Mr. DeMarco. The IG report, at the end of the day, had two
recommendations to the Agency, each of which the Agency has
agreed to carry out, neither of which go to whether there was
a--one had to do with an internal sort of policy for our
supervision staff that we are addressing. The other had to do
with something we already had under way, and the recommendation
we agreed to was to continue that work of examining the loan
review process.
This gets into a rather technical area to try to explain
what was going on with regard to the issues raised by the IG in
this report, but if I may have a moment, there has been a lot
of misreporting about this, and I would like to clarify a
couple of things. And Mr. Haldeman is welcome to add his view.
But FHFA had a senior examiner who raised a question
regarding a subset of loans that were on Freddie Mac's books--
they were interest-only loans and pay-option ARMs--and whether
the sampling strategy that was used by Freddie Mac corporate in
doing quality control review of these two types of loans--
interest-only loans and pay-option ARMs--was appropriate given
the pay adjustment characteristics of these mortgages, and
whether these types of mortgages would bear out default
characteristics different from other types of mortgages and
hence require a different sampling strategy.
This was raised. It was raised. It was something that Mr.
Haldeman was aware of when the settlement was done. It was
something I was aware of. And it was factored into the
settlement. So we identified that issue, signed up a potential
cost or risk into it, and it was factored into the settlement.
Since then, this has received a tremendous amount of
scrutiny by our Inspector General, by our own team, by Freddie
Mac's own team. And I will tell you that 11 months later,
almost 12 months later now, after all this scrutiny, if this
transaction was put in front of me, with everything I have been
able to learn subsequently, I would sign off on this settlement
again today.
There was not $1 billion of taxpayer money left on the
table. This was a commercially reasonable settlement that was
done. The issue that was raised by our own examiner was a
legitimate issue. We have continued to look into it. We believe
the judgment was appropriately assigned in making the
settlement, and I think that while it is a legitimate issue to
have raised, we have gone through it, and I am quite satisfied
with the transaction that we took here. And it is also
something that underwent a substantial amount of review within
Freddie Mac by the management team, by the Board of Directors,
by an outside firm retained by the company to review this, and
a good deal of scrutiny by my own team in making a
recommendation to me to sign off on this settlement.
There are always things that can be learned from these
processes. The IG has pointed some out, and we are taking the
appropriate action based on his recommendations.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Fine. My question to you is about--
Chairman Neugebauer. I am sorry. I am going to have to ask
the gentlewoman to suspend. Her time has expired. We have, I
think, a couple more Members who want to ask quick questions,
and they have called votes here.
Ms. Waters. I just want a commitment to provide
transparency.
Mr. DeMarco. Yes, ma'am.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. I think I will do Ms. Waters
a favor and pursue this question. I know you said that the
criticism of Freddie's settlement was misreported, but I didn't
just read press reports. At the time, I read the IG report.
Now, it is not fresh in my mind at this time, but it was very
critical. It is not that it was misinterpreted as being
critical. I read it. It was critical.
Mr. DeMarco. No question about it. It was very critical.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. It said that you settled the
suit too cheaply, and it said that you settled too cheaply, or
Freddie settled too cheaply for the wrong reason, which was to
improve your business relationship.
Mr. DeMarco. I am sorry, Mr. Miller. The report did not
reach a conclusion.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. He quoted emails that left
that impression. It was a very critical report. I think Ms.
Waters' question is the same as mine. There is pending
litigation involving tens of billions of dollars for the
private-label security, PLS mortgage-backed securities, the
private-label mortgage-backed securities that you all bought.
There are other put-back claims. How much conservatorship
ultimately costs taxpayers may largely depend on how that
litigation is resolved. We have an Inspector General's report
that is very critical of how Freddie has settled one set of
claims already.
Can the Inspector General review these claims in advance
before the settlement is entered into so that someone can look
at this and make sure that these are not settled too cheaply
and settled too cheaply for the wrong reasons, as the email
suggested?
Mr. DeMarco. Mr. Miller, that is a question for the IG, but
I would view it as highly--I would expect the answer is the IG
doesn't review things before they are decided or actions are
taken. The typical activity of an IG is to review an action
after--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Can you get someone detached,
someone else to look at it?
Mr. DeMarco. Yes, Mr. Miller. To that, yes. To that point,
I believe that we will be taking a different review process to
enhance the additional review and opinion that we get in
helping us to assess the settlements.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. And who will that be?
Mr. DeMarco. I don't have that answered yet, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Carney is recognized.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Capuano, for the additional time.
I just want to go back to the last question that I asked. I
didn't have enough time to ask the two gentlemen on either end.
Mr. Haldeman, I think it was, said that one of the
important matters is, I guess, for us to determine the future
of the secondary market. How would you see that? We did have
the Treasury come in and present the Administration's White
Paper. How would you answer that question?
Mr. Haldeman. Yes. When I took the job, they told me I
couldn't lobby or advocate, and I have taken that
responsibility pretty seriously. And so, I really don't want to
put on the table my personal view.
Mr. Carney. Could you frame the issue for us a little bit,
like Mr. DeMarco did? He didn't really answer the question
either, I don't think.
Mr. Haldeman. The issue for me is to what extent, if any,
should the government play a role in the housing finance
market? And I am sort of a free market kind of person, but I do
think there could be a legitimate role for the government as
some sort of ultimate guarantor for which a Freddie or Frannie
or a participant in the industry could pay an insurance premium
to get that kind of ultimate guarantee. The benefit of that
ultimate guarantee, as Congressman Miller said on this side,
would be that I think you would have a greater chance to get
foreign capital coming into our country and coming into our
mortgage market if we had that ultimate guarantee. But I think
it is critically important that the institutions have to pay an
insurance premium to get that guarantee.
Mr. Carney. If there wasn't a guarantee, do you think we
would have a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage product?
Mr. Haldeman. I worry about that. I don't think it would be
nearly so available to as many people as it is today.
Mr. Carney. Thank you.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Congressman. I think it is much like Mr.
Haldeman noted. We are not in a position to actually advocate a
specific solution. I think, first of all, it is very important
that we have a responsible transition to reform to make sure
that we do not destabilize the housing market as we go through
it.
I think, to your question, the key things the policymakers
will need to evaluate are how do you support a 30-year fixed-
rate mortgage in this market? How do you provide deep liquidity
that we have in the mortgage market today? How do you make sure
that low-, moderate-, and middle-income Americans have the same
access to mortgage financing that upper-income Americans do?
And how do you support balanced housing policy, meaning
affordable rental housing as well as homeownership? And I think
those are really the four to five key questions that
policymakers need to decide as they look at the solutions that
are on the table.
Mr. Carney. Thank you very much.
Mr. DeMarco, would you like to take another shot at it?
Mr. DeMarco. I think I am done. Thank you.
Mr. Carney. Thanks very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlemen, and I thank the
panel. This has been a good hearing.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Again, thank you for being here, and this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:48 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

December 1, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2629.043


