- MORTGAGE DISCLOSURES: HOW DO WE CUT RED TAPE FOR CONSUMERS AND SMALL BUSINESSES?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MORTGAGE DISCLOSURES: HOW DO

WE CUT RED TAPE FOR CONSUMERS

AND SMALL BUSINESSES?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

INSURANCE, HOUSING AND

COMMUNITY OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 20, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-138

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
76-100                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity

JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois, Chairman

ROBERT HURT, Virginia, Vice          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
GARY G. MILLER, California           MAXINE WATERS, California
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BRAD SHERMAN, California
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 20, 2012................................................     1
Appendix:
June 20, 2012................................................    39

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 20, 2012

Abbinante, Christopher, President, American Land Title
Association (ALTA).............................................    14
Canfield, Anne C., Executive Director, Consumer Mortgage
Coalition (CMC)................................................    16
Cosgrove, Bill, CMB, President and Chief Executive Officer, Union
National Mortgage Company, on behalf of the Mortgage Bankers
Association (MBA)..............................................    18
Date, Raj, Deputy Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB).........................................................     4
Hardy, Chanelle P., Senior Vice President and Executive Director,
National Urban League Policy Institute.........................    20
Hughes, Brenda K., Senior Vice President and Retail Lending
Administrator, First Federal Savings Bank, on behalf of the
American Bankers Association (ABA).............................    22
Veissi, Moe, 2012 President, National Association of REALTORS...    23
Wilson, Tim, President, Affiliated Businesses, Long and Foster
Companies, on behalf of the Real Estate Services Providers
Council, Inc. (RESPRO)........................................    25

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Abbinante, Christopher.......................................    40
Canfield, Anne C.............................................    50
Cosgrove, Bill...............................................   175
Date, Raj....................................................   186
Hardy, Chanelle P............................................   189
Hughes, Brenda K.............................................   194
Veissi, Moe..................................................   206
Wilson, Tim..................................................   212

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Biggert, Hon. Judy:
Written statement of the American Financial Services
Association (AFSA).........................................   227
Joint written statement of the Appraisal Institute and the
American Society of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers.....   230
Written statement of the Consumer Bankers Association (CBA)..   233
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association
(CUNA).....................................................   236
Written statement of the Housing Policy Council of The
Financial Services Roundtable..............................   239
Written statement of the Independent Community Bankers of
America (ICBA).............................................   242
Written statement of the National Association of Federal
Credit Unions (NAFCU)......................................   251
Written statement of the National Association of Mortgage
Brokers (NAMB).............................................   253
Gutierrez, Hon. Luis:
Written statement of the National Consumer Law Center........   257

MORTGAGE DISCLOSURES: HOW DO

WE CUT RED TAPE FOR CONSUMERS

AND SMALL BUSINESSES?

----------

Wednesday, June 20, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing
and Community Opportunity,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Judy Biggert
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Biggert, Capito, McHenry,
Dold; Gutierrez, Cleaver, Clay, Watt, and Sherman.
Also present: Representative Green.
Chairwoman Biggert. The Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing
and Community Opportunity will come to order.
Without objection, all Members' opening statements will be
made a part of the record, and I will begin with my opening
statement.
Good afternoon, everyone. Hopefully, the bells won't go off
too soon, but we are expecting votes, unfortunately, in a
little bit. So we thought we would get started right on time.
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing titled,
``Mortgage Disclosures: How Do We Cut Red Tape for Consumers
and Small Businesses?'' I welcome today's witnesses to this
important hearing.
As we all know, Congress has been examining complex
settlement procedures and confusing mortgage disclosures for
several decades. Mortgage disclosures required under the Real
Estate Settlement and Procedures Act, our favorite RESPA, and
the Truth in Lending Act, or TILA, have been of interest to me
since my days as a real estate attorney. Many of my colleagues
on the committee share that interest as they, too, were real
estate professionals in a former life.
For most homeowners, the biggest financial decision of
their lives is made at the closing table as consumers read the
mounds of confusing and complicated paperwork. Hence, in States
like Illinois, a lawyer is required at closing. For many years,
Ruben Hinojosa and I have authored letters to Federal
regulators outlining our concerns about these disclosures. At
times, these bipartisan letters have garnered the signatures of
over 240 Members of the House.
To Federal regulators, we have emphasized that newly
proposed mortgage disclosures must: one, be streamlined and
simplified; two, be thoroughly tested and vetted; three, allow
stakeholders ample time to provide input; and four, provide a
regulatory input analysis, with a particular focus on small
businesses.
It is important to keep in mind that these new disclosures
can radically change the marketplace for both businesses and
consumers. That is why as our housing market recovers and as
other relevant mortgage rulemakings, such as the Qualified
Mortgage, QM, and Qualified Residential Mortgage, QRM, rules
are under development, it is critical that any new mortgage
disclosures first do no harm to consumers, businesses, and the
recovering real estate marketplace.
And that is why we are here today. This hearing is a
continuation of the subcommittee's examination of provisions in
the Dodd-Frank Act and other regulatory initiatives that will
impact the mortgage origination process for both consumers and
service providers.
On July 21, 2011, the Dodd-Frank Act transferred general
rulemaking authorities on TILA and RESPA to the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). At this hearing, we will
examine more closely the efforts of the CFPB to improve and
combine RESPA and TILA mortgage disclosures; and we will
examine questions raised by consumers and lenders about the new
disclosures, hopefully shedding some light on how the CFPB
intends to move forward. I anticipate this will not be our last
hearing on mortgage disclosures and rules during the 112th
Congress.
So, with that, I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses--we are having two panels--and to an informative
discussion on this very important subject.
Now, I would like to recognize our ranking member, the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Gutierrez, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you for yielding, Madam Chairwoman,
and thank you for holding this hearing.
Complete, accurate, accessible information is critical to
ensuring that consumers are prepared when they consider what
could be their largest lifetime investment, purchasing a home.
Accurate and exhaustive disclosures are also one of the largest
deterrents against fraud, and eventually, defaults and
foreclosures.
More than 5 million American homeowners are facing the risk
of foreclosure, and it is clear that many homeowners were not
properly informed about loan terms or the risk of certain types
of mortgages. The need to harmonize TILA and RESPA disclosures
has been raised repeatedly over the years, and we were happy to
include it in the Wall Street reform law.
Today, we will learn about the work done by the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau in addressing this provision and
meeting the two twin objectives of: one, providing appropriate
consumer information; and two, keeping the costs reasonable and
manageable.
I look forward to hearing how the CFPB and the industry are
working to ensure that these new disclosure forms and rules
prioritize the need of the consumer and how they contribute to
a more secure housing market. I also look forward to learning
more about how the concerns of the industry and other
stakeholders are being addressed by the CFPB as it completes
its proposals for integrated disclosures and accompanying rules
for mortgage loans by July 21, 2012.
Madam Chairwoman, before I yield back, I request unanimous
consent to introduce the written comments submitted to the CFPB
on April 18, 2012, by the National Consumer Law Center, the
Alliance for a Just Society, Community Consumer Action, the
National Association of Consumer Advocates, and the National
Community Reinvestment Coalition regarding the ``Know Before
You Owe'' proposed mortgage disclosures.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Gutierrez. I thank you very much, and I yield back the
balance of my time, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Gutierrez.
The gentlelady from West Virginia, Mrs. Capito, is
recognized for 2 minutes.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thanks for the
time and for holding this hearing on the ongoing effort to
improve the mortgage disclosure process.
Many of us in this room have been through this process and
we know it is daunting. To sign the forms is daunting; to read
the forms, impossible; and it is a very difficult procedure
that I think can be improved.
Almost all of us have had these issues, and I know it has
been a priority of the CFPB to develop a more transparent and
understandable disclosure process. As this is not a new
endeavor, I still wonder if this renewed effort under the CFPB
will really do anything to reduce the paperwork and
information. I have said from this dais here several times, are
we just going to have the same stack of papers with two new
papers on top of it that we are going to have to sign anyway
because of all the legal disclosures?
The CFPB has been given substantial rulemaking authorities
in the mortgage area--I think maybe 20 or 29 or so are
pending--giving its broad mandate and the importance of
regulatory certainty to the mortgage finance industry. We know
they are still struggling. I am very interested in the
development of many of these rulemakings in the pipeline.
How will the directive being discussed this afternoon
impact other rulemakings, such as your QRM and the QM
definitions, which I think have been pushed off to the end of
the year? And will these rulemakings ultimately really provide
the clarity to consumers and small businesses? In promulgating
the rules, it is a tough task, and I hope they are mindful of
the impact that the rules will have on access to credit.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today, and I
want to thank the chairwoman for having the hearing.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
It is now time to introduce our first witness, Mr. Raj
Date, who is the Deputy Director of the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau.
Welcome. We are happy to have you here. Without objection,
your written statement will be made a part of the record. You
are now recognized for a 5-minute summary of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RAJ DATE, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CONSUMER FINANCIAL
PROTECTION BUREAU (CFPB)

Mr. Date. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify.
As you mentioned, my name is Raj Date, and I serve as the
Deputy Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
For more than 30 years, Federal law has required lenders to
provide two different disclosure forms to consumers shortly
after they apply for a mortgage. The law has also generally
required two different forms shortly before or at closing. Two
different Federal agencies developed these forms under two
different statutes: the Truth in Lending Act; and the Real
Estate Settlement Procedures Act. The information on these
forms is overlapping, and the language is inconsistent. Not
surprisingly, consumers often find that the forms are
confusing, and lenders and settlement agents often find that
the forms are burdensome to provide and to explain.
The American mortgage business was supposed to be the
broadest, deepest, most liquid, most sophisticated consumer
finance market in the history of the world, but it failed us,
and it failed us in part because consumers did not understand
the products that they were getting into or the risk profile
associated with those obligations.
While Federal agencies tried to address these disclosure
problems in the past, they did not arrive at a coordinated
conclusion. Dodd-Frank transferred authority for the TILA and
RESPA mortgage disclosures to the Bureau last July, July 2011,
and directed us to propose rules and forms combining the two
disclosures by this July, so next month, July 2012.
The Dodd-Frank Act established two goals for the combined
mortgage form: number one, improve customer understanding of
mortgage loan transactions; and number two, facilitate industry
compliance with TILA and RESPA.
To achieve these goals, the Bureau gathered information in
a variety of ways from a variety of sources. We tested draft
forms. We used interactive online tools and blog posts. We
hosted roundtables. We held conference calls and meetings.
These activities included the public, they included consumer
advocacy groups, and they included industry stakeholders, as
well as other government agencies.
One of those, one such activity, was our signature Know
Before You Owe initiative. We used our Web site to share early
prototypes of the combined disclosure forms to get the public's
feedback on the prototypes. We conducted extensive testing of
these prototype forms through interviews with more than 100
consumers, lenders, mortgage brokers, and settlement agents.
Those interviews took place in nine cities across the country.
Consumers were asked to assess whether the forms enabled
them to understand and compare different mortgage loans and to
identify changes during the mortgage loan process. Industry
participants were asked to use the prototype forms to explain
the loans as they would to a consumer and to identify areas for
improvement.
After each round of testing, Bureau staff analyzed the
results and designed new and improved prototypes. In fact,
almost every month between May 2011, and February 2012, the
Bureau posted these prototype forms on our Web site and sought
additional feedback. In total, the Bureau posted more than a
dozen prototype forms and received more than 27,000 responses.
In February of this year, 2012, the Bureau convened a Small
Business Review Panel with officials from the Small Business
Administration and the Office of Management and Budget. This
panel gathered information from small business representatives
about the cost of the proposed disclosures and other
potentially less burdensome alternatives. We are using all of
that information to develop proposed forms that will make the
mortgage process easier for consumers and for industry.
We will meet our statutory deadline. The forms will be
issued for public comment by the statutory deadline of July 21,
2012. At that time, we will also be issuing a proposed rule
that provides detailed requirements and guidance for filling
out the forms. The idea is to reduce unnecessary compliance
burden by providing clear guidance for industry while
strengthening protections for consumers.
Finally, the proposed rule must reconcile several
inconsistencies between TILA and RESPA. TILA and RESPA
establish different timing requirements for disclosing final
loan terms and costs and require different parties to provide
the forms.
During the small business review process, we discussed
potential solutions to these inconsistencies. We sought
feedback on whether the combined final disclosure should be
provided 3 days before closing so that consumers would have
time to review the final terms and costs and resolve any
questions or concerns and problems. We also asked about whether
the lender or the settlement agent would be better equipped to
provide the combined final disclosure or whether some sort of
shared responsibility was appropriate. We will continue to
explore these options in the proposed rule.
We are excited about this opportunity to develop a
practical solution to what has been a longstanding challenge
for both consumers and industry. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Date can be found on page
186 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
We have, I think, just been called for a vote, but we have
a few minutes. My personal best is 2\1/2\ minutes, but I don't
want to try to do that again. So we will start with the
questions, and as a reminder to each of the Members, there are
5 minutes for questions. I will yield myself 5 minutes.
When you did all of these focus groups or roundtables and
everything, what was the timeline that you wanted to get for
somebody who was going to have a mortgage? Because as I recall
in doing so many of these--the lawyer always got in at closing,
which was a little bit late sometimes for knowing what was
going on before the mortgage had already been made. So how do
you decide what--and now you are talking about 3 days. What
happens?
Mr. Date. The concern that you flag is definitely one that
is shared both by industry stakeholders as well as consumers.
Consumers, unfortunately, feel like they show up at closing and
there is a gigantic pile of paper that most people don't even
know how to begin making heads or tails of. It is only through
the guidance, for example, of a settlement agent that they even
find their way through with some level of comfort.
And, of course, industry stakeholders, be it mortgage
brokers or lenders or settlement agents themselves, feel like
so much ends up getting rushed at the last moment that there
are certain constraints that the timetable creates that
otherwise in a perfect world would not exist.
We are trying to tackle that in at least two broad ways.
One is, owing to the complexity--it is after all a relatively
complex transaction when all is said and done. With that
complexity in mind, still we want to really streamline,
clarify, and simplify that which consumers have before them. It
is only through maximizing the simplicity of the documents
themselves that you can maximize the chance that that timetable
doesn't work against you.
Chairwoman Biggert. Is it CFPB's plan to move forward the
new disclosures and rules? More specifically, what is the
timeline for rulemaking and shouldn't the QM and QRM rules be
finalized before you really complete the work on mortgage
disclosures?
Mr. Date. Sure. As you know, this is not our only mortgage
rulemaking. The CFPB has as many as--I want to say seven
different mortgage rulemakings, all of which Congress has
appropriately pointed us towards to remediate reasonably clear
deficiencies in the mortgage market as it had developed.
Taking the example that you raised, the Qualified Mortgage
Rulemaking, the proposal with respect to the ability to repay
provision in Dodd-Frank and the Qualified Mortgage definition
had been made by the Federal Reserve Board before we inherited
authorities from the Board last July. Our plan--and I can
assure you that it remains our plan--is to finalize the
Qualified Mortgage definition before the statutory deadline of
January of next year.
As a practical matter, I certainly understand the argument
and the concept behind the argument that a number of these
rules ought to be finalized before the disclosure forms are
made final. It is in fact an issue that we raised explicitly
with the Small Business Review Panel, and so it is entirely
possible that timetable you contemplate is the one that will
play out.
Chairwoman Biggert. Where is the CFPB in the process of its
work with the Small Business Review Panel?
Mr. Date. I am pleased with our work to date. We have
conducted three Small Business Review Panels: one with respect
to mortgage loan originator compensation; one with respect to
mortgage servicing; and the third with respect to the subject
of today's hearing, the integration of the TILA and RESPA
rules.
We are the first bank agency or financial regulator to
conduct Small Business Review Panels, so at some level it was
hard to know exactly what to expect. And I am not particularly
an especially optimistic person. I have been very pleased with
the process as it has played out, the input that we have
received, and the utility of that which we have heard as we
move forward. So I am really quite pleased.
With respect to this particular rulemaking, we will issue
the report coming out of the Small Business Review Panel at the
same time as we issue the proposed rule.
Chairwoman Biggert. Okay. You are looking at new
disclosures for consumers and small businesses that are
involved in the mortgage origination process. Are you
conducting testing? What is the testing for that?
Mr. Date. Yes. Our general approach to testing is one that
I think is shared by other Federal agencies with which I am
familiar, as well as broadly across much of the private sector
around consumer finance, and I would describe it in two big
pieces.
One up front is a series of what in a prior life I called
deep customer insight or deep discovery interviews. In this
case, we did more than 100 fairly lengthy interviews with
consumers, small business stakeholders, and other industry
participants to understand the broad contours and alternatives
we might pursue. That goes by lots of different names. The term
that we use is called qualitative usability testing. That
qualitative usability testing then forms the basis for our
proposal and then we would pursue quantitative testing through
one of several different means after the proposal is issued and
before it is finalized.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Gutierrez, would you like to get your questioning in or
would you rather wait until we come back?
Okay. We will recess to go vote. There are three votes, so
it should take about 25 minutes, I would say. We will be back
as soon as we can. Thank you so much.
[recess].
Chairwoman Biggert. The committee will reconvene.
Mr. Gutierrez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you.
Mr. Date, you spoke about the consumer testing that the
CFPB has done on the prototype mortgage disclosure forms. Often
when a buyer is reviewing these disclosures, they are in a
high-pressure atmosphere. Many of us have been there when we go
to a closing, sign this, sign that, move papers along, time to
get the keys and see the house; and this can sometimes lend
itself to inadequate review. Has the CFPB's consumer testing
simulated the high-pressure situation that borrowers can find
themselves in at all?
Mr. Date. Thank you, Congressman.
It is an excellent question, because some of the criticism
that is possible with respect to qualitative usability testing
is that, in general, it does not exactly simulate real-life
pressures in the moment. I think you are correct. It would be
odd to find a borrower at a closing table who says to himself,
``I would like to be here all day.'' Nobody says that.
Usability testing does do some things, but it does not do
everything. What it does do is set out the broad contours of
what ought to work in terms of basic comprehension and
understanding how the pieces of the transaction fit together.
In terms of more statistically significant and larger
quantitative testing, it is not a substitute for that, which is
why we are going to pursue quantitative testing after the
proposal and before finalization.
Mr. Gutierrez. I have heard of instances where borrowers
are the targets of deceptive practices. Let me ask you, has the
CFPB tested whether consumers understand the information
included in the prototype forms if they are verbally misled
about mortgage terms or settlement costs even?
Mr. Date. A couple of the elements of that which we may be
pursuing with respect to this rulemaking are meant to make it
much more difficult for bad actors in this space to be able to
deceive consumers. So, just a couple of examples with respect
to that.
First, HUD in the most recent revisions to RESPA's
disclosure forms tightened rules with respect to tolerances
associated with changes in closing costs after they are
initially disclosed to borrowers. There are areas in which we
are evaluating whether or not those tolerances were fully
effective or fully appropriate and so we would try to think
through those issues.
Part of the purpose for that is that it allows borrowers to
be more surefooted as they evaluate a potential transaction and
compare it to alternative transactions but at the same time to
be able to make it more difficult for so-called bait-and-switch
tactics to take hold of the process.
Mr. Gutierrez. There have been some concerns expressed that
in combining TILA and RESPA disclosures, the CFPB may have
inappropriately expanded beyond harmonizing and improving the
disclosures to include a reworking of any underlying
regulations. How do you respond to the accusation that you may
be reworking the underlying regulation?
Mr. Date. Congress has given us, in my mind, a quite
appropriate task, which is to combine, make from several into
one, to streamline, to clarify, and to make cheaper, less
expensive, and less burdensome to comply with. All of those are
entirely appropriate responsibilities for us to undertake, and
that is what we are doing. And we are doing it in a way that is
hopefully at the end of the day responsive to borrower needs
while providing incremental consumer protections as well as
making it easier and cheaper to comply with these two
disclosure regimens.
Mr. Gutierrez. The goal--I know it is your goal. I don't
think you are changing it. I think you are doing exactly what
the Congress of the United States in the last Congress enabled
you to do.
And I do want to say that I have never encountered the
problem, but then if America only had to deal with problems
that we encounter as a Member of Congress, they probably would
not encounter a great deal. We are really legislating for the
rest of America.
Because I have to tell you, I go to my bank. I take out a
home loan. It is pretty clear. Exactly what they said was going
to happen is what happens. The interest rate, I never get a
surprise later on.
But, at the same time, there are surprises in so many other
financial products, even for Members of Congress, like the
famous credit card, get 25,000 miles, get a free ticket. I
don't know to where you get a free ticket for 25,000 miles, but
they keep advertising.
So there still are bad actors out there, and there are
still people who will again try to manipulate and exploit a
maybe somewhat unsophisticated public when it comes to having
some kind of financial literacy. So I want to thank you and
wish you Godspeed in the work you do, and please let us know if
we can be a helping hand to getting that work done.
Thank you so much.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
If I could just quickly follow up on the RESPA and TILA and
whether there is a conflict, I wasn't quite clear on how you
answered that. Does the CFPB have the authority to resolve what
is a conflict? Let's say it is a conflict. And you talked about
streamlining and getting them to move together. But in law,
there is a difference. Can you change that?
Mr. Date. We believe that we can, both through the explicit
instruction to integrate these disclosures as well as the
broader authorities granted to the Bureau, which roughly
parallel that which the Federal Reserve Board had in Title X
and Title XIV.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. Okay.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Biggert; and thank
you, Mr. Date, for being here.
We hear a lot from community bankers, mortgage bankers,
about compliance with regulators gumming up the works and the
red tape. Let me ask you about the requirement that consumers
receive their final settlement disclosure form 3 days in
advance. Give me your thinking behind the 3-day requirement.
Mr. Date. Certainly. Consumers, in order to make sense and
be confident and be surefooted in the transaction they are
about to undertake, which, after all, both enables for many
people the best part of their financial lives but also in
reality is probably the single biggest obligation and single
biggest set of financial risk that they will face, in order to
do that in a surefooted way they need time to really understand
that which they are getting into. And the idea is to the extent
that data can be made available in a way that normal human
beings would be able to understand, 3 days ahead of time as
opposed to 3\1/2\ minutes, that is rather an advantage.
Now, obviously, things may change. In routine mortgage
transactions, there are some things that do change between 3
days out and the time of closing. For example, recording fees
might not be knowable 3 days ahead of time, hypothetically. So
what we are going to try to do and what we have been attentive
to the feedback from small business representatives through our
Small Business Review Panel about is to be attentive to those
areas where: number one, there is a real chance that you don't
know 3 days ahead of time; and number two, there is not a
prejudice to the borrower as a result.
Mr. Clay. And having been a real estate agent prior to
coming here, tell us what the CFPB's rules will do for
documentation at closing. Does it simplify it? I know that
there are numerous documents that each buyer signs and
sometimes seller. Does this help in that process?
Mr. Date. I believe that it does, and it does so by taking
a real step forward in terms of streamlining Federal disclosure
forms around the mortgage process. It is not just page count
that is reduced, although that will happen, but it is also
making it easier for someone to actually understand, which, of
course, should be the goal of any disclosure regimen.
Now, there is a lot that happens at the closing table and
otherwise in a mortgage transaction that has nothing to do with
Federal requirements per se, but we can absolutely put
borrowers in a better context with better tools to understand
that which they are facing, and everyone benefits as a result.
Mr. Clay. And in your public comment period, what kind of
feedback are you getting from the industry, from the mortgage
banker community and the community bankers, too? What are you
hearing?
Mr. Date. We will have a formal comment period that extends
after publishing our proposed rule next month. But essentially
from the very week that I arrived at the Treasury Department at
the end of September 2010, during that entire time period we
have been quite actively reaching out to small business
representatives and other industry participants across the
mortgage landscape. And the basic thread, both in general
terms--maybe I will give you the general and then a specific.
In general terms, I think it is fair to say that no one
looks at the Federal disclosure regimen as it exists today and
says, yes, that is ideal. That is the best of all possible
worlds. No one thinks that. There are certainly differences of
opinion about pace and exact trajectory, but fundamentally
everyone acknowledges that which we have today is not ideal.
Even to date, we have been able to incorporate specific
suggestions over time. One that immediately comes to mind is
sort of the notion in the loan estimate that we will propose in
our rule. Originally, our early prototypes didn't have, for
example, principal, interest, taxes, and insurance all
separately enumerated; and it was quite clear from the feedback
that we received, both from consumer groups and from the
industry, that you ought to do that, and later prototypes did.
That is not the only example, but it really speaks to the
power of an iterative approach where you actually reach out to
people who are affected by these things.
Mr. Clay. And I guess that is the key to this process. It
is striking a fair balance between more disclosure and the
mortgage banker industry and how we can expedite the process
while we still protect consumers. So thank you for your efforts
at CFPB.
Mr. Date. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Clay. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Dold,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman; and, Mr. Date, thank
you so much for taking your time to join us today.
Congress, through the Economic Growth and Regulatory
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996, directed the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and the Federal Reserve Board to
simplify and improve RESPA and TILA disclosures. My
understanding is that there are some notable conflicting
provisions in the statutes and the agencies failed to provide a
joint disclosure. They concluded that meaningful change should
come only through legislation.
How did the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act differ from the 1996 Act to compel regulatory
agencies to come up with a joint disclosure document?
Mr. Date. As I had mentioned briefly before, the advantages
I think are threefold post-Dodd-Frank versus obviously what has
been a long-standing challenge within the mortgage marketplace.
I say threefold, because the first is about having a singular
authority with respect to both statute and regulatory schemes.
Not to put too fine a point on it, but having a single agency
in charge of both statutes on the margin makes everything
easier in terms of trade-offs between them.
Second, there is, of course, a specific mandate within
Dodd-Frank to integrate these disclosure regimens so that they
are simultaneously better for consumers and that they ensure
compliance and make compliance easier for industry
participants.
And third is that both Title X and Title XIV in our view
clearly gives us the authority to do just that.
So the right mission with the right structural
accountabilities and the right authority to do it.
Mr. Dold. Correct me if I am wrong, but Dodd-Frank required
that by July 21st of this year, the CFPB propose and integrate
an accompanying rule for mortgage loans that satisfies the
requirements of both RESPA and TILA. Will the CFPB be meeting
that deadline?
Mr. Date. Yes, sir, we will be meeting that deadline.
Mr. Dold. Fantastic. So we can expect to see it on or
before--do you think it is going to be pretty close to July
21st?
Mr. Date. My hope would be not just before the clock
strikes midnight on that date, but it will be proposed next
month, yes.
Mr. Dold. Okay. Fantastic.
With regard to mortgage disclosures and closings, one of
the things that I hear oftentimes from my constituents is that
they don't read the documents because the stack is so large
that they couldn't possibly get through them. When was the last
time you talked to a consumer who actually read every one of
those documents? Or, more importantly, when was the last time
you sent somebody, an average consumer, to a closing without an
attorney?
Mr. Date. I will go one further, Congressman. I bought a
house last year. My wife does financial fraud cases for the
Department of Justice. Consider what I do for a living. We
didn't read the papers at the closing able. It is an
unrealistic premise that the disclosure regimen has been based
on, which is why we talked with the Small Business Review Panel
about the notion of delivering the closing disclosure not just
in simpler form but in fact earlier than the closing itself.
Mr. Dold. Okay. Madam Chairwoman, I have no further
questions right now.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Texas?
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman; and I thank the
witness for appearing.
I must say to my colleague who is about to exit the room
that you have preempted me. I think that probably more than
anything else when I talk to consumers about mortgages and
closing on their homes, they talk about just the inordinate
amount of paper and how it is just impossible to peruse it;
and, even if they do, they contend that they don't really
understand all that is there.
My question is, at the end of the day, when you finish,
given that lawyers have opinions about what must be done to
properly protect clients, will you be able to remove enough of
the language so that the stack of paperwork will be condensed
to some extent, and will the process be such that people won't
sign papers that have not been completed?
Many times a person simply signs documents, and they are
told that, ``We will fill that in later. Just go ahead and sign
now.'' So at the end of the day, I believe that is a noble and
laudable goal, but will we get there at the end of the day?
Mr. Date. I am optimistic, and I am optimistic in the
following two ways: one is a process point; and another is
substantive.
The process point is what we have done to date, this
iterative approach of developing prototypes that are informed
by outreach, informed by qualitative usability testing,
informed by hard work, and the willingness to change what was
originally done. Your first prototype ought to improve as you
get to your second, that process fundamentally I think is
better suited to create disclosure forms or, frankly, a lot of
other things that are not just things that are written by
lawyers for lawyers, but in fact things that are written to
work in the real world with actual human beings in stressful
moments doing important things in their financial lives. That
is the process point.
The substantive point is I personally am optimistic that
the concept that we spoke about with the Small Business Review
Panel earlier this year about separating the closing disclosure
from the giant stack of paperwork at the closing table, so the
first time that a consumer sees these important bits of
information is not when they are confronted with, for example,
the note itself or all manner of other documents that are first
subject to State law and at some level may be irreducible in
order to protect the security interest in the underlying, et
cetera.
So I think there are both process and substantive reasons
to be optimistic, but we absolutely share your objective.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
And, of course, I think that you have to have an acid test
to ascertain whether or not you have succeeded. So you will
develop your new paradigm, the process will be changed to some
extent maybe, and you will have your new instruments to be
signed, but what will be the acid test to ascertain whether or
not you have succeeded?
Mr. Date. There are two bits of testing that will give us a
lens into that.
The first lens happens before we even finalize the rule, as
we conduct quantitative testing to make sure that what we have
proposed in fact does what we hope that it will. Many of these
things you just don't know until you really do test them.
The second is Dodd-Frank, to my mind, appropriately calls
on us to take retrospective look-backs at new regulations that
we promulgate to ensure that what was intended in fact was the
result. And that is something that we, not just in this context
but across-the-board in terms of our policy agenda, are quite
serious about. Because even if it did work perfectly on day
one, markets change. They are dynamic. So we should be
attentive to circumstances as they change as well.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much. You have a daunting
challenge, but I do believe that it is not a Quixotic quest. I
think it can be done.
I just hope you won't assume that you will get it done the
first time. I think looking back and having an acid test will
be very helpful, because there is just so much involved in what
you are doing. It really is awesome when you actually go
through the process, as you have, I have; and consumers are
quick to point out that they just give up and they are just so
happy to get the home that they will sign anything and they
will walk away.
And my final point would be the signing of documents
wherein you indicate, I have read this and I understand it, can
you just give me a comment in terms of how you will handle
this? Because many people will sign a statement saying, I have
read it and I understand it, but they really haven't read it.
And even if they did, they didn't understand it, but they want
the house, the home. Please.
Mr. Date. Why don't I just make a general comment with
respect to that?
I think your observation points to the self-limiting nature
of just piling on disclosure form after disclosure form after
disclosure form. If there is a substantive problem in consumer
understanding, just generating another mostly meaningless to
the average person piece of paper that has to be signed doesn't
solve that substantive problem. They are hard problems to
solve, but if you take the right approach, again, I am
optimistic.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Green.
Just one quick question, and then we will excuse you, Mr.
Date, and go on to the next panel.
Is the CFPB working to ensure that disclosures ensure
transparency in charges that reflect different kinds of
business models? For example, we have the independent title
insurers, but we also have title insurers and brokers that have
an affiliation business arrangement, and we also have
independent appraisers as well as banks with in-house appraisal
management companies.
Mr. Date. In general, the approach is to try to give
consumers information that is complete enough to understand how
it is that the money in the transaction is flowing, as well as
the information presented in a way to give them a real sense of
the nature of the risks and the nature of the transaction that
they are looking at in substantive terms.
We presented to the Small Business Review Panel options
around changing, for example, the tolerance associated with
changes in costs for affiliates of lenders versus independent
providers of those services, and it could well be there are
changes on the margin there that would tend to conceivably put
those players on a better, more competitive, even playing field
with each other. But, again, it is certainly one of the
issues--
Chairwoman Biggert. And will there be transparency?
Mr. Date. In general, we have tried to make sure and we
will continue to try to make sure as we refine going forward
that those elements that really ought to be important to a
consumer's understanding of the transaction and of risk are as
transparent as we can make them.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. Thank you so much for being
here today. You are excused. We really appreciate your time.
The Chair notes that Members may have additional questions
for this witness, which they may wish to submit in writing.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 30
days for Members to submit written questions to this witness
and to place his responses in the record.
We will now have the next panel take their seats.
While we are having the second panel take their seats, I
will just ask unanimous consent to insert the following
materials into the record: a June 20, 2012, letter from the
Credit Union National Association; a June 20, 2012, letter from
Impact Mortgage Management Advocacy and Advisory Group; a June
20, 2012, letter from the Appraisal Institute; a June 20, 2012,
letter from the Housing Policy Council of the Financial
Services Roundtable; a June 20, 2012, letter from the National
Association of Federal Credit Unions; a June 20, 2012, letter
from the Consumer Bankers Association; a June 20, 2012, letter
from the National Association of Mortgage Brokers; a June 20,
2012, letter from the American Financial Services Association;
and a June 20, 2012, statement from the Independent Community
Bankers of America.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Okay, welcome to this second panel.
I will introduce the panel: Mr. Christopher Abbinante,
president, American Land Title Association; Ms. Anne Canfield,
executive director, Consumer Mortgage Coalition; Mr. Bill
Cosgrove, president and chief executive officer, Union National
Mortgage Company, on behalf of the Mortgage Bankers
Association; Ms. Chanelle Hardy, senior vice president and
executive director, National Urban League Policy Institute; Ms.
Brenda Hughes, senior vice president and retail lending
administrator, First Federal Savings Bank, on behalf of the
American Bankers Association; Mr. Moe Veissi, 2012 president,
National Association of REALTORS; and Mr. Tim Wilson,
president, affiliated businesses, Long & Foster Companies, on
behalf of the Real Estate Services Providers Council.
Once again, without objection, your written statements will
be made a part of the record. You will each be recognized for a
5-minute summary of your testimony, and we will start with you,
Mr. Abbinante. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER ABBINANTE, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN LAND
TITLE ASSOCIATION (ALTA)

Mr. Abbinante. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert, members of the subcommittee, my name is
Christopher Abbinante, and I am the president of the American
Land Title Association. I have been in the title industry for
over 35 years, most recently serving as the president of
eastern operations for Fidelity National Title Group.
ALTA members act as independent third-party settlement
agents in real estate transactions. We prepare and provide the
HUD-1 settlement statement which provides all parties to the
transaction with their final settlement costs.
ALTA supports simplified mortgage disclosures. It is
critical that the CFPB get this rule right for consumers and
industry. However, industry groups and the Bureau agree that
there are a number of statutory conflicts between RESPA and
TILA. It is not clear if these conflicts can be resolved by the
Bureau or will require an act of Congress.
My testimony will outline five principles that ALTA has
identified to help the Bureau avoid unintended consequences for
consumers and industry.
Our first principle is to prevent disruptive and costly
delays to closings for consumers. We recognize that RESPA and
TILA have conflicting timing requirements for when consumers
receive their settlement disclosure. To resolve this conflict,
the Bureau is expected to adopt the TILA requirement and
propose that consumers receive their final disclosure 3 days
before closing.
Providing disclosure earlier in the process makes sense in
theory, but it is simply not practical and will result in
delays, increased costs, and frustrations for businesses and
consumers. A lot of costs change within 3 days of closing
because of property inspections and walk-throughs. If each
change triggers a new 3-day waiting period, the rule will
almost certainly delay settlements and add costs.
Our second principle is to provide industry with clear
guidance. Today, a lack of clear and definitive guidance causes
lenders and settlement agents to unnecessarily lose an
estimated 3 million hours of productivity each year. When these
forms changed just 2 years ago, HUD issued 400 frequently asked
questions after the rule was published. This was very costly
for businesses, because each change required new software
coding, testing, and training.
Our third principle is that the rule should promote
competition. To improve accuracy and prevent bait-and-switch,
regulators hold lenders liable for some costs that increase
more than a certain amount at closing. This is called
tolerance. However, the economics of tolerance inflate
estimates and reduce the number of settlement agents that are
allowed to compete for business. We urge the Bureau to work
with us to improve accuracy for consumers and to protect
consumers by ensuring that settlement agents continue to serve
as the independent third party at the closing.
Our fourth principle is to avoid unnecessarily high costs
for small businesses. These forms will be very costly to
implement. Software vendors estimate that they will each spend
around $2.5 million to develop and implement compliant
software. This is more than twice the amount that was spent
when these forms changed in 2010. These costs will likely be
passed on to the 21,000 settlement agents across the country,
roughly 88 percent of which are small businesses, and
ultimately to the consumer. We estimate they will pay $800 per
employee for up-front implementation and training and see a 20
percent annual increase in software fees. It is also estimated
that their closing staff will be able to close two fewer
transactions per day.
In addition, changes that might be perceived as industry
friendly can actually be very costly. One example is that we
strongly recommend a standard disclosure form as required by
RESPA rather than a model disclosure form as required by TILA.
Standardization reduces costs and prevents consumer confusion
caused by the hundreds of different versions of the same
disclosure produced for each mortgage lender.
Our final principle is to encourage consumers to make
informed decisions. The choice of words influences consumers'
likelihood of making decisions in their financial interests.
Some drafts of the form described owner's title insurance as
not required. A consumer without an owner's title policy is out
of luck if their ownership is challenged. This is tragic and
can be prevented. If these forms need to use modifiers to
describe a particular settlement service, they should use terms
like ``recommended'' or ``advisable'' to encourage consumers to
make an informed choice.
We appreciate the opportunity to discuss federally-mandated
mortgage disclosures. Getting this rule right is critical. ALTA
is eager to serve as a resource to this subcommittee as well as
to the Bureau.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abbinante can be found on
page 40 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Ms. Canfield, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANNE C. CANFIELD, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CONSUMER
MORTGAGE COALITION (CMC)

Ms. Canfield. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert, and members of
the subcommittee.
My name is Anne Canfield and I serve as the executive
director of the Consumer Mortgage Coalition, a trade
association of national mortgage lenders, servicers, and
service providers. We appreciate the opportunity to testify and
appreciate the subcommittee's attention to this important
issue.
I would also like to request that the appendices to my
testimony be made a part of the record.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Canfield. Thank you.
Along with its industry colleagues, the CMC has been a
long-time and strong supporter of efforts to streamline
mortgage disclosures. The disclosure should assist consumers in
understanding their transaction and help them make informed and
prudent decisions. A well-informed consumer will also help
prevent abusive mortgage practices from taking hold.
The CFPB does have an historic opportunity, given that the
regulatory authority over the two principal government statutes
governing mortgage disclosures, RESPA and TILA, now reside in
one Bureau.
It would be most unfortunate if the CFPB were to repeat the
experience that occurred when the 2008 amendments to Regulation
X were implemented. At that time, the confusion surrounding the
2008 rule necessitated 11 rounds of frequently asked questions
after the rule was final, but never really did provide the
clarity that the industry needed, and required delaying
enforcement of the regulation by 4 months. While this was an
extremely difficult and expensive experience for the industry,
more importantly, the 2008 amendments resulted in a set of
mortgage disclosures that are even more confusing to consumers
than any of the previous disclosure regimens.
In order to get it right, the CFPB must take a holistic and
methodical approach to this project. Otherwise, chaos is likely
to ensue.
First, the CFPB should examine the existing TILA, RESPA,
and related rules to determine where modifications to those
rules might be needed so that any superfluous disclosures that
are emanating from the existing rules can be either eliminated
or modified.
Second, the Dodd-Frank Act includes a number of provisions
that will result in additional mortgage disclosures. All the
Dodd-Frank Act rules that will drive additional disclosures
need to be finalized, including the QM rule and the QRM rule.
The disclosures will only work if they are designed together.
Indeed, that was the main purpose for assigning to a single
regulator the task of designing the disclosures.
Third, once all the Dodd-Frank mortgage-related rules that
will result in additional disclosures are finalized, those
rules should be placed on hold until all the new disclosure
requirements are ready to be implemented. Both the substantive
rule changes and the disclosure changes should be implemented
once, at the same time.
Fourth, the new disclosure should then be designed to
accommodate all the existing and new disclosure requirements,
along with the requirements set by the States, unless the CFPB
agrees or decides to preempt the State disclosure requirements.
Fifth, once the new draft disclosures are designed, they
need to be tested on actual closed loans, not in focus groups,
across all available loan products to ensure that they actually
work. Testing the disclosures on closed loans may reveal the
changes that will need to be made to the draft forms.
Sixth, once the format of the forms is finalized, a
reasonable implementation period needs to be given so that the
industry is given the time it needs to change its systems,
train its employees, and monitor and audit the changes to
ensure that everybody is compliant.
I would like to reemphasize that both the rule changes that
are substantive along with the disclosure changes need to be
implemented once, and at the same time. Otherwise, the industry
will be in a position of having to implement and redo its
systems repeatedly, and in this process I can't even imagine
what the disclosures will look like to consumers. It will be
very, very confusing.
Also, the Dodd-Frank Act, as you heard in the prior
testimony by Mr. Date, requires that the CFPB come out with a
proposed rulemaking by July 21st. Since the Dodd-Frank rules
and the related disclosures are not going to be known at that
time, any proposed disclosures they come out with in a proposed
rulemaking at that time will not make any sense and will not be
usable. So we would recommend that Congress and the CFPB delay
that proposed rulemaking date. It only makes sense. It is not
unprecedented that Congress sometimes delays those required
dates. They did so with the QRM rule. There are many other
examples when legislation is passed that is a very large bill
and not every piece of it fits together perfectly.
The other thing that we would like to recommend is that the
CFPB implement a four-step disclosure regimenn even when it
does design its disclosures.
We think that at step one, a loan estimate can be given to
the consumer. It is a single disclosure that would be sent to
the consumer within 3 days of application.
At step two, using the same form that was provided at step
one after the loan has been underwritten, the consumer would
receive a second updated disclosure form. That second
disclosure form could also serve the purpose of meeting the
Regulation B ECOA notice. So the consumer would receive one
form at that stage of the transaction versus two.
Chairwoman Biggert. If you could wrap up, we will probably
come back to this in questions. Thank you.
Ms. Canfield. Great. Thank you. I appreciate your time.
Our remaining remarks are we think we can get part of the
way there in meeting the CFPB's desire to have a 3-day waiting
period before final closing documents are provided to the
consumer, but I think that actually requiring 3 days, a 3-day
waiting period, before the consumer does get the final closing
documents will create chaos. It was tried in 1975, and it did
not work, and it would be very harmful to the industry if it
were to happen again.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Canfield can be found on
page 50 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Cosgrove, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BILL COSGROVE, CMB, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, UNION NATIONAL MORTGAGE COMPANY, ON BEHALF OF THE
MORTGAGE BANKERS ASSOCIATION (MBA)

Mr. Cosgrove. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert.
My testimony this afternoon will provide MBA's perspective
on the CFPB's Know Before You Owe effort.
I own an independent mortgage banking company headquartered
in Ohio. We employ 220 mortgage professionals. I have 26 years
of experience in mortgage banking. Last year, my company
originated over $750 million of mortgage business, and this
year we are on track to close approximately $1 billion in
mortgage loans.
RESPA and TILA disclosures directly impact my company and
our customers. If done right, these new combined disclosures
will help borrowers make better-informed decisions about what
they can and cannot afford. These disclosures also make it
easier for them to compare the estimated cost of the loan
versus the actual cost at closing.
MBA has long supported that RESPA and TILA disclosures work
together as a way to provide better information for home
buyers. Splitting the authority between HUD and the Federal
Reserve never worked. The disclosures diverged over the years.
The CFPB Know Before You Owe initiative has the potential to
finally sync up the information borrowers receive.
Let me highlight the key points of our testimony.
First and foremost, MBA believes this effort must be done
right and not in haste.
Second, while these forms have benefited from multiple
rounds of feedback from the public, more work needs to be done
to ensure they are as useful as possible to consumers.
Third, the forms and rules resulting from this effort
should not be finalized until after other Dodd-Frank rules
impacting these forms are finalized and taken into account.
Fourth, the rules accompanying the forms should be
developed carefully so that they protect consumers without
unwittingly harming the market and the borrowers that they are
intended to serve.
And, finally, when the forms and rules are finished, they
should be implemented in an orderly manner that is respectful
of the considerable commitment of resources small businesses
like mine will need to make to ensure compliance.
Let me expand on some of these principles, starting with
the importance of getting this right rather than rushing to
meet arbitrary deadlines.
Buying and financing a home remains the largest financial
transaction in any family's life, yet the mandated disclosures
remain confusing and inconsistent. Past efforts to improve the
disclosures have been uncoordinated, and ultimately failed to
achieve their objectives. Yet, small businesses continue to
spend untold sums to implement the most recent RESPA rule,
which is about to be eclipsed by the CFPB's latest efforts. In
the end, those costs are borne by our borrowers, your
constituents, who then pay more for their mortgage loan.
Second, as I noted earlier, we can't develop these new
disclosures in a vacuum and ignore the many other mortgage-
related rules mandated by Dodd-Frank. The CFPB alone is
currently working on: ability to repay and its QM definitions,
as well as rules dealing with high-cost loans, originator
compensation, and servicing rules. All these rules will impact
the disclosure requirements. For example, materials related to
the loan originator compensation rule indicate the CFPB is
concerned about borrower confusion of discount points and
origination charges. These new forms, not new restrictions, are
the right way to address those concerns.
MBA also does not agree with the CFPB's suggestion that the
application information needed by lenders to issue a loan
estimate should be reduced to six items without also allowing
the lender to request other information it deems necessary, as
permitted under RESPA today. Under the proposed QM rule,
lenders face significant liability for failing to determine
that a borrower can repay a mortgage. Constraining companies
like mine from gaining relevant information could not only
result in unreliable estimates for consumers but could actually
put us in legal jeopardy later on.
Contradictory rules add uncertainty to the mortgage market.
This uncertainty is leading to factors behind today's tight
credit environment that is preventing qualified borrowers from
getting a loan, and it is holding back the housing recovery.
For these reasons, the final RESPA/TILA forms and regulations
should not be finalized until issues under the other Dodd-Frank
rules have been resolved.
Chairwoman Biggert, we at MBA appreciate your longstanding
interest in improving the mortgage process. We stand ready to
work with you and the members of the subcommittee on both sides
of the aisle to ensure this effort leads to the best and most
efficient set of mortgage disclosures for consumers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cosgrove can be found on
page 175 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much, Mr. Cosgrove.
Ms. Hardy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHANELLE P. HARDY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE POLICY INSTITUTE

Ms. Hardy. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today, and for the
leadership you have shown on this issue.
I am Chanelle Hardy, senior vice president and executive
director of the National Urban League's Policy Institute. On
behalf of the League, its president and CEO, Marc Morial, and
the 2.6 million Americans served by our 97 affiliates last
year, I am pleased to share our views on the CFPB's effort to
create combined TILA/RESPA disclosures as mandated by Dodd-
Frank.
With the help of HUD Housing Counseling Grants, the
National Urban League acts as a direct provider of housing
counseling services in 36 cities throughout the country. Last
year alone, the National Urban League affiliates offered
counseling to more than 10,000 families, with services ranging
from prepurchase workshops to mortgage modification and the
initiation of forbearance agreements. The goal of our
counseling model is to break down barriers and obtain economic
equality through education, self-reliance, and a greater
understanding of financial tools and services.
Our counselors see firsthand the damage caused by confusion
at the point of loan origination when well-intentioned and
qualified borrowers are confronted with hopelessly confusing
documents and sometimes deliberately abusive and malicious
lending agents. Today, we know that substantial evidence
indicates that African-American and Latino borrowers,
particularly, who were qualified for prime loans were often
steered into subprime loans and into loans that were overpriced
and unaffordable.
In our view, the CFPB's proposal discussed today,
simplifying and consolidating the information required by TILA
and RESPA, represents a critical step toward combating and
limiting this type of abuse and confusion that contributed in
no small part to the current foreclosure crisis.
The broader context for these reforms must not be
forgotten. The fact that between 5 million and 6 million
American homeowners are currently at risk of foreclosure allows
us to accept one of two possibilities: either the American
people in droves deliberately entered into loan agreements to
secure homes that they knew they could not afford; or, at
minimum, hardworking people seeking to achieve the American
dream lacked full awareness of the types of risks of certain
types of mortgages before agreeing to their terms.
Communities of color, and African-American communities in
particular, have borne much of the brunt of this crisis,
leading to a loss of family and community wealth that can only
be described as devastating. The Federal Reserve has recently
pointed to a 40 percent plunge in the wealth of the average
American family, from $126,400 before the crisis to $77,300
after. But these numbers are shockingly lower for African-
American and Latino families, where numbers began between
$11,000 and $13,000 and are now between $4,000 and $6,000.
The heartbreaking stories that the Urban League counselors
have heard from our clients reveal that many of them did not
fully understand the potential of many mortgage terms to cause
problems in the future, and many claimed to have been unaware
of those provisions at all. Better consumer education is a
significant part of the solution to the recurrence of the
current housing crisis, and streamlining these disclosure forms
is a critical component to the solution.
Now that the CFPB has authority over RESPA and TILA, we
believe the combination of these authorities will make it
easier to unify the legal approach. And while some will
certainly argue for an approach that reduces the regulatory
burden on the mortgage industry, we strongly believe the
central challenge of CFPB's focus must be on improving the
ability of consumers to understand disclosures.
Timely, consistent, and clearer disclosures have the
potential to reduce the frequency of poor financial decisions
by consumers, many of whom lack the sophistication to read
between the lines. Consumers will benefit from clarity and
reinforcement regarding elements of mortgage obligations that
could create future risks.
We commend the CFPB staff for its diligent work in crafting
this proposal and recognize that the home mortgage process is
unique and complex and that developing a fair and reasonable
method of ensuring early and accurate price disclosure is
challenging.
Unfortunately, whatever decisions are made with respect to
the disclosures in this proposed rule, it will not prevent
future predatory loans from being made. They will not fix the
misaligned market incentives that created this current
situation. But what they will do is empower consumers with the
information they need to evaluate all cost factors together so
that they can make the most informed choices possible.
I will close today by offering three recommendations to the
proposals: one, we believe that requiring all settlement and
financing terms to be communicated well in advance of
settlement with clear and consistent language is critical; two,
require that client disclosure and acknowledgment forms be
completed by the lender, not unlike the know-your-client
protection provisions mandated in the securities investment
marketplace; and three, the Qualified Residential Mortgage
rules should require all securitized residential loans,
qualified and other, to feature complete and valid know-your-
borrower documentation in addition to other prescribed forms of
risk retention.
Thank you for your time today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hardy can be found on page
189 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Ms. Hughes, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRENDA K. HUGHES, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND RETAIL
LENDING ADMINISTRATOR, FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, ON BEHALF OF
THE AMERICAN BANKERS ASSOCIATION (ABA)

Ms. Hughes. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member
Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Brenda Hughes, and I am senior vice president
and retail lending administrator at First Federal Savings Bank,
a 96-year-old community bank in Twin Falls, Idaho. We are a
$482 million institution serving the southern Idaho region. We
do both portfolio lending as well as selling actively into the
secondary market. We are also the largest lender in our region.
I am also co-vice chair of the ABA's Mortgage Markets
Committee, and I am pleased today to testify on behalf of the
American Bankers Association.
Thank you for holding this hearing on the reform of
mortgage disclosures. We commend the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau's ongoing efforts to merge the RESPA and TILA
disclosures as mandated by Dodd-Frank. Those efforts have been
diligently undertaken with a commitment to openness and
communication with all stakeholders.
ABA fully supports the reformation of the existing mortgage
disclosure system. We believe the RESPA and TILA forms are
convoluted and complex and must be fixed. It is common
knowledge that consumers either ignore these disclosures or
don't fully grasp the information contained in them. Simpler,
clearer forms have long been a priority for all stakeholders.
Notwithstanding our support, we do have critical concerns
to share. In reforming the RESPA and TILA disclosure
requirements, the Bureau is effectively rewriting the rules
that control the timing of the loan origination process, the
disclosures to consumers, and the legal liabilities that
result.
This is a massive and important undertaking. It determines
how we communicate with our customers. We must get this right.
The goal must to be achieve a workable and lasting framework of
clear mortgage disclosures. Rigid timeframes should not trump
quality.
The Bureau has thus far demonstrated an excellent capacity
to analyze the issues. However, they still need to carefully
consider a great number of elements that affect the RESPA/TILA
disclosure system.
The Bureau should be allowed to satisfy the July 21st
statutory deadline for completing a proposed rule by issuing an
advance notice of proposed rulemaking. This would allow the
Bureau to continue considering options regarding the structure
of the rule and allow flexibility to incorporate changes
without having to repropose additional rules. It also allows
Congress to assess the Bureau's progress.
This flexibility is important because any other approach
will lead to a difficult sequence of expensive regulatory
revisions. The comprehensive forms in Dodd-Frank impose many
other regulatory changes to the mortgage loan origination
process and will significantly affect the disclosures being
considered under the RESPA/TILA reform. It would be cumbersome,
expensive, inefficient, and confusing to finalize a merger rule
without considering these other rules that must be implemented.
It would result in erratic and never-ending amendments to our
compliance system. Such a result is unwarranted and avoidable.
As a second consideration, we encourage disciplined and
efficient rule writing, and we therefore offer four important
principles to guide this process.
First, the RESPA/TILA merger must result in simplified
disclosures that are clearer for consumers. This is not an easy
task, given the new requirements imposed in Dodd-Frank as well
as current Federal, State, and local requirements.
Second, the merger rule must incorporate all changes that
emanate from the Dodd-Frank Act. If this rule misses a new
requirement, then it does not achieve the goal of integration.
Third, the Bureau should not overstep the boundaries of the
RESPA and TILA laws, which have explicit legal boundaries that
must be respected as the disclosures are merged.
Fourth, and finally, adequate timeframes should provide for
guidance and implementation of the final rule. Once finalized,
the Bureau should commit to timely guidance and adequate time
for implementation and interpretations.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hughes can be found on page
194 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much, Ms. Hughes.
Mr. Veissi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MOE VEISSI, 2012 PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF REALTORS (NAR)

Mr. Veissi. Chairwoman Biggert and members of the
subcommittee, I am honored to testify today on behalf of the
over 1 million members of the National Association of REALTORS
who practice in all the areas of residential and commercial
real estate. My name is Moe Veissi. I am the broker-owner of
Veissi and Associates in Miami, Florida, and I have been a
REALTOR for over 43 years.
Before I begin, I would like to thank the Chair and the
members of the Financial Services Committee for all of their
hard work on extending the National Flood Insurance Program. We
strongly support your efforts for a long-term resolution to
this vital program.
The housing industry is experiencing a fragile recovery
after the financial crisis in 2008. To prevent another
financial disaster, many well-meaning regulations are adopted.
The past several years have shown us that tight credit is
slowing the recovery of the housing market. It is time for
Congress and the Administration to seriously reexamine the
breadth of some of the laws and the regulations that have come
out of the financial and mortgage crisis, and that includes the
Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act and Truth in Lending
harmonization efforts.
NAR has participated in the effort by the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau to continue the Truth in Lending
Act disclosures with RESPA and good-faith estimates. NAR
strongly supports reducing the duplicative paperwork and
combining those two forms, providing the combined document is
useful and effective. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
has done an adequate job harmonizing the good-faith estimate
and the truth-in-lending disclosure. But more testing and work
needs to be done, including testing on actual loans and final
fine-tuning for products that are not plain vanilla.
Lining up the good-faith estimates in truth-in-lending
disclosure is the most essential part of the rulemaking and
truly represents what Congress, industry, and most consumer
groups originally intended in pushing for RESPA/TILA
harmonization. The effort to harmonize the HUD-1 settlement
statement and the final truth-in-lending disclosure could be
very disruptive to industry and consumers.
Unlike the good-faith estimate and truth-in-lending
disclosure, the two documents have very different purposes. The
TILA is a mortgage disclosure and settlement statement, and it
is a memorization of the entire transaction. Trying to tie the
two together to apply truth-in-lending rules and RESPA rules to
both could create severe complications. For example, at present
we do not even know who will fill out the combined statements.
And, currently, lenders provide truth-in-lending disclosure,
and the settlement agent does the HUD-1. These are people with
two definite and determined skill sets and roles in a
transaction, and neither is totally equipped or positioned to
do the other's job or bear their liability.
Other problems include requiring the HUD-1, 3 days before
closing. And, for reference, that was tried in 1970, and
Congress had to remove that provision because it created
disasters in the closing process.
Tightening RESPA tolerances is also a mistake. The HUD
tolerances have failed to save consumers money, and since their
implementation in 2010, closing costs have increased over 17
percent, according to several studies. The tolerances should
not be expanded. They should be rolled back to include any
lender charges.
The solution that the National Association of REALTORS
recommends is for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to
focus on fixing the initial disclosures. That would mean
merging the good-faith estimate and truth in lending and either
drop the more comprehensive and unnecessary effort to transform
RESPA and TILA into a single entity or seriously curtail the
effort. Currently, it is possibly unworkable and will make the
expensive, time-consuming, and frustrating HUD RESPA form of
2009 look like a minor inconvenience in comparison.
Thank you for providing the National Association of
REALTORS this opportunity to testify about the critical issues
contained here. And we stand ready to work with you and the
committee and your staff to find a productive solution. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Veissi can be found on page
206 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Mr. Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIM WILSON, PRESIDENT, AFFILIATED BUSINESSES, LONG
AND FOSTER COMPANIES, ON BEHALF OF THE REAL ESTATE SERVICES
PROVIDERS COUNCIL, INC. (RESPRO)

Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairwoman Biggert, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Tim Wilson, and I am president of
affiliated businesses for Long and Foster Companies and
immediate past chairman of RESPRO.
Long and Foster is the third-largest independent
residential real estate brokerage firm in the Nation, with 185
real estate offices and 12,000 sales associates in the mid-
Atlantic region. We also offer a full array of mortgage, title,
and insurance services through affiliated businesses that are
regulated at the Federal level under RESPA.
Affiliated businesses are not new in the industry. In 2011,
the Nation's 500 largest residential real estate brokerage
firms closed almost 120,000 mortgage loans and conducted over
325,000 closings through affiliated companies. Economic studies
and consumer surveys have shown that affiliated services are
competitive in cost and that consumers who use them have a more
satisfactory home-buying experience.
My testimony today focuses on three issues in the Bureau's
RESPA/TILA rulemaking that are particularly relevant for
affiliated businesses.
First, the Bureau says it is considering imposing a zero
tolerance on fees offered by a lender's affiliated companies,
meaning that these charges at closing could not exceed those
disclosed in the loan estimate. Fees charged by unaffiliated
companies would continue to be subject to the current 10
percent tolerance.
The Bureau's reasoning behind this proposed zero tolerance
is that lenders should be better able to estimate the cost of
services provided by their affiliated companies. This
reasoning, however, is faulty because the cost of many third-
party services are subject to variables unknown to both
affiliated and unaffiliated lenders at the time the loan
estimate would be provided.
In addition, the Bureau says it also may propose to trigger
the lender's delivery of the loan estimate after only receiving
limited information. Imposing a zero tolerance on affiliated
services, in addition to limiting the information the lender
can collect upon application, would create a difficult
compliance burden on affiliated lenders that would place them
at an unfair competitive advantage.
Second, RESPRO believes that the Bureau needs to integrate
its RESPA/TILA rulemaking with the points and fees definition
that is being separately developed in its QM rulemaking. A
mortgage loan cannot be a QM if the total points and fees paid
by the consumer exceed 3 percent of the loan amount. Affiliated
businesses are particularly affected because the fees that a
consumer pays to a lender's affiliated company count toward the
3 percent cap but not fees paid to an unaffiliated company.
As a result, loans in which a lender's affiliated company
is used would most likely not qualify as QMs, even if the
affiliated company's fees are equal to or even lower than an
unaffiliated company's fees. Affiliated companies like Long and
Foster would need to discontinue offering either mortgage or
title services in conjunction with those loans in which the
caps would be exceeded, which would decrease competition and
increase the cost of mortgage credit, particularly for low- and
middle-income borrowers.
Moreover, the Bureau has announced that it is considering
including additional fees in the finance charge, many of which
also would count toward the points and fees threshold. This
would significantly increase the percentage of affiliated loans
that would exceed the points and fees cap, which would further
limit competition.
RESPRO has two recommendations to minimize this
potentially harmful impact. First, we urge Congress to pass the
Consumer Mortgage Choice Act, which excludes from the
definition of points and fees charges for title services
regardless of affiliation. Second, it is essential that the
Bureau research the potential impact of including these
additional fees in the points and fees caps and disclose it to
the public for comment in its proposed rule.
Finally, I would like to comment on the Bureau's proposal
to require that the settlement disclosure be provided to the
consumer 3 days before closing.
Long and Foster's affiliated mortgage company, Prosperity
Mortgage, has some experience with the issues involved in
providing the current HUD-1 in advance of the closing. Under
its Target Date program, Prosperity Mortgage pays an incentive
bonus to its operation team members when the HUD-1 is delivered
to the consumer 2 days in advance of their closing date. So far
in 2012, we have achieved that goal in 56 percent of our
transactions. Consumers who receive their HUD-1, 2 days in
advance of their closing date have had a higher documented
customer satisfaction score, based on independent third-party
evaluations.
RESPRO supports the concept of a 3-day requirement in
principle, and we believe that affiliated businesses could be
more capable of complying with this requirement because of the
efficiencies associated with many of the services needed to
close the loan under one corporate entity. However, the
ultimate viability of such a concept and its ultimate value to
the consumer lies in the specifics of the proposal. In our
written testimony, we have identified many issues that will
need to be addressed in any proposed and final 3-day
requirement.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today,
and I will be glad to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson can be found on page
212 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
We will now proceed to Member questions. And I will give
myself 5 minutes to ask questions. Let me start with Mr.
Abbinante.
I asked a question of Mr. Date about whether the CFPB has
the authority to resolve conflicts between RESPA and TILA, and
he said he thought that they did.
Do you think Congress needs to fix any RESPA/TILA
conflicts?
Mr. Abbinante. I think it is a tough question, and I heard
Mr. Date's response, as well, where he said he thought he had
the authority. I am certainly not a legislative expert, but I
think there is certainly room to argue that they may not have
that authority, and, in fact, it may require action by Congress
to address some of these issues.
Chairwoman Biggert. We certainly had a hard time in the
last few years trying to get the two of them together to
resolve--the two bodies to resolve that, so I think that there
is a problem there.
But what are the conflicts?
Mr. Abbinante. Certainly, from my perspective, I think we
look at a couple of things: the timing of disclosure. TILA
requires a 3-day provision. RESPA doesn't have a 3-day rule.
Forms, who will complete them? Today, TILA is completed by the
lender, as is the GFE, and what we call today the HUD-1 is
completed by the settlement community.
And then we have the issue of standardized forms versus
model forms. Under RESPA, it is a standardized form. Under
TILA, it is a model form. We believe that using a model form
will only cause more confusion and increase costs tremendously
throughout the closing process. We would be certainly much more
in favor of standardized forms. I think it gives the industry
and ultimately the consumer a better position in terms of
understanding what they are looking at, because the information
they are receiving should be consistent no matter who they are
using.
Chairwoman Biggert. Okay. Thank you.
Then, for anyone, the CFPB has indicated that it may
require all and final settlement charges to be disclosed 3 days
before closing. And you have all been talking about this. I
think that we had a bill which did pass to make the 3 days, but
I am not convinced yet.
As I said, in my former life I was a real estate attorney,
and I know that, so many times, standing by a fax machine--we
didn't do as much with email then--by a fax machine, waiting
for the final decisions to come over so that I could tell the
buyer how much money they had to bring to closing and whether
they had enough or they had to run back to the bank before it
closed.
And so many times there were things that were not settled
and came up very late--for example, fences, where was the
fence? Was it on the other person's property? Was it on that
property? And were we going to have to work that out? And a
couple of times where sellers had not cleared everything out of
the garage, or something like that that caused a lot of angst
at the very end, very close to the closing.
So I wonder, would that all happen 3 days before so that it
would be resolved? It really seems to me that when you get
there, there are still some problems. Now, having to have an
attorney in Illinois made a big difference, but would anybody
like to address that?
Should the CFPB maybe consider a multistep disclosure
process?
Ms. Canfield. Chairwoman Biggert, maybe I can address this.
In the appendix to our testimony, we wrote a short White Paper
on the history of this actual experience.
When RESPA was enacted in the mid-1970s, Chairman Proxmire
put in a 12-day waiting period. And after it was implemented,
the regulations and everything were implemented, the Congress
ended up repealing it 6 months later because there was such
dislocation around the country. What happened is that people
were moving out of their homes, and because of the artificial
waiting requirement, they had to stay in hotels, other
temporary lodgings--they had all their belongings in moving
vans--until the 12-day requirement was met. So there was an
uproar. It was enormous--
Chairwoman Biggert. I remember that.
Ms. Canfield. Okay. So I don't think it would be a good
idea to repeat that experience.
But I do think that what we are recommending gets you part
of the way there. I understand the goal, but if you look at the
four-step disclosure regimen we were talking about, what we are
saying is that within 3 days of closing, you would get a final
loan estimate. And because the lenders currently have a zero
percent tolerance on their costs from the time the initial
good-faith estimate is sent to the consumer all the way through
closing, the differences between the costs of the final loan
estimate and closing really wouldn't be allowed to change for
the lender's costs.
There would be some settlement charges that could change,
but, again, those are subject to a 10 percent tolerance from
the beginning of the initial good-faith estimate to the closing
document. So there is some limitation as to how much those--
Chairwoman Biggert. Would that be true of what the CFPB is
proposing? Because if it is zero tolerance, than whenever it is
finished--
Ms. Canfield. There currently is a zero tolerance for
lender's costs, but then there is a 10 percent tolerance for
settlement-related costs. They are suggesting that maybe there
be a zero tolerance applied for settlement costs, as well. I
think that would be quite problematic because the lenders don't
control--Regulation 10 prohibits them from controlling those
costs. So I think it might actually increase settlement charges
if that were to be done.
But if you do have a final loan estimate 3 days before
closing and there are the existing tolerances that are kept in
place, the only costs that could change between the final loan
estimate and the closing document would be changes related to
the property, such as those you were describing, or if the
person changed the closing date, the odd-days interest and
transaction taxes would change. But they would be relatively
minor changes.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. And my time has expired.
Mr. Cleaver from Missouri, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you for
holding this hearing, because I think this is extremely
important. We did a lot of work to try to create an opportunity
for consumers to be protected.
And, Mr. Abbinante, on the 3-day requirement, you have said
that the 3-day requirement might cause things to change over
that 3-day period. Give me an example of some of the things
that could change that would impact the consumer.
Mr. Abbinante. Sure. In my experience of 35 years, both as
an attorney and then as a member of the title industry, it is
not unusual for a walk-through to occur just prior to the
closing, sometimes literally hours before the closing. So the
closing is scheduled at 1:00, the buyer wants to see the
property and make sure there was no damage, that everything
that was supposed to be left, in fact, was left or if something
was taken and something else substituted. It happens all the
time. They show up at the closing, haven't had a chance to talk
to each other about it, so the first time the issue is raised
is at the closing.
And then you get into, is this going to require an
adjustment in price? Is this going to require a holdback? Is
this going to require damage to be repaired? And do any of
these things then prevent the closing from occurring? Does it
affect the loan-to-value ratio? Does it affect the ability to
close that day? Because a change may, under the CFPB rule,
require a new 3-day waiting period because something has
changed, something substantial. If it requires a new 3-day
waiting period, will the borrower now lose the lock on that
loan? Or can they waive that?
So I think the situation in theory makes a lot of sense.
Look, I think our goal, everyone's goal is to protect the
consumer. And I don't think anyone on this panel or anyone else
that is involved in the real estate industry would argue with
that. We want the consumer to be protected, we want them to
have the information. But there are just some practicalities
that occur all the time in the process, and frequently occur
the day of closing.
Mr. Cleaver. I am going to stay on that subject, but, Ms.
Hardy, and you, too, Mr. Abbinante, do we need 10 days? Do we
need 15 days? Do we need 20 days? Do we need 30 days? What
happens if the consumer is subjected to bait-and-switch? People
buy a home, and they are--and I can say this in front of
everybody here because everybody here has bought a home, and
most people in here are guilty. There is probably not a person
in here who owns a home who read every line in the contract. If
you did, you are rare, and somebody needs to give you some
apples or something. The chances are not high.
So everybody wants to sign; I want to get into my new home.
So aren't they more subject to bait-and-switch, Ms. Hardy, that
things can actually--some new stuff ends up in the contract?
Ms. Hardy. With a longer time period?
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Ms. Hardy. I think that we think that the 3-day period
sounds reasonable. It provides enough time, in terms of the
loan disclosure documents, for them to get additional insight
from those who have expertise. We are flexible around the
settlement disclosures because we recognize that there is a
need for some flexibility toward the end of the process.
Mr. Cleaver. Do you agree with that, Mr. Abbinante?
Mr. Abbinante. I agree that there has to be some rethinking
in terms of flexibility, absolutely. Otherwise, you are stuck
with the problem of, it is a change; does it require a new 3-
day waiting period? And if it does, what happens to the
borrower's lock on the loan or the ability to complete the
transaction? Because, frequently, the furniture is sitting on
the truck, parked out in front, waiting to move into the new
property. Who picks up that cost? Or how does the seller go
close on their transaction, because they needed the cash from
the transaction that they are involved in so they can walk
next-door and buy their house?
Mr. Cleaver. Now, during this 3-day period, we are
automatically assuming that the interest rate doesn't change.
Mr. Cosgrove. Congressman, if I may add, as well, in 2010,
RESPA put in a provision for the tolerances that cannot go over
10 percent--that were talked about earlier. And I think that
also goes a long way toward eliminating any possibility of
bait-and-switch, because the lender is locked into the lender
fees at application.
And, also, another thing that we are talking about, the
goal here is--everybody mentioned that there has been just a
pancake of mortgage disclosures, that six disclosures say the
same thing, and the borrower checks out. And everybody has
acknowledged that the borrower doesn't read all those
disclosures. I think the goal here is, if we truly get
simplification from the CFPB, that would go a long way--if the
borrowers see that the disclosures have been reduced and they
truly read all the documents, both at application and closing,
that would go a long way to eliminate any bait-and-switch that
is in the marketplace today, which I think is very little.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. And I might note, Mr.
Cleaver, I don't want to be a ``Goody Two-Shoes,'' but I did
read every line to my clients. And they were dying by the end,
but it was my job.
Mr. Cleaver. She is an attorney.
Chairwoman Biggert. Mr. McHenry from North Carolina is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I am glad I
have finally met someone who has.
I am still licensed as a REALTOR in the State of North
Carolina, but I want to concur with my colleague across the
aisle that the stack of information--we have mandated so much
disclosure, that there is no disclosure now. I want to be
gentle about how I say that, and I am grateful that there are
great legal minds who actually will go through those documents,
and I am glad I trust my attorney--in the State of North
Carolina, we have attorneys do closings, rather than settlement
companies--but I am very grateful for that, and I put a lot of
trust in him.
So, I would say to my colleague, I was going to begin by
asking the panel if they have actually read all the disclosure
documents--not to impair any reputations with the business you
are in.
But I want to just understand this because, in the first
panel, Mr. Date, I think he has a very sharp mind, and is a
very talented individual, but last week he apparently
referenced the fact that he didn't go through all the
documents. And so we have a very high-ranking government
official who is in charge of refining this process, and when he
has his closing, he doesn't go through it. It is clear we have
a problem here.
So the question here is, what is the appropriate amount of
information a consumer should have before they go to the
closing table, before all their stuff is in the truck outside
the settlement company or outside the attorney's office, they
come in and they find out there is a mistake. That means hotel
rooms, that means kids displaced--big troubles. Not that this
doesn't happen now, but how can we make sure that consumer has
the appropriate amount of information ahead of time? What is
that balance?
What are the essential ingredients? Is it the HUD-1? We say
you are supposed to get certain disclosures beforehand. But
what are the essential ingredients a consumer needs to know
before he goes in? Can we figure that out, and can the consumer
get that 3 days in advance? Could that work?
So I just want to sort of offer that as a broad question.
Start with Mr. Wilson, and we could just go down the list here
and you all could make your comments on that.
Mr. Wilson. I believe the HUD-1 is the one of the few forms
they do, in fact, focus on, because that is, in fact, where the
seller's proceeds come from and where the buyer's check is
written from, that is where the number comes from. So having
that what I would consider very important document to them 3
days ahead of time, I would be a fan of that.
There would be a lot of rules around that. I think you
would have to build in some flexibility for a garbage disposal
or some small item that could be adjusted at close based on the
final walk-through, as one of the witnesses said.
But, I am looking for more than just doing what is right
for the consumer; I am looking for a good customer experience.
And I think for last-minute changes at closing that happen in
the last hour, nobody feels good about that. And it happens too
often in our industry, from my perspective. This will force
everybody in our industry to be better at what we do. The real
estate contracts that are written in 30 days needs to be
written in 45 days. And everybody should--if you need it there
3 days ahead of time, then you get it there 3 days ahead of
time. We pay a bonus to do that today, 2 days ahead of time. We
do it for a reason: Because we want a great customer
experience, and that gives us good referrals.
So, I think it can be done, but I think we have to be
careful and protect not just the buyer's side of the
transaction but also the seller's side. And done right, it can
be done.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Veissi? Or down the line, if you all would
like to comment?
Mr. Veissi. There is little disagreement in the fact that
when there are minor instances that impact the closing, that
would create the kind of experience at the end that just
doesn't occur.
I am reminded of the time when I went to Disneyworld and
the folks kept telling me where I parked, where I parked, where
I parked. And they did that because they knew I was going to
have 8 hours' worth of wonderful experiences, but they also
knew that if I had a lousy time trying to find my car in 95-
degree weather with humidity, it would be horrible. And that is
what happens at the closing statement when we don't get advance
information.
So advance information with the respect of telling our
customers and our clients exactly what is going to happen--not
necessarily changing it or not necessarily concerned about
giving it a 3-day or a 5-day or a 10-day, but making sure that
they understand upfront what the situation is so that their
experience at the end is exactly what they had been wanting to
do, and that is to close on that home.
Ms. Hughes. I would agree that we just need clarity in the
disclosures that we have presently. I am not sure more
disclosures are going to solve the issue. RESPA, as it is
currently written, allows for a provision for consumers to
receive their settlement statement 24 hours at a minimum in
advance of closing if they desire. And that settlement
statement, I agree, is the key to telling them what they need,
and if initial disclosures are done appropriately, that should
be all that is required.
I don't have an issue with an additional disclosure
required 3 days before closing. I believe that my buyers and my
REALTORS in my community will have a huge issue with it,
because it is just an additional 3-day delay in a process that
is already too cumbersome.
Ms. Hardy. I think our concern is making sure that the
egregious and abusive activities don't happen. And so, to the
extent that simplification increases the likelihood that
consumers will actually read the documents that are set before
them and that an additional time period provides them with
opportunities to verify their understanding of the documents
with independent experts, we think that that is useful.
Mr. Cosgrove. I would say that we all have a passion for
customer service. Referrals is how we make a living. At my
company, we have over a 99 percent referral rate, and we are
very proud of that.
I find it somewhat ironic that after 26 years in the
business--and we talk about fixing what is broke. The process
that we have tried over the 26 years is to add disclosure after
disclosure, and we have pancaked disclosures for 26 years,
thinking more is the answer. And I find it ironic that I am
sitting here contemplating another disclosure, 3 days before
closing. And though I understand what we are trying to
accomplish--
Mr. McHenry. No, that is not my question. I am just asking
what the consumer needs to know ahead of time.
My time has expired, so if we could just keep this brief
and wrap up. I want to know what the consumer needs to know,
because that gets to the root of the whole disclosure process.
Mr. Cosgrove. I think the consumer needs to know the
pertinent lending information is payment, downpayment, all the
settlement charges, and the lender fees. And although I do
believe that at closing a 3-day disclosure potentially could be
problematic because, as we are talking about here, things
happen within 3 days of the closing that a lot of times can't
be foreseen.
Mr. McHenry. Sure.
Ms. Canfield. Thank you. Very quickly, I think it is
important to design the disclosures so that the consumers
receive a disclosure relevant to the particular loan product of
their choice. That would also help prevent a bait-and-switch
situation. So if a consumer has chosen a fixed-rate product,
they should get the same disclosure form from the beginning of
the transaction through to the end, through closing, so that
they are seeing the same document all the way through the
transaction.
And at the end they get a HUD-1 that would be a revised
document that is similar in style to what they received at the
beginning at the transaction, accompanied by a detailed
document that would detail where all the costs and where all
the fees are going. But that is what I think is important.
Mr. Abbinante. Congressman, I would suggest that they
certainly would need to know their downpayment. You could
certainly tell them that 3 days before closing. They would need
to know their interest rate. You could tell them that before
closing.
It becomes a little bit more questionable, if there is a
change that occurs, whether you can actually give them the cash
they need to bring to closing. Because if that walkthrough
occurs on the day of closing, the cash they may need may
change. It could also affect the itemized disbursement that
both consumers at the closing require and should have, not just
the buyer but the seller as well.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman from California, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Veissi, I want to commend you for bringing to our
attention the importance of passing the bill to extend the
Flood Insurance Program. This is critically important in so
many parts of the country. Even I know it is critically
important. I have been working on it, and I represent a desert
where we built a city.
Now, on page 3 of your testimony, you talk about the
interconnection of the rules we are dealing with now with rules
that are probably not going to be available anytime soon. The
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau plans to issue rules that
we are discussing by July 21st, but it will be long after that
that we find out what is a Qualified Mortgage and what is a
Qualified Residential Mortgage, when we define what mortgages
you have to have a risk retention--and I think it is going to
be very few banks are going to want to make those mortgages--
and what is the definition of an ability to pay.
Should we delay the RESPA and TILA rule finalization until
we can make sure it is coordinated with QM and QRM?
Mr. Veissi. There is no question in my mind that you don't
want to do anything right now that would otherwise hurt a
fledgling recovery of the real estate marketplace in this
country. And if you were to impose rules and regulations
without total comprehension of what those rules and regulations
would be, I think you would do that.
So I would want to get it right the first time out of the
box. That would be my simple answer to your question.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Let's hope they do that, because
the last thing my area needs is another precipitous decline in
home values.
Mr. Abbinante, what do you think is the most important one
or two things that the CFPB could do to protect consumers
during the closing process?
Mr. Abbinante. It would seem to me the thing that is most
critical to the consumer is information that is useful and
easily understood in a format that they can read and not need a
special technical degree to figure out how forms interrelate
one to the other. So simplification, easily understood, easy to
use--the kind of basic premise of prudent business.
Mr. Sherman. I am going to turn to Mr. Cosgrove, but I am
going to add one more concept, and that is shorter. Because I
know what is politically correct. Politically correct is to
take anything that anybody could argue needs to be disclosed to
the consumer and require it to be in 20-point type on red
paper. The result to the consumer is 400 pages of red paper
with everything in 20-point type. And just putting it in 20-
point type isn't going to get me to read it, as a consumer, if
it goes on for hundreds of pages.
Mr. Cosgrove, what can we do to prevent a layering of
disclosure requirements in increasingly large type on
increasingly brighter shades of red paper?
Mr. Cosgrove. I think the CFPB has truly an opportunity
that has not been in front of us for 35 years, since RESPA, and
the TILA document, the good-faith estimate and the closing
document, was in different regulatory bodies. So we have an
opportunity and the CFPB has an opportunity that we have not
had as an industry in this country for 35 years.
And if they would work with the industry and all the
stakeholders, consumer groups, everyone, and truly work with
the States--because you have municipalities, you have State
disclosures, you have Federal disclosures, FHA disclosures, VA
disclosures--again, the pancaking of 26 years of, the answer
has been more disclosures--
Mr. Sherman. Let me just try to squeeze one more thing in.
And I hope that Mr. Abbinante, but other witnesses as well,
would respond for our record, but, more importantly, bring to
the CFPB's attention: What are the situations where you can
make a change in the last 3 days? The last thing I want to do
is lose my 3 percent mortgage because we have to delay closing
3 days because of a garbage disposal. And, at the same time,
what are the changes that would require restarting that 3-day
period?
I know my time has elapsed, but I have been through a few
of these closings, and the last thing I want to do is have to
choose between getting a $100 reduction in the purchase price
because the garbage disposal doesn't work on the one hand and
having to come back to the closing 3 days later, endangering my
loan, endangering the sale price, et cetera, and, as some of
the witnesses pointed out, endangering the seller's ability to
close on his or her property because I can't give up my check
until you give me the hundred bucks for the garbage disposal or
something that minor.
So I look forward to reading your comments.
And I yield back to the chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt, whom I believe
is also a former real estate attorney, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Watt. I don't know why you malign me that way,
gratuitously. But you are correct. I did a lot of real estate
work, which is why I came. I actually just wanted to hear the
questions. I couldn't get here for the testimony, but I will
review it.
This is a subject that is very difficult, and I won't
belabor that point. So I don't think I have any questions
because I am afraid I would repeat something that somebody has
already asked. So I will review the record, and if I have any
questions, I will submit them in writing.
Chairwoman Biggert. All right. Thank you.
That gives me an opportunity to--I would like to ask just a
couple of questions, and I recognize myself.
Ms. Hughes, on page 8 of your testimony, you state that one
complication of the merger of RESPA and TILA disclosures is the
question of whether the merged document will be prepared by the
settlement agent or the lender, creditor. Who should prepare
the document, and why? And I think, particularly, I am
concerned about who would bear the liability if the merged
document form isn't correct?
Ms. Hughes. Presently--and Idaho is a settlement agent
State, so we do not have attorneys who do our closing documents
for us. But we need to define within the regulations who is
responsible for completion of those documents. If they are
combined into one document and we utilize a settlement agent to
prepare that closing, who is going to prepare that document?
Are they going to do it? Are we going to do it? Are we
responsible for their data? Are they responsible for our data?
Are they responsible for the regulatory disclosures that go
into that? There just needs to be some very clear clarification
as to how that breaks out.
Chairwoman Biggert. I think that is something that we
probably should have asked earlier, but I think it is a very
good question and something that we really have to look at. So
I thank you for that.
Then, for the witnesses, we haven't talked much about
costs. So what are the potential costs of new mortgage
disclosures to businesses, particularly lenders and other real
estate service providers that are small businesses? What is
going to happen with them?
Mr. Veissi?
Mr. Veissi. Some of the documentation that we have seen
with reference to that would add additional cost in the form of
labor at the time of closing, extending the closing itself,
having more people involved in the process, that cost being
either absorbed by small business--and that is not a great
thing to have happen right now--or absorbed by the folks who
are trying to make the purchase of the property or the seller
in those terms.
So more paperwork means more people. More people means more
money, more time. It is not an efficient and economical way to
process a closing.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Would anybody else care to address this?
Ms. Canfield. Yes, I would like to make a comment.
That is why it is so important--this is going to be a very
costly endeavor, to change all of the systems, do all the
training, do the audit, et cetera. So that is why it is so
important that all the rule changes, the substantive rule
changes and the related disclosures changes, be done once.
Because if you do it on a piecemeal basis, the costs are just
going to be astronomical. In addition, the disclosures
resulting from that piecemeal disclosure process will be even
more confusing to consumers than they are today.
Mr. Cosgrove. And that, as a business owner--
Chairwoman Biggert. Mr. Cosgrove?
Mr. Cosgrove. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. As a business
owner, there is no doubt the last few years, as piecemeal
regulations have come, we continually are working on our
systems. And even a company like ours, a small business, is
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on systems and
people. And all that does is increase the cost to our
customers.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Abbinante. Chairwoman Biggert?
Chairwoman Biggert. Yes?
Mr. Abbinante. I would like to, if I may, just add to both
questions you have asked, the previous question about who.
I think today the system--and when we talk about this, we
want to focus on what is not working. Today, I don't think it
is a question of what is not working. Lenders today adequately,
accurately fill out the forms that have to do with the GFE and
with the TILA requirements. And the settlement agents across
the country, regardless of the State, whether it is an
attorney, a settlement agent, a title company, they fill out
the forms relative to the HUD-1. We have expertise that exists,
and it would seem to me this current proposal is confusing or
creating a murky situation that we don't need to create.
In terms of costs, I can only reiterate what everyone else
has said, and that is: It is the cost of software, it is the
cost of training, it is the cost of implementation. And we have
a pretty good handle on this because, just 2 years ago, we did
this with the last changes to HUD in 2010. And it wasn't an
easy set-to at that time, especially when you had to deal with
over 400 FAQs. And as responses came in, things were constantly
changing. It just seems that there is a better way to do this.
Mr. Cosgrove. I would agree, the system is working much
better today than it has in the past.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you so much.
Mr. Cleaver, do you have another question?
Mr. Cleaver. I just have one question, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. And this is related to the earlier discussion
we had. And maybe, Mr. Cosgrove, this would be directed to you.
How often at a closing have you ever experienced a consumer
contesting the cost? How often, if ever?
Mr. Cosgrove. I can't remember a scenario in which a
consumer of ours has come in and contested the cost in the last
5 years.
Mr. Cleaver. Anybody else have any--yes, Ms. Hughes?
Ms. Hughes. I have been in real estate lending for 22
years, and I can never recall a borrower coming in and saying,
``I don't understand what these fees are.'' I believe if you
explain what the process is upfront and you get to the end and
it is the same, it is all about the education along the way.
And I can never recall one instance.
Mr. Cleaver. Could it also be that, as somebody said, the
moving van is outside?
Mr. Cosgrove. No.
Ms. Canfield. Actually, I think there have been changes
that have been implemented in--one of the things that happened
in 2010--a change that was made in 2010 was that there was a
zero percent tolerance on the lender's costs from the beginning
of the transaction to the end, and there is a 10 percent
tolerance on third-party costs. So what can change has been
limited.
The changes that could occur between the final documents
that you get 3 days before closing today and the actual closing
documents are related to if the closing date changes, the odd-
days interest and taxes might change the calculations, or
changes related to the property itself, such as was described
by Mr. Abbinante and Chairwoman Biggert.
Mr. Cleaver. Hypothetically, if there is a change--and you
answered the question exactly how I thought you would answer
it--isn't it also possible because of that, someone would
ignore, move over, not recognize cost changes?
Ms. Canfield. I think you might be concerned about the
bait-and-switch situation. Is that what you are most concerned
about?
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Ms. Canfield. I think, first of all, there are currently
laws in place that prohibit that. So that would be mortgage
fraud. It would be a fraudulent loan.
Second, with the tolerances that are currently in place,
your ability to do that is very limited.
Third, I think with even clearer disclosures, which is what
we have been talking about, the consumer would be able to see
that they are not getting the loan product that they had signed
up for when they chose the loan product at the beginning of the
process.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Let me yield to Mr. Watt from North Carolina, because the
time is running out.
Mr. Watt. Actually, they say we have to get out of the
room.
I had an unrelated question that occurred to me. It has
come to my attention that, because of the meltdown, there seems
to be a lot more conservatism in appraisals now. Mr. Cosgrove
and Mr. Abbinante in particular, have you all experienced that
and is there any recourse if both the seller and the buyer
believe that the appraisal is too conservative, too low?
Mr. Cosgrove. I would believe that today the system is
fixed. And what I mean by that, the loan officer, no one
involved in the lending process, the real estate agent, the
borrowers are allowed to have contact or influence the
appraiser. So the appraiser is truly independent. And we
believe--
Mr. Watt. But that assumes that appraising is a science
that is so precise that nobody ever makes a mistake. What does
one do if they disagree with the appraisal?
Mr. Cosgrove. If we have a consumer who disagrees with the
appraisal, most times we will make a business decision to get a
second opinion, pay for a second opinion, which we pay for as a
company, and then we analyze both of the appraisals and make an
underwriting decision.
Mr. Watt. Okay. That is not related to this hearing. I
appreciate the chairwoman--
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Watt, and thank you, Mr.
Cleaver. I might note that we are having a hearing on the
appraisals on June 28th, next week. So we will see you there.
I would like to thank you all. You have been a great panel
with a lot of information that you have given us on a topic
that seems to go on and on and on, but it hasn't been fixed
yet, and I think you have been very helpful.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, that they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:10 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 20, 2012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76109.228


