- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS REGARDING BANK EXAMINATION PRACTICES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS REGARDING
BANK EXAMINATION PRACTICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 8, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-45

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-940 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 8, 2011.................................................     1
Appendix:
July 8, 2011.................................................    53

WITNESSES
Friday, July 8, 2011

French, George, Deputy Director, Policy, Division of Risk
Management Supervision, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation..    32
Johnson, Simon, Ronald Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of
Management.....................................................     9
Kelly, Jennifer, Senior Deputy Comptroller, Midsize and Community
Bank Supervision, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency....    34
McKillop, James H. III, President and CEO, Independent Banker's
Bank of Florida, on Behalf of the Independent Community Bankers
of America (ICBA)..............................................     6
Whalen, Michael, President and CEO, Heart of America Restaurants
and Inns.......................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bachus, Hon. Spencer.........................................    54
French, George...............................................    55
Johnson, Simon...............................................    64
Kelly, Jennifer..............................................    68
McKillop, James H. III.......................................    87
Whalen, Michael..............................................    93

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of the American Bankers Association........    96
Posey, Hon. Bill:
Letter of support for H.R. 1723 from the Florida Bankers
Association................................................   102
Letter of support for H.R. 1723 from the Independent
Community Bankers of America...............................   104
Letter of support for H.R. 1723 from the National Bankers
Association................................................   106
Letter of support for H.R. 1723 from the National Association
of REALTORS...............................................   108
Written responses to questions submitted to George French of
the FDIC...................................................   109
Written responses to questions submitted to Jennifer Kelly of
the OCC....................................................   120
Perlmutter, Hon. Ed:
Written responses to questions submitted to George French of
the FDIC...................................................   128
Westmoreland, Hon. Lynn:
Chart listing the 10 States that have had more than 10 bank
failures since 2008........................................   129

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS REGARDING
BANK EXAMINATION PRACTICES

----------

Friday, July 8, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Royce,
Manzullo, McHenry, Pearce, Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Canseco,
Grimm, Fincher; Maloney, Watt, Miller of North Carolina, Scott,
and Carney.
Also present: Representative Posey.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order.
The purpose of today's hearing is to better understand the
challenges the community banks are facing during bank
examinations.
I am going to waive my opening statement because we have
the sponsors here of two of the pieces of legislation that we
are considering. So I am going to give them my time.
And with that, I am going to go ahead and recognize the
ranking member, Mrs. Maloney, for an opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank you. And I will put my
opening statement in the record, but I just want to welcome the
panelists today and thank you for having this hearing, and
express my strong support for community banks and for small
banks.
I do have serious questions about the bill that would treat
nonaccrual loans as if they were accrual loans, if they meet
four criteria. I feel that a better way would be to give banks
more time to work it out.
I think it is important that we stay on the same GAAP
accounting procedures that are in place. And banks should work
with their clients to restructure the loans or put them in a
way that will make them healthy in the future.
We have to remember that in the past 4 years, we had one of
the worst economic downturns in the history of our country. We
lost well over $13 trillion in household wealth, unemployment
shot up, and jobs became scarce. And we had to take measures,
such as the TARP program and others to really help our
financial institutions to recapitalize and become stable.
Many of these causes, according to some economists, were
due to a lack of capital standards, a lack of any limits on
leverage.
During these years leading up to the crisis, under Fed
Chairman Greenspan, everyone supported--most of the regulators
supported deregulating, lowering standards. Now, the opposite
is in place. Most regulators are supporting strong standards
for capital and for leverage limits and for building a stronger
financial base.
I believe a better way to help our community banks would be
to give them more time to work out the challenges they have in
this stressful economic time.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I just would ask the members--I am going to try to be
stringent on the time allotments for several reasons, because
that is a fair way to do it, but also because we are going to
have a vote that is coming up around 10:45, that is going to be
lengthy. So, we want to move this hearing as quickly as we can
so we can get to the witnesses.
We are going to do opening statements by seniority.
So, Mr. Royce is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
There was a recent article in the American Banker entitled,
``Community Bankers Face a Choice: Sell Out, Fold or Change.''
And that article noted that the number of banks in 2020 may be
half of the current number because of the various factors
working against small banks.
Now, you would expect a certain amount of consolidation in
a downturn, but many of the problems faced by community banks
were inspired by Washington. And I will just go through a few
of them.
It was Washington that gave them hundreds of new
regulations in Dodd-Frank. It was Washington that decided to
enact price controls on interchange fees and limit a critical
revenue source for these smaller firms.
It was Washington that propped up their too-big-to-fail
competitors, thus expanding the competitive advantage these
firms hold in the market, thus advantaging the cost of capital
for larger investment banks versus the smaller community banks.
Certainly, many will add overzealous bank examiners to this
list. Being from California, I have heard from those community
bankers who feel hamstrung by their regulators.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry, for 1 minute?
Mr. McHenry. In the interest of time, I will yield my time
back to the Chair.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Westmoreland, for 2 minutes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate
you calling this hearing and giving me the opportunity to make
an opening statement. And I also appreciate your willingness to
include my bill, H.R. 2056, in this hearing.
In my opinion, there is no greater threat to our
communities than bank failures, especially in my State of
Georgia.
Since Chairman Bair last testified before this
subcommittee, two more banks have failed in Georgia. Georgia's
grand total is now 65 failed banks. To date, 15 banks have
failed in Georgia just this year.
I am here today to once again express the profound
frustration people in my district have with the FDIC. Banks in
Georgia, both strong and weak, big and small, are trying to
survive in a market where government is picking winners and
losers every day.
The banks that are failing now are from paper losses, and
by this I mean that banks are forced to write down assets
because of mark-to-market and other regulations which
immediately cause a capital call from the regulator.
Often, this occurs on loans that are actually performing.
But Georgia is by no means alone with the threat of bank
failures. Ten States have had more than 10 failures since 2008.
They are Arizona, California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nevada, and Washington.
Sadly, these States also have some of the highest
unemployment and foreclosure rates in the country. The bill I
introduced, H.R. 2056, directs the FDIC Inspector General to
study FDIC's loss share agreements, banks failing because of
paper losses, hardship of being able to modify loans, and the
application of the FDIC policies by examiners in the field.
For these 10 States, failure on the part of management to
ensure information of policies by examiners on the ground have
resulted in continued stagnation in the real estate industry,
higher than average unemployment, and the steady pace of bank
failures.
This is why my bill, H.R. 2056, and my colleague Mr.
Posey's bill, H.R. 1723, are so vitally important. Three years
after the events of 2008, 2 years after the recession was said
to be over, the regulators testifying today are no closer to
find a solution to the bank crisis, even though you say you
have all the tools.
I urge the committee to continue to examine this crisis in
our communities.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer, for 1 minute.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I may be one of the few Members of Congress here who has
been employed as a bank examiner during my career. And I
appreciate the conversation we are having today.
I also want to thank my colleagues from Georgia and Florida
for the work on the bills we are about to hear about today. My
home State of Missouri is one of the hardest hit for bank
closures, and this is an issue that must be addressed.
We also need to recognize that institutions should not be
penalized for making good loans to borrowers who have never
missed a payment. Our examination environment is an issue I
have been concerned about for many years. I continue to hear
from my Missouri bankers that the relationship between
financial institutions and the regulators seems to have turned
into a game of ``gotcha.''
This is an issue I have raised many times with the various
regulatory officials, but it still seems to persist. If we do
not begin to consider proposals that will give these
institutions targeted relief, then we will continue to see
reduced lending and a growing number of unnecessary
institutional failures, which will delay any hope of economic
recovery.
I look forward to an important discussion today, and I
yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco, for 30 seconds.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Today, we have heard more sobering news about our troubled
economy. A mere 18,000 jobs were created in June, and the
unemployment rate is now at an unacceptable 9.2 percent.
We were told recovery summer was supposed to be last year,
but because of the ongoing regulatory burden on businesses
caused by some of the confusing and conflicting regulations we
are going to talk about today, it does not appear we are going
to have a recovery this summer either or any summer until the
regulatory burden is lifted off of small business and community
banks in my district, too.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Fincher, for 30 seconds.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Community and small-town banks are major stakeholders in
our rural economy. Farmers, small businesses, and manufacturers
depend on loans from community banks to make payroll, hire
employees, and invest in the equipment.
As a co-sponsor of H.R. 1723, I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses today about how this bill will help
community banks better provide loans to job creators in our
districts who are needing access to capital.
As Mr. Canseco said, 18,000 jobs created, unemployment 9.2
percent. We are heading down the wrong path. So thank you guys
for coming today.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Posey, for 2 minutes.
Mr. Posey. House Resolution 1723 is the jobs bill that will
help our economy recover. It helps our local banks do what they
were created to do: make loans to small businesses and
homeowners.
I was first exposed to the plight of community bankers when
Representative Ron Klein, a former member of our committee,
invited me to attend a bankers summit he held in Orlando.
It was there for the first time I learned regulators were
placing loans on a nonaccrual basis for such reasons as parents
or others having made payments on loans while the borrowers
were in between jobs, even though not a single payment was late
or missed. Because performing, high-interest loans were
modified to a more current rate even though a payment was never
late and never missed, and because regulators felt in their
opinion that borrowers should not have been able to make the
loan payments that they made because the economy was late--
again, even though not a single, solitary payment had been late
or missed.
Such subjective overregulation makes banks less inclined to
loan money to job creation, and results in more foreclosures,
more layoffs, and longer unemployment lines. The traditional
definition of a performing loan is exactly that: a loan which a
borrower is currently repaying on the agreed terms, period.
This legislation simply codifies that definition.
The Common Sense Economic Recovery Act has a 2-year sunset
provision. So unless it is extended, it is over in 2 years. But
it would stop regulatory abuse, create jobs, and help get our
economy back on track.
I want to thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for calling this
hearing and also thank the great staffs on both sides of the
aisle for facilitating it.
I would like to ask unanimous consent for four letters of
endorsement to be entered into the record. I have letters of
support for H.R. 1723 from the Independent Community Bankers of
America, the National Bankers Association, the National
Association of REALTORS, and the Florida Bankers Association.
I thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
I would also like to enter into the record a statement from
the American Bankers Association, along with your request.
Thank you.
And Mr. Grimm, for 1 minute.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for
holding this hearing.
Thank you for the witnesses for being here today.
The system of credit is a big part of the life blood of our
economy. It allows capital to officially flow from those who
save to those looking to invest and those looking to expand
their businesses, which ultimately creates jobs--we all
recognize that during the previous boom, mistakes were made.
Lending standards became far too loose and large losses
followed.
However, I now fear that the pendulum has swung too far in
the other direction. I am deeply concerned that overzealous
bank regulators are too quick to force banks to take write-
downs against loans that are currently performing. These write-
downs lower the amount of credit that these banks can extend
into our economy.
I am particularly concerned about the application of mark-
to-market accounting rules and how they are being applied to
loans that are currently performing.
The lack of credit being created by regulatory policy is
stifling our economy's ability to create jobs, as evidenced by
the dismal job losses that we have seen. With that, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Grimm.
And that concludes our opening statements.
I would like to, first of all, thank the panel for coming
today. And I would like to introduce our first panel for the
purpose of giving a 5-minute opening statement.
First, we have Mr. James H. McKillop--did I say that right?
Thank you--the president and CEO, Independent Banker's Bank of
Florida, on behalf of the Independent Community Bankers of
America.
Welcome, Mr. McKillop.

STATEMENT OF JAMES H. McKILLOP III, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
INDEPENDENT BANKER'S BANK OF FLORIDA, ON BEHALF OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY BANKERS OF AMERICA (ICBA)

Mr. McKillop. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney,
and members of the subcommittee, good morning.
I am James McKillop, president and CEO of the Independent
Banker's Bank of Florida. I am pleased to represent community
bankers and ICBA's nearly 5,000 members at this important
hearing.
As a banker's bank, I provide lending, investment, and
payment services to over 300 community banks in the Southeast.
I have a broad perspective on the challenges faced by
community banks, which I am pleased to share with you today.
ICBA believes that the two bills to be discussed today, H.R.
1723 and H.R. 2056, will go a long way toward improving the
current oppressive examination environment, a top concern of
community banks.
The exam environment is discouraging lending at the very
time that bank credit is needed to sustain economic recovery.
Specific concerns include write-downs of performing loans based
on collateral value, despite the cash flow of the borrower,
second-guessing of appraisals, and moving the capital goal post
beyond what is required by regulation.
While all banks accept the need for balanced regulatory
oversight, the pendulum has swung too far in the direction of
overregulation.
What is particularly frustrating to us is that field
examination practices are often not consistent with the
directives from Washington, such as the November 2008
interagency policy statement on meeting the needs of
creditworthy borrowers.
That directive cautions against excessive tightening of
credit and encourages banks to practice economically viable and
appropriate lending. Unfortunately, this policy is often
overlooked. Good loan opportunities are passed over for fear of
examiner write-down and the resulting loss of income or
capital.
ICBA supports H.R. 1723, introduced by Representative
Posey, because it will reaffirm existing agency guidance on
loan clarifications and bring more consistency to the
examination process.
The bill provides that a loan must be put on accrual status
if it has been paid on a current basis for the past 6 months,
among other conditions.
Establishing conservative, bright line criteria will allow
lenders to modify loans as appropriate without fear of being
penalized.
When loans become troubled in a tough economic environment,
often the best course of action for the borrower, the lender
and the community is a modification that will keep the loan out
of foreclosure.
But many examiners are penalizing modifications by
aggressively and arbitrarily placing loans on nonaccrual status
following a modification, even though the borrower has
demonstrated a pattern of making contractual principal and
interest payments under the loan's modified terms.
I want to emphasize that H.R. 1723 is not an effort to
rewrite accounting rules. Rather, it is an effort to bring
examiners back into line with accounting rules.
Specifically, agency guidance on troubled debt
restructuring provides that a modified loan should be placed on
accrual status when there is a sustained period of payment
performance, generally recognized as 6 months, and collection
under the revised terms is probable.
ICBA also supports H.R. 2056, introduced by Representative
Westmoreland, which would require the Inspector General of the
FDIC to study examination resolution policies that may
contribute to the current difficult environment for banks.
The study would focus on many of the concerns that we have
identified in the current examiner environment, such as paper
losses and the cause of the institutions to raise more capital,
commercial real estate loan workouts.
The study would be very useful in raising awareness of
these concerns, hopefully changing examination practices and
giving momentum to the legislation that would directly fix
examination problems, such as H.R. 1723.
ICBA fully supports H.R. 2056 and believes that it might
also be appropriate for the GAO to work closely with the FDIC
Inspector General because the topics to be studied are common
to all Federal banking agencies and affect all banks.
Finally, I would like to advocate for an additional piece
of legislation, the Communities First Act, which would improve
the regulatory environment and community bank viability.
Communities First would raise the threshold of SEC
registration to 2,000 from 5,000 owners. Another provision
would extend the 5-year operating loss carry back to free up
community bank capital at this very point in time.
We are pleased that the SBA has bipartisan co-sponsorship
and look forward to its advancement in the House.
ICBA appreciates the opportunity to testify. We encourage
you to schedule H.R. 1723 and H.R. 2056 for consideration as
soon as practical.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKillop can be found on
page 87 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our second witness is Mr. Michael Whalen, president and
CEO, Heart of America Group.
Welcome, Mr. Whalen.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL WHALEN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, HEART OF
AMERICA RESTAURANTS AND INNS

Mr. Whalen. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for having me here.
I represent no other institution than, I think, the people
on Main Street. Back in 1978, right after I got out of law
school, my law school buddies thought I was crazy when I
started a little, 100-seat restaurant called the Iowa Machine
Shed, in rural Davenport.
It was with sweat equity. And it was small-town bankers who
had a belief in my, maybe not in my balance sheet, but in my
work ethic and our vision and what we intended to do.
And over the course of 33 years, we have done the American
dream. My company today has a nine-figure net worth. I am not
here to tell you I am bragging about that, but to really kind
of lay the groundwork for what is happening on Main Street.
In a stabilized environment, our debt-to-value ratio is in
the 30 percent. We are not leveraged. We are a great, great
company to lend money to.
And we decided, as things started to come out of the gloom
and doom, that we are really marching to a hell with a heavenly
cause, and start to build some new projects, including a six-
story Hilton Garden Inn with one of our giant Italian
Bakehouses in suburban Kansas City, in Olathe, Kansas, a
brilliant growth area and a great site, that I already owned
free and clear.
It was really as close to a no-brainer loan as I have ever
had in 33 years. I thought, ``This is going to be easy.''
And they gave us--the community gave us $12.5 million in
Economic Recovery Zone Bonds in order to even help facilitate
the financing. So, off we went, and met with banker after
banker, and laid it out what our company was, laid out the pro
forma on this thing. Seriously, this was as good as a deal as I
have ever presented to a bank in 33 years.
And almost--I am going to give--I have counted about 24
banks. It continued to have the same dynamic. Enthusiastic
reception. Wonderful when they looked at our financials. They
would get in there, and the word came back, time after time,
``Look, Mike, we are just really scared that if we make this
loan, we are going to get second-guessed.''
Now, that is the reality on Main Street.
Another project that we are doing right now, a $20 million
hotel in East Peoria, Illinois, I am working with a banker.
And, basically, they are saying the same things over and over
again, ``We are fearful that if we make this loan, even though
it is a good, solid loan, that we are going to get second-
guessed,'' because they do not like the category.
Now, eventually, in both those situations, I found
financing, because our company is really strong.
But I will tell you that if this environment had prevailed
back in the 1970s and 1980s when I was trying to get off the
ground, we would have been dead in the water.
And that is why I am here. I am not here for my company. I
am not here for community banks, but I love them, okay. God
bless them. They have stuck with me sometimes when they should
not have. I am here for the guy trying to do what I did 33
years ago, which was to get started.
Now, the other thing that I would like to say is this: I
deal with a lot of solid banks. And I think that some of the
trouble that occurred, particularly on the Wall Street banks
and some of the major national banks is, let us say there are
two kids in the backseat. One is acting up, one is raising
Cain, and the other one is quiet.
And I get the feeling that we are doing the situation where
we are walking around and smacking the quiet kid and saying to
the one that raised Cain, ``You know, you are going to get that
if you do not settle down.''
I think we have had really good, well-managed banks that
have given to fear and that--Pepperdine University, I just
happened to come across a study that indicated that they talked
to a lot of bankers, through their representative sample study,
found 75 percent of the bankers said that they are concerned,
they are worried about being second-guessed by regulators.
Sixty-one percent of those bankers said that they did not
do a loan they thought they should do, underwriting standards
indicated that they should do, but they are scared about
getting second-guessed.
And I would like to submit to you that the other 39 percent
maybe were not as honest with the response as they should have
been.
So what we do have is a crisis on Main Street. And we have
to get that straightened out. It is not because of a loan
excess.
I just found out--and this is kind of a piece de
resistance, because I was calling some of my bankers, that a
loan that I had on some undeveloped property. It is fully
developed, but it is not, right now, developing any income
stream, even though we have been more than capable of carrying
the debt service because of the excess cash flow from our other
operations, was treated as a nonperforming loan a year ago.
I did not even know it. It was absolutely ridiculous,
because we had more than the carrying capability. It was only
for that reason that it did not come to a catastrophe.
And that is the kind of thing that is killing job creation
in this country.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whalen can be found on page
93 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Whalen.
Our final witness on this panel is Professor Simon Johnson,
the Ronald A. Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of
Management.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF SIMON JOHNSON, RONALD KURTZ PROFESSOR OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AT THE MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY'S
SLOAN SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT

Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much.
I would like to make three points, if I may.
The first is to reiterate and reinforce a point made by
Mrs. Maloney at the beginning, which is, we should not lose
sight of the context here. We are in the aftermath of the most
serious financial crisis since World War II, which involved $13
trillion of lost household wealth, as well as a 6 percent, 7
percent drop in employment, from which we are struggling to
recover.
I, in that context, would emphasize what I think Mr. Royce
said at the beginning, that the major responsibility here lies
with the Wall Street banks, the so-called too-big-to-fail
banks, that got massively out of control and did enormous
damage to the rest of the economy, including to small
businesses and to community banks.
So I think it is very important to get that clear. And I
hope that we can agree on this issue.
The second point is that a core part of this banking crisis
was due to the lack of capital and excessive leverage on the
part of the very big banks, but, unfortunately, it has to be
said, also on the part of some of the mid-sized and smaller
banks that need capital as a buffer against losses.
Personally, I would be attracted to a system in which there
were no capital requirements, and banks could choose their own
capital levels, because everything we know about unregulated
systems of that kind is that banks have much more capital. They
fund themselves with much more equity relative to debt in those
unregulated systems than they do in our system.
However, I do not think we can go to such an unregulated
system, because the experience in the Great Depression with
regard to depositor runs was so horrific that I would be
surprised if anybody, including from my side of the table or
from community banking or from small business would like to go
back there.
So, we have a regulated system. We have federally-insured
deposits. The FDIC has a responsibility to ensure there is an
acceptable level of capital in these banks. And if the banks do
not have enough capital, if they run out of equity, if the
losses swamp the equity, the bank becomes insolvent and there
is a charge to the deposit insurance fund, which, as you know,
is funded in the first instance by the banks themselves, but
also draws on the credit of the United States Treasury.
Now, I, for one, do not want us to go anywhere near another
situation of bailouts or a TARP, Troubled Assets Relief
Program, situation, where we are providing capital to private
banks in an effort to prevent systemic catastrophe.
It is therefore prudent on the part of the FDIC, the OCC
and other bank regulators to ensure the banks have sufficient
capital at all times, including in difficult times such as
these.
I have reviewed the latest situation, including the
testimony submitted by the FDIC and by the OCC today. And it is
my assessment as somebody who works on these issues, who has
worked on crises around the world--I am the former chief
economist of the International Monetary Fund, among other
things, and I have worked on crises for more than 20 years.
I think the rules that we have right now in the United
States, as explained by the FDIC and the OCC, make sense. They
are appropriate.
I understand completely the desire to try and stimulate
further jobs in this way. Of course, I would also like more
jobs to come back and unemployment to come down.
But I would caution you very strongly against this kind of
regulatory forbearance. This leads to trouble. This leads to
more losses. This led to much of the losses we also lost in the
1980s that we had from the--ultimately from the S&L crisis.
I agree with Mr. McKillop and with Mr. Whalen that the
pendulum in such a situation can swing too far the other way. I
do not think that has happened in this case. I do not think
that is what is coming out of these rules, as explained by the
FDIC.
There is plenty of credit available in this country. There
are also banks that are borderline insolvent. I support H.R.
2056, in part because I think the rules have not been fairly
applied across community banks and big banks.
And I think the OCC should be pressed very hard on this. I
think they have given too much forbearance to the big banks.
I also think, by the way, the FDIC has closed not too many
banks, but too few. I think when you are pressed for the GAO to
be involved, which I think Mr. McKillop suggested, and I would
support, you will find things that perhaps you did not want to
find. So be very careful with this.
But I think we should have transparency, as much
transparency as possible.
And in closing, I am afraid that I do not support H.R.
1723. I think it will lead to more trouble down the road.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Professor Johnson can be found
on page 64 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you all.
We will now begin the questioning portion, and I will begin
with a question.
Mr. Whalen, you are an entrepreneur. You have obviously
created over 30 years a lot of jobs in your time and continue
to do this.
In the context of what we are talking about today, because
I think that is the bottom line of what we are talking about,
when you talked about your frustration of your last project on
the commercial real estate deal, do you see this as an
inhibitor to job creation for you and those like you that are
well-capitalized, that have a long history of job creation and
have been able to look at a lot of different financing arenas
to move your companies forward?
Mr. Whalen. Absolutely. We are kind of the canary in the
coal mine, because we are well-capitalized, a strong company
that has never had a real failure in 33 years. Our track record
is outstanding.
And if we are facing this much difficulty, this much fear
from these bankers, then I cannot imagine somebody who is still
struggling, but still strong to try to build a company.
And we can sit here and we can pay hosannas to the small
and medium-sized business people. All of us sit around in the
hinterland and watch this from the Beltway, but then you sit
there and say, ``Wait a minute. Where are the policies that
facilitate all the medium-sized persons to try to get off the
ground?''
And, Professor, with all due deference, maybe we could have
a debate on the macroeconomic situation and the Wall Street
situation and the excesses of it, but I think what we are here
talking about today is Main Street, usually smaller and
regional banks, and the fact that, really, the medicine that
should be applied perhaps on Wall Street is being applied in a
double dose on Main Street.
And so I am here to probably say what it is like walking on
Main Street and not on Wall Street.
Chairwoman Capito. How many people would you say you have
employed right now, indirectly or directly, mostly, yes?
Mr. Whalen. Somewhere between 2,500 and 3,000. These
projects have put together hundreds of construction jobs.
Chairwoman Capito. Is that down from a figure from maybe 5
or 6 years ago?
Mr. Whalen. No, we did not lay anybody off.
Chairwoman Capito. Consistent.
Mr. Whalen. We did not have to. We hung in there. We did
what everybody did; we hunkered down. But as soon as we saw it
come back, or start to come back, we went back.
I have what I refer to as a sickness called being an
entrepreneur, and I am going to continue to do it.
But when I start to talk to my friends in business and I
talk to my bankers--and, of course, none of my bankers wanted
me to mention their name, okay?
[laughter]
Chairwoman Capito. For obvious reasons.
Mr. Whalen. --a story--``Mike, I will tell you this story
and that story, but do not mention my name.'' There is a
genuine fear, as I said, of being second-guessed on loans.
Here is a good example. If we start a new hotel, it is
usually a 2- to 2\1/2\-year period while it stabilizes up and
achieves the EBITDA level that you would normally have to have
to service the debt on a pro forma. There is going to be a
period, and a short-term period, where my other operations are
going to subsidize that.
If you came in 6 months at the end of the operation of that
loan, and said is that on a standalone basis fully capable of
amortizing that loan, does it meet things like debt service
coverage ratios of 1.2 or 1.3, the answer is, of course not. It
has never worked that way.
And if they start to apply these draconian rules, you shut
down small and medium-sized businesses.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Now, Professor Johnson, I know that there is a--we all want
to get to the same place, I think we acknowledged that, which
is full employment, availability of credit.
But we do hear, repeatedly, that while we are hearing the
President has a plan for small-business lending through the
SBA, is that really occurring on Main Street? I think that is a
question we need to ask.
Or are the differences in the applications of capital
requirements, etc., inhibiting that program from moving
forward? A lot of banks are not even getting involved in that,
because they do not want to touch it for reasons that the rules
may change or that they are going to be more heavily
scrutinized and not be able to meet up to the standards.
So I will give you a chance to respond.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. These are all very good and
appropriate questions.
I think we have to ask, why are the banks scared? What are
they afraid of?
And the answer is, it must be, that they have relatively
little capital, either because they were thinly capitalized to
start with or they suffered losses along the way.
I work with a lot of entrepreneurs also, as does Mr.
Whalen. I do not think that H.R. 1723 says institutions could
disregard currently available borrower financial information.
That is very strange in an unregulated, private-sector context.
You want to look at the borrower.
Anybody to whom you have lent money, you would like to be
able to evaluate that credit on a holistic basis. Disregarding
whether or not they can repay you is very strange, and not a
good business practice, and not something we should be
encouraging.
So I agree with your skepticism on whether the Small
Business Administration-type loans can make a difference. I
suspect they cannot.
But I do not think we should be encouraging banks to adopt
such a break with standard accounting practices actually. That
is the FDIC and the OCC interpretation.
I think the rules that we have right now are what we should
be applying.
Chairwoman Capito. All right. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank you for having this hearing,
and to thank all of our panelists today.
I am concerned about safety and soundness, given what we
have just gone through and certainly the financial stability
and the effects that it might have on classifying what
otherwise would be a nonaccrual loan as an accrual loan under
the terms of this bill.
And I am concerned if this would perpetuate the practice of
holding inadequate capital relative to risk that participated
in and caused the financial crisis.
So I would like to ask Mr. McKillop and go down the line. I
am very sympathetic to the challenges that community banks, or
some community banks, are facing. And some of them are seeking
forbearance, a regulatory forbearance during this financial
climate, and I am certainly supportive of it.
I would like to know--and Mr. Westmoreland, I would like to
be associated with your comments earlier and be a cosponsor of
your bill. I agree that community banks are an important part
of every community and played a critical role in our recovery.
Are there other alternatives that could achieve the goal
with fewer potential negative implications on safety and
soundness and financial stability than would reducing capital
requirements?
Could giving more time--are there other ways that we could
approach it that would help community banks?
Mr. McKillop. Ranking Member Maloney, there might be. I
have been in banking for almost 35 years, and I have been
dealing with banks in Florida and Georgia and Alabama for all
my life.
And what I have seen through the 1980s period into the
1990s and now here, 2011, is that there is an occurrence
following a catastrophe that, by necessity, rallies all the
troops.
We have done a very good job in trying to focus in on Dodd-
Frank and deal with the major mountaintop issues. But community
banks are not the Wall Street banks and the unregulated
institutions that caused the Dodd-Frank bill to have to come
into play.
We do not believe, ICBA does not believe, and I personally
do not believe that Representative Posey's bill changes
accounting standards at all. What we are saying in the bill is,
``pay attention to those standards, and do not go beyond them
in a regulatory environment at the bank level.''
I will give you a ``for instance'': When we have to
restructure a loan for a borrower, we must put it on nonaccrual
for 6 months. Must. No ifs, ands or buts. That will take place
even if the loan continues today, from day one, and continues
all the way through that 6-month period.
Now, we hit the 7th month and we start to move into a gray
zone. And if documentation in my files does not say that I see
how the borrower can continue to make payments, the regulators
have been inclined to say, ``That loan must stay on
nonaccrual,'' even though the loan is current.
To the degree that I can take it off of nonaccrual, I can
put it--
Mrs. Maloney. Let me ask, so it has to stay on the
nonaccrual, even though they are current, and they are asking
you to pledge that they are going to pay in the future, but you
cannot really pledge, because you do not know everything that
is going to happen. Is that basically it?
Mr. McKillop. The documentation that I might have is a year
old, from old tax returns. I am still dealing with 2009 tax
returns. The law does not require businesses to file until
October for 2010.
So, the documentation that the regulators look at says this
thing does not support the facts of the loan. And what this
bill creates is the payment, the evidence of payment is a
greater fact than any documentation deficiency.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much. My time has expired, but
I would like to hear more concrete examples of how this works.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you to all the witnesses for being here.
I am concerned about safety and soundness also, but I am
also concerned about jobs. And, Mr. Whalen, I appreciate you
being here because almost 28 years ago, I started my own
business and I created over 1,500 jobs, employed over 3,000
people. And if some of the standards were placed on my business
over 28 years that are being placed on businesses today, my
business would not be here any longer. And that is a shame.
Now, today my business has been sold and it is still
employing over 3,000 people and it is still a success story,
and 67 percent of employment is with small businesses like
yours. So I thank you for what you do.
In the testimony I heard today, it is interesting--Mr.
McKillop, I would agree with you, you have said specifically
about what some of the examiners are doing, requiring write-
downs or reclassification of performing loans, placing loans on
nonaccrual, even though the borrower is current on payments.
And I can go on and on.
But, those are issues--I can take you back to my district
in Ohio, and I can take you to some small businesses that have
lost the ability to refinance their debt because of these same
things, even though they have continued to make payments, even
though their value, their asset value is greater than their
loan. These are things that the examiners are continuing to do.
So I appreciate your testimony.
And I will go over to Professor Johnson. You testified on a
couple of things that do concern me. And it is interesting,
because I do believe we need--you said we need significant
capital. I am a firm believer that we need appropriate capital
levels.
The question is, and the problem I have, is that the
appropriate levels of capital are being determined by
regulators who are making decisions in many cases that are
dropping the capital levels down in these banks because they
are calling loans substandard.
So, I would question when you say ``significant,'' do you
really believe that if a loan is being paid, if it is--if the
value is in excess of the debt, if the loan is being paid. But
I am going to give you an example. If the loan is up for
renewal and cannot be paid off, is that a loan that should be
substandard and should be classified as reclassified on a
bank's balance sheet so that it will reduce the capital?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman.
I think the rules are very clear. And I also laid out for
you in the FDIC testimony to come shortly, and I will quote
from that: ``If the borrower is expected to repay the loan in
full according to its terms, there is no required write-down or
place in nonaccrual status, regardless of any deterioration in
collateral, for example, the point they are addressing here.''
And on the points made by Mr. McKillop, I could link the
two, the rules are that after a period of 6 months of
demonstration for a modified loan that you--that the borrower
can perform, the loan can be removed from nonaccrual status.
I think these are very sensible rules. Even the OCC--which
I have to tell you does not have a good reputation with regard
to avoiding regulatory capture--says in its testimony that
these rules--and I agree with this--would ``create regulatory
accounting standards that are less stringent than GAAP for
regulatory capital services.''
I really do not think you want to go there, from a free
market, pro-business perspective, this is not a good place to
go.
Mr. Renacci. The problem is, though, when they believe that
the loan cannot be paid. And if you ever want to travel back to
Ohio, I will take you to many small businesses who have been
making payments for 10 years, 20 years, and just because they
are only to pay their interest today, the loans are being
classified, and that is a problem.
So that is where I am saying there is overreaching, and
some of these regulators are coming down on businesses that are
creating jobs.
Look, we have a problem today. You heard it this morning
with the unemployment rate. It is small business owners like
Mr. Whalen's business and many others that are going to be able
to produce jobs, and I am extremely concerned that we are
taking regulations--and, again, I would say appropriate
capital, not significant capital. You used the word
``significant'' a few times.
The question of whether it is appropriate, significant or
enough capital gets to be determined by a regulator who can
take a loan and place it as a classified loan and reduce the
capital in a bank. And, again, I can probably name you--I am a
CPA also--I can take you to 10 of my clients in the past who
have had loans that have been classified and they have not been
able to borrow because of this situation.
So let us be careful when we talk about significant,
appropriate, and then how we determine what loans are
classified or not.
So, again, this testimony is near and dear to my heart
because it is about jobs. I am concerned that we are taking the
small business owners and the opportunities for them to create
jobs away by reducing their ability to borrow.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Watt, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
First of all, I want to thank the Chair for convening this
hearing, because it is really among the most important, I
think, and constructive hearing.
I think all of us as Members have heard the complaints
about policies being set at the Washington level not playing
themselves out in the field at the examination level. And this
is a serious concern.
As a general proposition, I am very sensitive to the
problem and somewhat favorably inclined to H.R. 1723, Mr.
Posey's bill, but I think perhaps the bill may be overreacting
too much in the opposite direction. I would say, as a general
proposition, I am very favorably disposed to H.R. 2056, because
I think a study of this issue would be very helpful and
constructive in getting us to the result that we are trying to
get to.
My concern with H.R. 1723--and this is what I want to focus
on in my questioning--is the part that basically forbids
banking regulators from imposing additional capital
requirements on loans that would be treated as accrual loans by
operation of the bill. I think that is a step too far, because
I think the four conditions that are outlined in the bill that
create a so-called accrual loan are too proscriptive.
And so, McKillop, I wanted to ask you about that in
particular. An accrual loan under this bill would be a loan
that is current, no payments were delinquent more than 30 days
during the last 6 months, the loans are amortizing, and
payments are not being made through an interest reserve
account.
Those are the four criteria that would qualify. And if you
met those four criteria, as I understand this bill, banking
regulators would be forbidden from imposing additional capital
requirements.
So, the question I want to focus on is, should not there be
some kind of additional out for extenuating circumstances that
goes beyond those four criteria? I guess that is my concern. I
could conceive of a situation where the loan is current, no
payments were delinquent for more than 30 days, the loans are
amortizing, payments are not being made through an interest
reserve account, but the borrower has robbed Peter to pay Paul,
meeting all of those criteria, and the rest of the business is
falling apart.
How do we protect ourselves if we pass this legislation
against that kind of eventuality, Mr. McKillop?
Mr. McKillop. That is a great question, Congressman, and I
am not sure that I can give you a full answer.
Mr. Watt. You recognize it as a problem--
Mr. McKillop. I recognize it as a possible problem. Yes,
sir, I do.
The banking regulators and the regulations that we must
comply with prescribe standards of capitalization that we must
live with. And as we drift to lower and lower levels of capital
standard, the degree of our flexibility as management inside
the bank is constrained. And at some point in time the
regulators, just through the capital standard, can impose
increased regulation to cease, to cause there to be a
cessation--
Mr. Watt. I do not mean to cut you off. I would love to
engage in a long conversation about this, but my 5 minutes is
going to run out.
You have acknowledged that it is a potential problem and it
is one that we may need to address.
Mr. Johnson--Professor Johnson, do you acknowledge that
this could be a potential problem also, and how might we
address it? If you can address that quickly?
Chairwoman Capito. You would make a quick answer there--
please.
Sorry.
Mr. Watt. I am sorry.
Mr. Johnson. Of course, there is a potential problem here.
I do not think the bill addresses it.
I would ask, if the banks have great opportunities, such as
lending to Mr. Whalen, why do not they raise equity? There is
plenty of capital out there that wants to lend--
Mr. Watt. You are answering a different question now. I am
trying to focus on the specifics of the bill.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Watt. I have run out of time. I am sorry, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
Mr. McKillop, the research shows that loan balances in 10
out of the last 11 quarters have been lower. I hear from my
small businesses who say that their bankers will not lend to
them. I hear from bankers who say, ``I cannot lend to them
because of the regulators.'' I hear from the regulators who say
they are not qualified borrowers.
So there is a circle here. Give me your take on it. And do
not give me the standard answer--give me something new, give me
something interesting that I have not heard before.
Mr. McKillop. You are not going to be caught on my watch. I
believe that there is pressure and uncertainty in the bank
boardroom where the examination process, probably for good
reasons, has put the bank into a constrained management
position.
Loans have gone bad. In Florida and Georgia, we are dealing
with unemployment and underemployment exceeding 15 percent.
Loans will go bad in that environment. When a loan goes bad,
the management mark under an examination goes down. All other
gradings go down and many banks go under a regulatory order.
So under a regulatory order, the board of directors is very
reticent to move forward. They look around in their community
and there is a community where 15 percent is either unemployed
or underemployed. That means 20 percent or 35 percent of the
businesses are also affected very negatively by the business
that those people would be doing. The whole community is in a
recessionary environment.
Does that new loan that comes through the books satisfy the
regulator? Maybe, maybe not. But if not, when it hits the books
of the bank, then it is another loan that is classified. As
classified loan volumes grow, more pressure comes on the
banker.
So the banker, who is trying to make that community work,
is between a rock and a hard place. Okay? The business person
is between a rock and a hard place. They need credit. They need
the access to credit. In reasonable periods, the banker makes
the decision and says, ``I will take a chance on you.'' In
today's environment, the regulatory pressure, at least in
Florida and Georgia, is such where the bank boardrooms cannot
take that chance.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. But to Mr. Whalen's point, which is--Mr.
Whalen, I am familiar with your original restaurant. I have
been there--fantastic food, great service. Thank you.
But it sounds like Mr. Whalen is sure money. Explain to me
his situation and your view. If you have a company that is well
capitalized with the ability to pay--
Mr. McKillop. Absolutely.
Mr. McHenry. But a project, as these things are, takes some
time to be profitable. So give me your take on it, then Mr.
Whalen, I will give you an opportunity.
Mr. McKillop. I believe that the major criteria in Mr.
Whalen's case is a guidance issue by the regulators relating to
commercial real estate exposure, CRE. Okay? Florida bankers and
Georgia bankers and Alabama are very familiar with this. CRE
exposure was guidance as it came out several years ago, many
years ago now. I believe it was 2005, but I am not positive.
It is now a very bright line. If a banker exceeds exposure
to certain CRE, commercial real estate loans as a function of
capital, a percentage of capital, and if they exceed that
bright line, which has become a regulatory very hard line, even
though it still says ``guidance'' in all the regulations, then
the banker comes under increased scrutiny.
Mr. McHenry. My time is short here.
Mr. Whalen, I will give you an opportunity to finish up. I
have 20 seconds.
Mr. Whalen. Simply put, we are not necessarily just talking
about current loans, but the chilling effect that it is having
right now on new job creation. I think that is the concern. For
example, if it takes a year for a new hotel to ramp up, and
after the first year it falls short of its debt service by a
quarter-million dollars, even though I might have $5 million of
cash-flow on the other side, the regulators could come in and
say, ``That loan is nonperforming.''
And that basically ignores the way that businesses grow.
Things do not start from day one necessarily being self-
amortizing. And that is what we are talking about. We are
talking about the chilling effect, the fear factor of stopping
good solid loans.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Miller from North Carolina, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I think we all recognize the importance of community banks
and community bank lending to small business. I
enthusiastically supported the small business lending fund. I
offered an amendment in this committee to strengthen that
legislation. I am disappointed that program is not really up
and running yet and housing starts are one-third of natural
demand--natural demand from new household formation and
replacement of dilapidated stock, housing stock.
And there are a few markets in the country, although we
have an overhang of probably 11 million in the inventory,
shadow inventory. But in those housing markets where there is
really a demand for new lending for new housing, to loosen up a
little bit on community banks so they can lend for acquisition
development and construction.
So I understand the importance of small business lending by
community banks. I am on it.
But all of you acknowledge that the real crisis 3 years ago
was not community banks and there was an enormously
concentrated banking industry; 80 percent of banking--of
lending capacity at banks was with the 19 banks that got the
stress test. And it appears that there is even more
concentration now than there was then.
It also appears that regulators have a pretty good idea of
what is going on at the community banks. You are just not that
complex. That is actually a compliment. But they have hardly a
clue still, and they certainly did not know then--they did not
know 3 years ago.
The OCC did not know. The Fed did not know. The boards of
directors did not know. The CEOs did not really know what all
was going on at their banks because they were so enormous and
so complex. They were in so many lines of business that created
a very questionable alignment of interests, by my lights, often
an outright conflict of interests, and that has not really
improved.
Dr. Johnson, I know that you have criticized the overall
size of banks. Do you think we have a better sense--and
generally, I have supported the idea of higher capital for
requirements particularly for the biggest banks. But one
criticism I have heard is that higher capital does not help you
if you do not really know what their assets and liabilities
are. And we still kind of do not, or at least some suggest we
do not.
Professor Johnson, do we have a handle yet on what is going
on with those biggest banks? And do you think--what advantages
or disadvantage do you see to the size and complexity of those
banks?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman.
I think that is the elephant in the room, if you like. And
I fear that the problems of the big banks are not now behind
us. If you look at the situation in Europe, for example, as it
is currently developing, there are very big exposures that we
have through Wall Street, the banks and actually the money
market mutual funds, to some of the serious problems in Europe,
and we do not have enough capital in that part of the financial
system.
Now, I take your point that we also may not know what are
the true assets and liabilities in those banks. And I think we
are talking today about various dimensions of collateral damage
caused by the failure of those massive banks.
And I think the process of that collateral damage will
further the concentration of the system, because the more small
community banks go out of business, really go out of business.
They really made loans that have gone bad. There is no--
ultimately no way you can avoid that, the more concentrated the
system is going to be at the end and the worst--the stronger
the power of the big 19, or I would say the big six bank
holding companies are the ones that worry me the most; and the
more danger we are exposing ourselves and our system to down
the road.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. One criticism of the too-big-
to-fail banks is they still have, despite everything we have
done, there still is an assumption they would not really be
allowed to fail, and they get credit on better terms because
their creditors assume that they are going to get paid
regardless of what happens to those banks.
Mr. McKillop, what is the competitive effect of that? We
may deny it, but the market still thinks it is there--the
implicit guarantee that those banks will not be allowed to
fail. Does that put you at a competitive disadvantage to those
biggest banks?
Mr. McKillop. Congressman, it definitely does. There have
been numerous studies over the years on the effects of massive
aggregation and huge economies of scale and whether or not that
puts a large bank at an advantage to a small bank. A lot of
those issues are very difficult to unwind, but if you look at
the deposit rates that are paid by the large institutions and
compare that against the rates that are necessary to be paid by
the small institutions, we have found times where that
difference widens dramatically.
I am going from memory. This is not necessarily accurate.
But the last study that I remember exceeded a 50 basis point
advantage, a half-point advantage in terms of the cost of
money. So the inference is that was an extra layer of insurance
or too-big-to-fail. You could not fail, so they did not have to
pay as much to get the deposit through the door.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. McKillop.
Mr. Westmoreland?
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Professor Johnson, have you had the opportunity to start
any businesses up like Mr. Whalen has from scratch?
Mr. Johnson. I have certainly not entered the hotel
business. I have worked closely with business people in various
capacities.
Mr. Westmoreland. But not for yourself.
Mr. Johnson. I have not--in my own business--
Mr. Westmoreland. So you have not employed anybody?
Mr. Johnson. I have employed people, but not in the kind of
business that we are talking about.
Mr. Westmoreland. Right. Have you ever made a loan in a
bank?
Mr. Johnson. No, I have not made a loan from a bank,
although I have worked with bankers closely on exactly those
kinds of situations, particularly after crises.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you.
Let me tell you a little bit about what is going on in my
district and with the community banks. We have had banks that
have failed that people who have gotten TARP money have come in
and taken the banks over. We have also had acquiring banks from
Arkansas and other places come in that have a loss-share
agreement with the FDIC.
When these banks come in, they will go in and do a fire
sale and it lowers all the values in the community. We had one
bank that got TARP money, almost $1 billion, came in, had a
fire sale, really put it up, did not do foreclosures, put it up
at public auction and got about 30 cents, 35 cents on the
dollar.
Our community banks had some construction loans in these
same neighborhoods. Now, all of a sudden, their values were
written down. The builders who were trying to employ people,
make a living, were basically put out of business because this
bank that got TARP money came in and drove all the values down.
The same thing has happened with banks that come in with a
loss-share agreement. The quicker they can flush those loans,
the more reimbursement they get. And if they modify the loan,
then that loan comes out from under the loss-share agreement,
and that bank takes it over. So, there is no incentive to work
these out.
And so these community banks, through no fault of their
own, to have performing loans, to have good loans and employing
people, when the government has either made a deal with an
acquiring bank to reimburse them for their losses or gotten the
TARP money, they are the ones that have driven the market down
and the community banks are suffering.
So we have banks that have been too-big-to-fail, but we
have other banks that have been too-small-to-save.
And these community banks--and Professor Johnson--these
community banks that you are probably aware of, the most
prominent people in the community, even people at ours, have
bought stock in there.
Once these community banks are taken over, that wealth--
$15, $20, or $30 million--is flushed out of that community,
gone forever.
And somebody else is getting those funds, that money, and
taking advantage of what these communities have built up.
I have sat down with community bankers and said, give me
some specifics.
And, Mr. Whalen, one of the examples you have given about
the six-story building--and I have been to Davenport, too, and
so I want to compliment you on your food--but had an expansion
of a business in my district.
That was a--it had increased its employment 25 percent. It
was a $7 million expansion. He was going to buy a million
dollars worth of equipment.
And his banker, whom he had been banking with for 30 years,
said, ``We cannot do it because our commercial real estate
portfolio is at a percentage where we cannot make you the
loan.''
Now, there is something wrong with that. Government is
getting in the way of this recovery and we wonder why we are
not creating jobs.
Mr. McKillop, these community bankers I am talking to--and
every time I talk to the FDIC, they say, give me specifics.
My community bankers do not want to give me--because they
are afraid of retaliation. Can you just say something about
that? And is this an experience of all your community bankers?
Mr. McKillop. Congressman, yes, it is. When an examination
takes place, one of the issues that Congress should understand
is that the information in that exam is confidential.
It is--we are not supposed to talk about it, period. And
there are legal sanctions that can be taken.
My charter is a little different. I can step out on some
issues and talk more clearly. But I cannot say specifically
about another bank.
I have seen and heard from my customers--some of my
customers are in your district--the same thing, sir, okay? It
is a difficult issue, and it is difficult not to generalize. So
let us be careful about that.
But the regulatory pressure--
Chairwoman Capito. Let me just inform the witnesses and
everybody in the room, the vote has been called. It is going to
be a very lengthy series of votes.
I would ask the first panel, when I suspend the hearing, to
come back. I would really appreciate it, because we have a lot
of other questioners, if that is all right.
And I will go to Mr. Scott, and hopefully we can get one
more person in before we suspend.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Let me just say briefly what is going on in my State of
Georgia, which is ground zero for bank failures. We lead the
Nation in bank failures.
Just 2 weeks ago, regulators shut down the Mountain Ridge
bank in the town of Clayton in Georgia, bringing the number of
U.S. bank failures this year to 48. But the startling figure is
that in Georgia alone, during this period of 48 banks closing
all across the country, 15 of those bank failures this year
have been in Georgia. And we are only halfway through this
year. It is only July.
As a matter of fact, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution said
that the Mountain Ridge Heritage Bank was the 65th bank in our
State to fail in the last 2\1/2\ years. So it is devastating
there.
And that is one of the reasons why I am proud to cosponsor
with my good friend, Congressman Westmoreland, House Resolution
2056, which really will get the FDIC Inspector General to take
a look at some of the issues that have caused these bank
failures, especially the application and effect on consent
orders and cease-and-desist orders, and particularly orders
that have been enforced uniform--whether or not these orders
have been enforced uniformly across the spectrum.
But to zero in on our smaller community banks, one of the
real issues--and I would like to, first of all, I think,
address this to each of you.
But, Mr. McKillop, since you are here and representing the
small bankers, I want to ask you about the repeal of regulation
Q.
There is a considerable concern within the smaller
community banks in my district and throughout Georgia, probably
throughout the Nation, that the new-found ability to pay
interest on checking accounts placed them at a competitive
disadvantage versus the larger banks.
There is also a concern that this repeal could negatively
affect the safety and soundness of community banks. Do you
think that the effect of the repeal on community banks was
adequately studied before regulation Q was inserted into the
Dodd-Frank bill, and would you not feel and agree that a delay
of the repeal would be a good idea in order to have time to
fully study its impact?
Mr. McKillop. Congressman, you bring up a very good
question. I am not sure that I have the resources to be able to
answer you appropriately. My bank deals with lots of small
banks throughout the Southeast.
And I believe that the change in Reg Q will change the cost
of interest rates. I also remember that it was fairly well
advertised in advance that a possible change could occur.
So as for the timing and the degree of analysis, sir, I am
not qualified, really, to answer.
Mr. Scott. Does anyone else have a thought on that at all?
Do you feel that the smaller banks, community banks, are at a
disadvantage with the larger banks at all?
Would anyone like to express concern about that?
Let me ask you about 2056, then, Mr. Westmoreland's and my
bill, and others who have cosponsored it, would you--do you
believe that the bill would be an effective way of having the
information necessary to eventually prevent bank failures?
If not, in your opinion, what needs to be added to the
topics that should be studied by the FDIC to prevent future
bank failures?
Does anyone have a comment on that?
Mr. McKillop. Yes, sir. The degree of the study is probably
the most important, sir. I am a little skeptical. I have seen
Congress bring forward proposals to study things and ultimately
the study is either so late or so tardy or so thin--
Mr. Scott. Let me ask, as my time is short and I know
others want to ask questions. I do not want this opportunity to
pass without you giving us, as a representative of the smaller
community bank, what do you think we can do to stop these bank
failures?
It is a drain in Georgia and across this Nation. What do
you think we could do if 2056 is not the answer?
Mr. McKillop. The ultimate fundamental is capitalization,
sir. And if we can create an environment that says these banks
will be stabilized into the future, they will become viable
into the future, they will not be closed immediately, then we
could see community banks begin to raise capital.
Today's environment is exceptionally onerous for community
banks that have a lot of regulatorily defined impaired or
substandard loans.
Mr. Royce. [presiding]. Thank you. Without objection, we
have a statement from Chairman Spencer Bachus that we will
enter into the record, and we will go to Mr. Luetkemeyer for
his questions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whalen, I want to congratulate you. You may be the best
witness I have ever seen in all of the few years I have been
here in Congress.
You bring an expertise from what you do. You are pertinent
to the issue and your frankness is very refreshing. Thank you
very much for being here today.
Mr. McKillop, thank you for the kudos on the Communities
First Act. It is a bill that I am handling, and will hopefully
have up after the August recess here. And along that line--and
you made several comments that are pertinent to today's
discussion with regard to the legislative proposal regarding
banks' examination practices as the headline for our committee
hearing today.
And you have nailed it when you said that the regulatory
environment is making it very difficult to do business. Mr.
Whalen is an example of that.
What do you see as a--this bill that we are looking at
today is one--and the two bills, I guess, are a couple of
solutions that we have come up with.
Do you have some other ideas, besides Communities First and
some other things that we can do?
Because I think what we have done here with these two bills
today, we have some great ideas, I think, for ways that will
give some forbearance to some of the activities that are going
on.
Mr. McKillop. Congressman, I look at Dodd-Frank, and I say
that was a bill that had to come by, had to occur to deal with
the too-big-to-fail issue and the problems on regulated
institutions.
But at the same time, I look at what is happening now and
the trickle-down effect that will be occurring into the future,
and I go back to prior conversations with Directors in the
FDIC, and I believe that establishing a separate way of
examining community banks, a separate examination standard,
might be the only thing that we can really implement with some
peace.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. One of the things that I hear regularly
from my bankers back home is that there is a huge disconnect
between what the folks in Washington are telling us is supposed
to be the way that banks are examined and what is really going
on out in the field.
I assume that your testimony lends itself to that
direction. You agree with that statement?
Mr. McKillop. I agree totally with it, sir.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do we need to say it louder? We have some
regulators here in the audience. Do I need to stand on the
table today and you want to shout in your microphone to let
them know that there is a huge disconnect between what is going
on here in Washington and what is really going on out in the
field?
Mr. McKillop. Let my yes be yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Because I have met multiple times with
regulators and it does not seem to register.
So thank you for being here today. And, again, if we need
to, we will sing this praise from the highest heaven here that
this is what is going on and we need it to stop.
But one quick question for the professor. You made the
comment awhile ago, sir, that you said that--I would like for
you to elaborate on it--that we really need to have no capital,
would be a way to go. And then you turned around and said that
we need to have no forbearance.
Can you justify those two statements? Can you tell me how
they are juxtaposed against each other and make sense?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, Congressman.
I did not say no capital, I said no capital requirements.
But that does not make sense in a system with deposit
insurance.
In pure free market systems, before, for example, in the
United States before there was deposit insurance and before the
creation of the Federal Reserve, banks routinely had 30, 40, 50
percent equity capital as a share of their assets. So they had
a lot more capital.
And one consequence that we should all recognize and--we
actually can all agree on is because we now have deposit
insurance, banks are able to have less capital, they are
protected--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So what you are saying is we had--if we
had no insurance we would have more capital--or should have
more capital--
Mr. Johnson. If you look at private banks, the non-insured
banks, financial institutions that take the same kinds of risks
as banks, small, medium or large, they routinely have 30
percent capital. So that is 30 percent equity funding as a
share of the total funding; 30 percent equity, 70 percent debt.
That is not risk-weighted capital. There is no risk
adjustment--pure, plain, straight numbers.
And so, we run our financial system with very little
capital relative to what you get when you do not have the sort
of regulatory-related deposit insurance.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Fine. I do not disagree with that. I think
that you are probably right.
With regards to no forbearance, that is exactly what we are
talking about here today, though, with regards to Mr. Posey's
bill--forbearance here, to put in law that is really supposed
to be in practice, as was said awhile ago.
Do you disagree with this bill, then? I think you made that
statement awhile ago.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I do disagree with the bill, Congressman.
In Texas, in the early 1980s, there was a serious problem
with commercial real estate. One response was regulatory
forbearing, including through legislation passed by Congress.
Now, the problem was not just in Texas. The problem was not
just in the bank that originally had the problem. But by the
end of the 1980s, we had what is now known as the S&L crisis
that was large and cost the taxpayers hundreds of billions of
dollars in order to sort out.
That was a direct result--costs escalated because of the
regulatory forbearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I thank you for your patience.
We are on a vote. We have about a minute-and-a-half left
for the vote, so I think we are going to suspend the hearing.
We will stand in recess until after the last vote. We should be
back here between 12:15 and 12:45. Some of the staff can give
you a more accurate time.
You can go to the glorious Rayburn cafeteria and enjoy a
great a lunch.
Thank you.
[recess]
Mr. Renacci. [presiding]. We are going to call the hearing
back to order.
Mr. Pearce, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before we were so rudely interrupted, I was going to ask--
when I am looking at Mr. Whalen's testimony, I see on page one,
he says that the decision to make a loan will be second-guessed
by regulators. And then he goes on to make the point that
regulators are responsible for the failure to--for the loans to
take place.
Then Professor Johnson on page two, number eight, says to
blame bank examiners for the lack of lending in a post-crisis
economy makes no sense. And so, I would kind of like to drill
down just a little bit deeper in that.
Professor Johnson, do you have empirical evidence? I guess
if I were going to look to try to figure out the difference, I
would look at safety and soundness reviews and compliance
reviews. That would be two vastly different approaches. One
would be concentrating on the capital and whether the financing
by debt or whatever. The other one might be a regulatory
approach.
So in your empirical evidence, have you studied the amount
of reviews now that are compliance versus those that are
concentrating simply on safety and soundness? Which one is
dominating in the reviews right now?
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, that is a very good and a very
fair question. I do not think anybody knows that level of
detail on the systematic data.
We do know from the Federal Reserve's senior loan officer's
opinion survey, and from the National Federation of Independent
Businesses survey of small business economic trends, the
predominant fact there is that demand for loans remains
sluggish because of the damage to the balance sheet. So I do
not--
Mr. Pearce. I am hearing a completely different thing, sir,
in New Mexico small banks. And I am hearing that there is
evidence that--I get banks together on phone calls frequently,
and they tell me that compliance reviews have replaced safety
and soundness, the tediousness of it. And, in fact, those
soundness reviews are killing the market exactly the way that
Mr. Whalen describes.
They, in fact, tell me that when they used to get a simple
markup, say, a notation, a write-up for something. Now, they
face $50,000 fines. And they tell me, ``Why would I loan money
on a New Mexico house that I am never going to make $50,000 on
that particular loan? Why would I risk making the loan in order
to get possibly a write-up, because we left a comma out or
because we did not completely fill out the flood insurance?''
Flood insurance in eastern New Mexico is not a high
priority item. We have not had rain since last August, and the
State is burning up, as you can see on TV. And so, this would
lead us to believe a little bit more that the process of
reviews is in fact killing the market exactly like Mr. Whalen
said.
Now, in your verbal comments, you asked the rhetorical
question, why are banks scared. And then you said that they
have too little capital.
I, in fact, am hearing from banks every day that they have
plenty of capital, and they have loan demand, but they also
tell me that if they make one bad loan, that their bank is
going to be taken away from them. They point to examples in New
Mexico where that has happened.
So, why would a banker risk making a loan that somebody is
going to come in and review at some later time that could cause
them to lose their entire bank?
I would have you look at Charter Bank and the Bank of the
Rio Grande, both of which were operating fairly well until they
began to come in and say, ``Well, we are going to downgrade
this or that,'' very few non-operating loans.
I think the next point that I would really like to ask
about is the procyclical and countercyclical regulatory
measures.
Right now, I think that the regulators, and I think you
could make a very strong point, that they are pro-cyclical.
When things are good, they simply open the door and let them
get better instead of trying to check the process and trying
to--instead of saying, ``Well, let us all slow down just a
bit.''
And when they start going bad, then they make things go
worse by their foreclosures, by their insistence that they
close down loans that are still performing. Then, appraisal
values go down, and so builders cannot get loans, because the
appraisal values have been abnormally pushed lower by the
actions of regulators that are calling into question loans that
are performing every day.
We recently had a group of--this was about a year ago, as a
matter of fact, even before the election--Indian American hotel
owners. All came in from a three-State region. Every single one
of them had demand requirements that you had to provide
$750,000 in capital to loans that had performed flawlessly,
never missed a payment.
Those feel like regulatory excesses that are simply doing
what Mr. Whalen contends. And your contention, on the other
hand, is that it is ludicrous to make that assertion. Would
you--I tend to side with Mr. Whalen, and the evidence that I
hear every day sides with him. Would you like to comment on
that?
Mr. Johnson. May I? Again, these are legitimate concerns.
Certainly, regulators can become procyclical, as you say,
exaggerate the boom and also exaggerate the bust. And
certainly, there are convincing anecdotes and instances,
examples, but systematically is this what is happening? Have
examination standards become tighter?
Mr. Pearce. When every banker in the State says yes,
because I have these conference calls. Do you have any
empirical evidence that says it is not happening, that it is
only anecdotal? I find that pretty offensive, when you do not
come in here with empirical evidence, and you are declaring
what I come with, with bankers saying often. I consider that to
be offensive that you are saying it is anecdotal.
If you come here as a professor, you bring the empirical
evidence for the claims you are going to make, sir.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Posey?
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pearce, I think, if you look at the written statement,
Mr. Johnson looks at the situation in reverse. He seems to view
it that the regulators are the good guys and presumes that
banks are bad guys, who just want to somehow game the system.
The statement was absolutely silent and failed to address
in any way whatsoever regulation, which is the point of this
bill and the point of this hearing that we are having here.
Mr. McKillop and Mr. Whalen, I wonder if you could each
share with me how important you think cash flows are versus
collateral value? Are the regulators focusing too much on
collateral value and not enough on cash flows?
Mr. Whalen. Yes, if we had a situation where the FASB Board
did suggest that we would, in effect, go on mark-to-market
rules through appraisals, if would have been the end of small
and medium-sized businesses. It would have been absolute chaos.
How often do you go in to get an appraisal every week, every
month, every 6 months?
The irony of it is, is that you can--ups and downs in
appraisals, but cash flow is still the mother's milk of
repaying a loan. And that is one thing that has occurred here,
which is, I think, excessive use of appraisals. You did have
excessive appraisals there for a while. We have swung to the
other side.
I had a situation where we put in $13.5 million of hard
infrastructure into a development. Basically, the appraisal
came back unchanged from the year before. I said, ``Wait a
minute. I just spent $13.5 million. Here is the bill.'' ``Well,
you know, it is a tough market.''
The point being is I do think that this is exactly that--
way too much emphasis on what is the appraisal of the day, the
appraisal du jour, and not enough on looking at historical and
cash flow trends.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much.
Mr. McKillop. At best, the collateral value is generally a
secondary source of repayment. The primary source is cash flow.
As bankers, we always look for that first.
Mr. Posey. And is there in banking any better measure of an
account, in your opinion, than the simple matter that the
payments were made on a timely basis?
Mr. Whalen. That was the old idea--borrow the money and pay
it back.
Mr. Posey. I get a feeling that there are two kinds of
people in this room. There are people who see the problem of
arbitrary overregulation, and those that do not. It is just
really simple.
And if you do not see the problem, then you will find all
kinds of objections to this legislation, because it changes a
regulatory environment that some people seem to think is okay
and needs to be preserved for whatever reason.
But I just do not see how letting a current debt be left on
an accrual basis perpetually, as long as payments are made, can
harm anybody. I think that is common-sense legislation and
basically what it is going to take to recover.
This is no cost at--unlike some of the big banks that got
bailouts, the community banks got bailed on. And most of the
community bankers that I am aware of, a majority of the
interest in the banks are held by the officers, the directors
of the bank, and people in the local community.
There is not a big spread of stockholders across this
Nation and around the world whose money they are gambling with.
They are gambling with their own money, if they are gambling.
They are loaning their own money, more than they are other
people's money. And they are accountable for it.
And given the opportunity to work with the homeowner or a
small-business man who may be in tough times, they can bring it
to a positive conclusion, whereas a heavy-handed, monolithic
bureaucrat can come in there and just stomp them out of
business.
In my State, unfortunately, there is probably not very much
real estate that is worth today what it was 5 years ago. And so
if your loan is over 5 years old, and some bureaucratic
regulator just decides they need to have a current appraisal,
there is a good chance your property is not going to appraise
for what it did 5 years ago.
You could essentially take every loan on real estate in our
State, probably, and put it on a nonaccrual basis for that
reason.
That is bad for Florida, that is bad for the United States
of America, and that is bad for the taxpayers.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
Mr. Royce, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask Professor Johnson a question. And it
has to do with a concern that you raised about the ability of
the resolution authority that was passed last year to resolve a
global financial institution that is in trouble.
Can you briefly explain your concerns regarding this
authority as it pertains to these massive financial
institutions?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, Congressman. I am of the view that were
one of the largest banks in the country--Citigroup, for
example, or JPMorgan Chase--to get into trouble, this would be
very hard to deal with under the resolution authority that the
FDIC now has, working with the Federal Reserve, the Treasury
and the Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Because there is no cross-border resolution agreement;
there is nothing between the United States and the United
Kingdom, nothing between the United States and other countries.
So there is no way to agree on who has what kind of priority in
the event of a failure.
And that would be a source of confusion, very much like
what we saw in the days after the failure of Lehman Brothers.
Now, the FDIC has issued a paper of specifics on how they
would have handled Lehman differently, and they make some good
points in that paper. So my concerns are not so much about the
specifics of a Lehman, but it is much more about the global
mega banks that, unfortunately, I believe could not be handled
through effective resolution at this time.
Mr. Royce. One of the challenges we have is that with the
too-big-to-fail presumption and with the legislation that we
have passed in Dodd-Frank, the implied subsidy or benefit in
the market, the lower cost of capital, keeps compounding.
It used to be that the studies showed it was about a 100
basis point advantage for large banks over smaller banks. Now,
we have the Kansas City Fed president saying maybe, by today's
standards, it has 360 basis points more.
And if you look at the consequences of that, we have a
situation now where 2 percent of the industry controls 78
percent of the assets. Before we went into this conundrum, we
had 33 percent of the assets concentrated in the big investment
banks in the 1990s.
So it seems as though one of the disadvantages for
community banks is this lower cost of capital that exists
because of the implied government backstop and because of the
various actions we took.
And now, with Dodd-Frank, because it is apparently believed
out there in the market, and if the Kansas City Fed's right, it
has compounded the problem, all of this leading to the question
that if this plays out over time, then, as I said in my opening
statement, we are going to just continue.
And with it, would not there come an overleveraging,
logically, of the largest financial institutions unless
something is done along the way in terms of regulation which
tried to capture that implied advantage, government backstop
advantage.
And if we assume that the reason we are in this is because
of that--let me let you--I am going to run out the clock here.
Go ahead.
Mr. Johnson. I agree with everything you have said. I think
that is a completely accurate and sobering assessment.
There are various tools available under Dodd-Frank,
including the so-called living will provision. So the FDIC
does, in principle, have the power to force big banks to become
smaller.
But we have seen no indication that they have done that,
and I would be skeptical that there will be political support
for them taking those actions.
And, as you say, if we could find a way to remove the
funding advantage--I do not think it is quite as big as Tom
Hoenig is saying, but it is big, and as Mr. McKillop said it is
at least 50 basis points. That is probably closer to 75. That
is a big deal in this market.
If you can find a way to tax that or remove that funding
advantage, that would be good. But it is very hard to do. And
the result almost certainly will be an overleveraging of the
too-big-to-fail banks, because of the government backstop, and
further financial crisis that will damage, massively, both
community banks and small business.
I think nothing could be more important than dealing with
the risks to the system posed by today's mega banks.
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Royce.
Mr. Manzullo, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you for coming to this hearing. It is
unfortunate that we could not have one panel where the
regulators sit with the regulated, to have more interaction
than is going on.
I am very disturbed over what the regulators are doing. The
area I represent in northern Illinois is heavily involved in
manufacturing. And I have had manufacturers come to me with an
order in their hands from a major, major contractor--an order
in hand, wanting work to be done locally.
With the manufacturer going to the bank and asking just for
enough money to buy the raw materials, it is called
``factoring.'' And with factoring, the banks have absolute
control, because they would write the check to the vendors to
the small manufacturer and actually receive the check coming
back from the large manufacturer that ordered parts from the
intermediary.
And every time this happens, I sit there and I ask myself,
why do we work so hard to return manufacturing to America, when
the Federal regulators hate manufacturers?
I am going to say that again. The Federal regulators hate
manufacturing. They do not trust it. They think that is going
to--things are going to fold up, and they actually do not
believe that manufacturing is that important.
This is reflected in some of the idiotic statements made by
the examiners who, when two of my constituents were turned down
on a loan, said to the bank, ``You cannot continue the line of
credit because those two brothers do not have any reserves left
in their sub-S corporation.''
That is how stupid the examiners were. You do not have
reserves in a sub-S corporation. You distribute the money in a
pass-through, the same as an LLC.
And the bank said, ``Our hands are tied.'' I am talking
about a 30-year long commitment.
And, Mr. Johnson, when you say in your statement that you
cannot blame the examiners--``to blame bank examiners for the
lack of lending in a post-crisis economic--economy makes no
sense''--you are wrong. The reason that you are wrong is the
fact that most of my work is done in manufacturing, probably 70
to 80 percent of time as a Member of Congress.
I talk with these guys every single day. And I also talk to
the banks, and I have also talked to the regulators.
And then one day, I talked to the heads of the Fed, the
FDIC and the OCC. And here is what they said: ``We have not
changed policy,'' which is true. And each one invited me--said
if you have a particular loan that you think should have been
given, I will look at it personally.
They were not stroking me. The problem is the bank. Every
time, the bank refuses to take them up on it because they are
fearful of retaliation coming from the examiners.
Now, this stuff has to stop. And it has to come from the
top. And I just want to throw that out to you and see if
anybody there thinks I am nuts or if you want to agree with me
or, Professor Johnson, the--I think you probably agree with my
answer, because the pressure is coming from the top and not
just the examiners themselves. Would that be correct?
Do not take all my time. We have two other guys I want to
hear from.
Mr. Johnson. I think you are raising very serious questions
that deserve careful examination, to be sure. I have not seen
evidence of this intimidation by regulators to which you--
Mr. Manzullo. I have. It exists. You cannot deny that it
exists. The banks are being hammered by it.
Mr. Johnson. I have not seen that evidence myself--
Mr. Manzullo. Anybody else? Mr. McKillop? Anybody?
Mr. McKillop. Your premise, I think, is right on target. I
am obviously not aware of the banks in northern Illinois, but I
see similar sorts of things occurring in other aspects of
regulatory pressure on community banks quite often.
Mr. Manzullo. Mr. Whalen?
Mr. Whalen. You hit it right on the head. I have businesses
in your district, by the way.
Mr. Manzullo. Yes, the machine shop. Good chicken.
Mr. Whalen. Thunder Bay.
But, I had a banker and he has been in the business for
multiple decades. He said, ``Mike, I am going to lend this
money to your business, but I know next year they are coming in
and they are going to put this--have some kind of a watch list,
but I do not care.'' But he is one of the few who was not
intimidated.
Mr. Manzullo. The--I am over?
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Manzullo.
Again, I want to thank the first panel for your testimony,
and at this time, you are dismissed.
I would also like to call up our second panel of witnesses.
Good afternoon. At this time, I want to introduce
individually for the purpose of giving 5-minute opening
statements our second panel. Our first panelist is Mr. George
French, Deputy Director, Division of Risk Management
Supervision, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

STATEMENT OF GEORGE FRENCH, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, POLICY, DIVISION
OF RISK MANAGEMENT SUPERVISION, FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
CORPORATION

Mr. French. Good afternoon, Chairman Renacci, and members
of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on
behalf of the FDIC on the condition of the banking industry,
our approach to supervision, and some concerns we have
regarding H.R. 1723.
The banking industry today continues to face challenging
conditions. Loan demand is weak and for some banks problem
assets are at high levels. Nevertheless, a number of indicators
show signs of a turnaround and the FDIC is cautiously
optimistic regarding the outlook for bank performance.
The 4,400 community banks that we supervise continue to
play a vital role in credit creation across the country, and
especially for small businesses.
Now, before addressing H.R. 1723, I would like to make a
few observations about our supervisory process. The FDIC
attaches great importance to taking a balanced and fact-based
approach to supervising banks in this challenging environment.
In reviewing banks' loan portfolios, we rely significantly on
validating banks' own credit risk management processes, and
most often examiners agree with a bank's assessment of loan
quality.
We do not micromanage banks in how they deal with
individual customer relationships or how they manage their loan
portfolios. The FDIC does not require banks to write-down loans
based solely on a decline in collateral values. And in fact, as
long as the borrower is expected to be able to repay the loan,
no loss on the loan should be recognized.
Another misconception is that once a loan is placed in
nonaccrual status, it is stuck there until the next examination
regardless of any work-out arrangements. In fact, when a
borrower has demonstrated the ability to pay for 6 months, the
loan can be returned to accrual status.
We have joined several interagency efforts to clarify these
points and to encourage banks to originate and restructure
loans to creditworthy borrowers. We have heard from bankers
that these statements have helped clear up misconceptions and
helped them to become more comfortable extending and
restructuring soundly underwritten loans.
I also want to emphasize that to carry out our statutory
responsibilities for supervision, we need accurate information
about problem assets. We expect the financial statements
prepared by banks to adhere to the standards prescribed by the
accounting profession for problem loan accounting and loss
recognition.
And this is the source of our concern about H.R. 1723.
Under that proposed legislation, as long as an amortizing loan
is current and has performed as agreed in the recent past,
institutions could disregard currently available borrower
information indicating that it is improbable that the loan
would be repaid in full. This would enable institutions to
include accrued but uncollected interest income in regulatory
capital when collection in full is not expected.
Information about the borrower's ability to repay the loan
would be disregarded for purposes of placing loans in
nonaccrual status and measuring capital, including for purposes
of prompt corrective action determinations.
This would result in an understatement of problem loans on
banks' balance sheets and an overstatement of regulatory
capital. Compromising the quality of information about
nonaccrual or troubled loans or preventing supervisors from
acting on such information would detract from supervisors' and
investors' ability to properly evaluate the safety and
soundness of banks or require corrective action as needed.
Such regulatory capital forbearance would detract from
investors' confidence in the reliability of all banks'
financial statements. Moreover, experience has been that
policies that delay the recognition of bank losses can
ultimately increase losses to the FDIC deposit insurance fund
and the costs that healthy banks pay for their deposit
insurance premiums.
In closing, I would like to reemphasize that the FDIC
recognizes the challenges facing banks and their borrowers in
this difficult environment and encourages banks to prudently
originate new credits and work with distressed borrowers. At
the same time, we believe that accurate financial reporting is
critical to maintaining a safe and sound banking industry.
With respect to H.R. 2056 directing the FDIC I.G. to study
the issues relating to bank failures, I would just like to say
that we are always glad to work with our I.G. We value their
input. They are an independent organization and I believe they
may be in contact with some of your offices regarding their
views and specifics on that view.
I would be glad to answer any questions from the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. French can be found on page
55 of the appendix.]
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. French.
The next witness that I would like to introduce for a 5-
minute opening statement is Ms. Jennifer Kelly, Senior Deputy
Comptroller for Midsize and Community Bank Supervision, Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER KELLY, SENIOR DEPUTY COMPTROLLER, MIDSIZE
AND COMMUNITY BANK SUPERVISION, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF
THE CURRENCY

Ms. Kelly. Chairman Renacci, and members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to explain the
OCC's approach in assessing the condition of banks' loan
portfolios, including determining whether individual loans
should be classified or placed on nonaccrual, and to offer the
OCC's views on H.R. 1723 and H.R. 2056.
Access to credit plays a vital role in restoring economic
growth and supporting jobs in our communities and we share the
subcommittee's view that banks should not be unduly constrained
from meeting the needs of creditworthy borrowers.
We are committed to balanced and fair supervision of the
financial institutions we regulate and I believe our examiners
are striking that balance. OCC examiners assess the quality of
a bank's loan portfolio during each examination cycle. The goal
of our reviews is to confirm the accuracy of bank management's
own assessment of credit quality, not to second-guess or
supplant their judgments with ours.
When a borrower's ability to repay a loan becomes impaired,
we expect the bank to classify the loan to recognize the
increased risk. Examiners confirm management's assessment
through transaction testing of specific loans or loan
portfolios. Where weaknesses are found, examiners direct bank
management to take corrective action.
To provide consistency in the examination process, the OCC
and other banking agencies use a uniform risk rating scale to
identify problem credit. This regulatory classification system
consists of four levels of designation that identify different
degrees of credit weaknesses.
We have a variety of mechanisms in place to help ensure
that OCC examiners apply our policies in a consistent and
balanced manner across institutions. And we spend considerable
time and resources providing training and guidance to our
examiners on evaluating credit risk.
Loan analysis and accounting principles are focal points of
every new examiner's classroom and on-the-job training. One of
our primary regulatory objectives is to ensure that the call
report a bank is required to publish each quarter accurately
reflects the condition of the institution at that point in
time.
Accurate and transparent financial statements are essential
to allow investors, creditors, and regulators to evaluate a
bank's financial condition. Congress recognized the importance
of this when it passed FDICIA in 1991. Section 121 of FDICIA
requires that the accounting principles used for regulatory
reporting should be no less stringent than GAAP in order to
facilitate prompt resolution of troubled institutions.
When a borrower shows signs of trouble, banks and examiners
must consider whether the loan warrants criticism or
classification, then whether the loan should continue to accrue
interest. And finally, if the loan is subsequently modified,
does it need to be reported as a troubled debt restructuring.
The banking agencies' policies for these and other loan
accounting issues are detailed in the instructions that banks
follow when preparing their quarterly call reports.
Consistent with GAAP, the call report instructions that a
loan be put on nonaccrual status when payment in full of
principal or interest is not expected, or when principal or
interest has been in default for a period of 90 days or more,
unless the asset is both well secured and in the process of
collection.
As a general rule, a nonaccrual loan may be restored to
accrual status when none of its principal and interest is due
and unpaid, and the bank can reasonably expect repayment of the
remaining contractual principal and interest, or when it
otherwise becomes well secured and in the process of
collection.
With this background, let me briefly offer the OCC's
perspectives on H.R. 1723 and H.R. 2056.
H.R. 1723 would permit certain loans that would otherwise
be treated as nonaccrual loans to be treated as accrual loans
for the purposes of calculating regulatory capital.
We are concerned that legislation proscribing specific
regulatory accounting that is less stringent than GAAPs could
mask troubled assets and overstate a bank's capital ratios.
This type of forbearance could diminish investor confidence
in banks and undermine a primary objective of the prompt
corrective action regime.
H.R. 1723 also requires the Financial Stability Oversight
Council to study how to prevent contradictory regulatory
guidance on loan classifications and capital requirements.
The OCC shares Congress' interest in assuring that
assessments are fair, balanced, and consistent over time and
across institutions.
For this reason, we generally coordinate with our
regulatory counterparts on the issuance of regulations and
supervisory guidance on matters such as capital and capital
requirements and loan classifications.
As previously noted, the criteria for loan classifications
and loan accruals are set forth in the interagency guidance and
the call report instructions.
H.R. 2056 would require the FDIC's Inspector General to
study the effects of certain policies that may also pertain to
institutions directly supervised by the OCC.
As such, we believe it would be appropriate for the OCC to
be given an opportunity to provide comments before the study is
finalized. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kelly can be found on page
68 of the appendix.]
Mr. Renacci. All right. At this time, we are going to
recognize members, and I will yield 5 minutes to myself at this
point.
I know that both of the organizations do not get up every
morning and try and figure out ways to slow down banking and
slow down jobs. But that is actually what is happening in the
real world out there.
We heard testimony from the bankers earlier. We heard
testimony from an independent owner of a business.
And I think I told you my personal experience as a CPA and
also a business owner, that the regulators out there are
overreaching.
They are doing everything that I know you have said in your
conclusion that they are not trying to do and that you do not
want to do. But, there is overreach.
And if you came back to my district in Ohio, I could take
you to six, seven, eight different businesses that would tell
you that I have paid my loans on time. The value of the
property is there.
And as a CPA, I have had the opportunity to see those
things. So, it is not like they are just telling me that. I
have actually had the opportunity to see it, and understand it.
So tell me, from both your perspectives, how do you make
sure that this is not happening? You could say here today that
your goals are for it to not happen.
But if I was able to take you out into my district to five
or six businesses and show you that it is happening, tell me
what you do, from each organization, to try and make sure that
this is not happening? Because it is. So I would like to hear
what your thoughts are on that.
Mr. French first.
Mr. French. I would like to start by saying that I think,
overall, most community banks today--
Mr. Posey. Can you pull the microphone closer?
Mr. French. Most community banks today do have a lot of
capital, I would say. The typical community bank has more than
twice as much capital as it needs to be well capitalized, 2\1/
2\ times its minimum.
So I think, in many cases, the banks are waiting for a
return to robust loan demand. That is what we are hearing from
the bankers who come in to meet with us regularly--
Mr. Renacci. I hate to interrupt you, but I have had 11
bankers in my office who all told me they have the dollars and
the demand, but the regulators have--they are concerned about
overreaching because of what the regulators are saying.
Mr. French. We would certainly be concerned as well. We
want our banks to lend. We want them to make good loans.
We are not out there looking to close banks. So, what we do
is we have our examiners--they have comprehensive training
programs.
We go out, on a quarterly basis, to our regional offices
and to Washington executives, talk to them about
professionalism in dealing with banks.
Mr. Renacci. Again, but is anybody going out to Main
Street, America, and seeing what the actual regulators are
doing to some of these small businesses? Because so far, I have
not heard that.
Mr. French. We take great interest in this. We have a small
business lending hotline at the FDIC.
We have received about 500 or 600 calls where we
investigate, find out what is going on behind those.
We have it processed in our exams, where every risk
management exam, we have a structured dialogue with the bankers
about obstacles that they are seeing to credit creation.
And we keep track of the answers. And we hope, hopefully,
over time, this will help us to get a better sense of where
some of the concerns might be--
Mr. Renacci. But it does sound like you are not testing or
sampling. You are waiting for people to come and call the
hotline. The problem is most of these individuals are
concerned.
Most of these banks are concerned about calling the
hotline, because then they are going to be--they know they are,
in many ways, they feel they are going to be punished.
Mr. French. Yes--
Mr. Renacci. I am--I know we are running out of time.
Ms. Kelly?
Ms. Kelly. I would say that we do a tremendous amount of
outreach to bankers in terms of getting out there, talking to
them, hearing some of the comments that you are relating to us
here as well.
And they do share specifics with us, and we talk through
it. We also have an ombudsman, an independent ombudsman at the
OCC. Banks can file a formal appeal, if they really disagree
with us.
But more often than that, the ombudsman has many
conversations with bankers to help better understand what the
issues are and get their side of the story and try and resolve
things on the supervisory side.
So it is encouraging that dialogue. I hear all the comments
you are relaying to me about retaliation. But I can tell you
there is an extensive dialogue.
The other thing we have done is quite a few Members of
Congress have asked us to participate in different local forums
with small businesses and bankers. We always are willing to do
that.
We have found those sessions to be very helpful as well in
terms of keeping us informed of what the issues are, what the
concerns, and trying to be responsive to that.
Mr. Renacci. But, again, it does not sound like either
organization is actually sampling or testing or going out in
the field.
Ms. Kelly. I am sorry, I did not speak to that directly.
Yes, we do. I have designated credit experts, who are spread
across the country. They do quality assurance reviews on a
sampling basis.
And when we have a problem bank, a bank that has particular
credit problems, we will send those experts in to take a closer
look at the work that the examiners are doing.
So that gives us a good sense of how well the examiners
understand the policies, and are they applying them
consistently.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you. And just in closing, I can tell you
that it sounds like you are trying, but it is not working.
And we really do need--there are business loans out there
that are--and businesses who are not able to employ people
because their credit has been shrunk, even though they have
made payments, their assets are there.
So I hope we can do a little better job in the future,
because this is all about jobs and making sure that these
businesses have that opportunity.
All right. I am going to recognize Mr. Westmoreland for 5
minutes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have a
chart I am going to ask to be put up on the board there.
Mr. French, have you ever worked in a bank?
Mr. French. No, sir.
Mr. Westmoreland. Have you ever been in business for
yourself?
Mr. French. No, I have not.
Mr. Westmoreland. Ms. Kelly, have you ever worked in a
bank?
Ms. Kelly. No.
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay. Have you ever been in business for
yourself?
Ms. Kelly. No.
Mr. Westmoreland. Mr. French, in kind of relationship to
what the chairman was asking, does the FDIC do any postmortem
after these closings to review what may have caused the
closing?
Mr. French. Yes. There are a number of things that we do.
But we certainly have the Inspector General material loss
reviews after closings that, where the loss exceeds a certain
threshold.
We also have, for any bank that is in a problem status or
about to be put into a problem status, the level of internal
review required for that to happen escalates to the regional
director level. And--
Mr. Westmoreland. I am talking about banks that have
closed.
Mr. French. Yes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Do you go in and do a--
Mr. French. We--
Mr. Westmoreland. --postmortem review of what caused it?
Mr. French. We do both formal and informal lessons learned.
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay.
Mr. Westmoreland. And how about the OCC?
Ms. Kelly. Yes. The Treasury Inspector General does their
own review, and we do an internal review as well. We look at
not only what caused the failure, but more importantly, our
supervision and do a lessons learned from that, based on the
history and the benefit of hindsight, and what we could have
done differently.
Mr. Westmoreland. So I would not have any problem getting
copies of the postmortem reviews of the 65 banks that are
closed in Georgia?
Ms. Kelly. The I.G. reports?
Mr. Westmoreland. Your report. Does the OCC not do a
report, the I.G. does the report?
Ms. Kelly. The I.G. does the report that is a public
report, yes.
Mr. Westmoreland. So you do not actually go in and look at
them yourself? Or you just read the report?
Ms. Kelly. We do. But those are internal documents.
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay. But do you go in yourself and
actually do an interview with the bankers or try to find out
what happened?
Ms. Kelly. We are working with the bankers all the time up
to the closing. So we are having constant communication with
the bankers up until then.
Do you mean going back and talking to them afterwards?
Mr. Westmoreland. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. I would agree with what--
Mr. Westmoreland. After it is closed, you might get a
different opinion than when they are in fear of being closed.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. But I would agree with what Mr. French
said about the levels of review and as the problems progress--
Mr. Westmoreland. Trust me. It is a different environment
after the banks close than it is when they are trying to fight
for their life. The attitude is probably a little bit
different.
The information you get will probably be a little bit
different.
And, Ms. Kelly, let me say that the most complaints that I
have gotten have been about the OCC regulators, very arrogant,
almost threatening, almost calling people crooks.
The fact that somebody would get A's on their report cards
and talk about how well the bank was managed and then at the
next review get F's and talk about how crooked all the
directors were, and here again, from both of your standpoints,
we have trouble getting a lot of these people to come forward
because they are afraid of retaliation.
To me, that is not good. But let me draw your eyes to the
chart up here. These are the top 10. And we have been told many
times that the reason that we have had so many bank closings is
because we have too many banks. And Professor Johnson kind of
alluded to that, that there are possibly too many banks.
If you look at the number of banks that we have in Georgia,
261, we have had 65 bank closings. And if you look at our
population and the number of banks that we have and compare it
to some of the other States, I do not know that we have too
many banks.
We have 159 counties in Georgia. And you would assume that
at least every county may have at least their own community
bank, although I have four counties in my district right now
that do not have a community bank because they have been
closed. They do not have one.
They have banks from Arkansas and other parts of the
country that have come in and assumed these banks that know
nothing about the community, and were really sent there to
flush some of these loans down.
But I would just like--if you look at Nevada, 45 percent of
their banks have been closed. And look at the unemployment
rate, look at the serious delinquencies, and their does not
seem to be a pattern.
It seems like there would be some type of pattern as to why
these banks were being closed. And I do not understand in
particular the--why as a result of the banks that have gotten
TARP or the loss share agreements going in and destroying the
markets in these communities and then the banks that have been
there providing for the communities suffer because of the
things that those other banks did. They are having to write
these loans down.
I will give you another example of government intervention,
and let me just close with this. The community--not the
community redevelopment, but the stabilization program. I had a
call today from a builder. A county had gotten money for the
stabilization program to stabilize the neighborhoods. He is
building in the subdivision. There are also homes that is
already been purchased in this subdivision.
The county came in and bought lots from a bank with this
revitalization money, and they are selling the houses for
$20,000 less than what they sold for. And the bank has called
him and told him that he is going to have to put up more
collateral because the values of the homes are less.
Does that make good sense to you? Really, how would the OCC
and the FDIC look at that when they go into that bank and the
guy cannot put up more collateral, he has paid his interest, he
has the same things he has been doing when government
intervention has caused that loan to call for more collateral.
That is inexcusable.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Westmoreland. And I yield 5
minutes to Mr. Luetkemeyer.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you two understand the reason for Mr.
Posey and Mr. Westmoreland's bill here today--bills, from the
standpoint that they are both the results of the frustration
with examiners and the fact that things are not changing? You
understand that? You understand why those bills are out there,
why we are here today?
Ms. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I made the comment in the previous
hearing, I can bring Bill Gates here, I can bring in 100
business people just like Mr. Whalen, I can bring in 100
bankers just like Mr. McKillop and they can testify to the same
thing.
And I have, over the past 2\1/2\ years I have been in
Congress, met with the FDIC, the OCC, and the Fed on an annual
basis till this year because--nobody will listen anymore and
presented the same problem, that there is a huge disconnect
between what you think is going on in the field and what is
really going on in the field.
I will give you an example. I have a banker--he is not in
my district, but he is in my area--who was put on the problem
list. His bank was on the problem list. It had never been on a
problem list in the history of this bank--never had problems
with earnings, never had problems with capital, never had
problems with past due. Yet, he happened to be the next bank
that was examined after an examiner got ripped for not catching
some stuff in the previous exam.
The next day, his was the next bank, and he was put on the
problem list. And ever since he has been on the problem list he
has never still had a problem with his capital, past due,
earnings, whatever.
That is what is going on. And you guys are blind to this. I
hope that you understand how significant this problem is,
because it is affecting the people who--Mr. French, you made
the statement awhile ago that you do not micromanage banks. But
do you really understand the effect that you have with the
interpretation of the laws, the recommendations that you make
and the exam that you have on communities?
Do you understand that?
Mr. French. We do understand, sir. That is part of why we
really want to emphasize to our examiners the importance of
taking a balanced and reasoned approach and--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. How are we going to solve this problem?
Mr. Posey and Mr. Westmoreland are trying to find a way to
solve the problem here today. You guys do not agree with this
approach, obviously.
What is your solution for how we can find a way to allow
the banking community, especially community bankers, because
they are the ones that really help our small business and local
communities fund the businesses that make this country work.
How do you--what is your solution if you do not like these
two bills today?
Mr. French. Like I said, I think we have a very sluggish,
still, a very sluggish economy. And we had a lot of banks with
a lot of capital, very liquid balance sheets now after going
through this crisis for 3 years, 4 years.
So we do have to keep reinforcing the message that we want
banks to make prudent loans. And we do not want--we want to
keep pressing the point with our examiners, as we have been
doing, that you do not write down a loan based solely on the
collateral if the borrower's making his payments. And I think
we just need to keep that up.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Kelly what do you think?
Ms. Kelly. Yes, my response would be that a key to economic
recovery is making sure that we have a strong banking system.
And our responsibility as regulators is to ensure that banks
maintain their safety and soundness.
And so it is important when banks are experiencing trouble
that they identify those issues and they deal with them early
on when there is still flexibility, they still have to work
with borrowers who are experiencing some problems, possibly
restructure the loan--whatever is the right thing to do.
I would go back to the comment that Ranking Member Maloney
made earlier about whether there is a way we can just give
people more time. So the earlier that there is a recognition of
a potential problem, and the borrower and the banker come
together and talk about how there could be a problem with
repayment and how can we work through it, the better.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I understand that. I have been on your
side of the table too.
Ms. Kelly. Yes
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I have been on both sides of the table. I
am kind of unique around here.
But by the same token, you have to understand from your
side of the table what the people on the other side of the
table are going through and understand that their long-time
working relationship with those customers, they know those
people. You do not. And yet, you are telling them how to
micromanage--whether you like it or not, you are telling them
how to micromanage their business. And I think that is
unfortunate.
One more question I want to ask you.
Professor Johnson made a comment that the FDIC is closing--
is not closing--you are not closing too many banks. You need to
close more, closing too few.
What do you think about that comment?
Mr. French. I do not think we are anxious to close more. I
think we are taking them as they come, one bank at a time. And
we really--we try to avoid a failure whenever we can. We try to
work with the bankers to help them to--in their efforts to
reach out, get investors, deal with the issues that they have.
But the failure is the last resort, and it is not a good thing.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I realize we are--you know--I am hammered
on. You get a chance to hammer on him. But thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Luetkemeyer.
I now recognize Mr. Pearce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Kelly, you have said that bankers have the right to
file an appeal whenever there is some write-down, is that
correct?
Ms. Kelly. If they choose to do that--
Mr. Pearce. If they choose to do that.
Does the borrower have that same right?
I find that the banks are more than willing to comply
because They are pretty much afraid of the regulators. So they
comply. But does the borrower have the right to make an appeal
when you do that?
Ms. Kelly. To the OCC?
Mr. Pearce. To anybody. Can they appeal to God, even? Do
you you have a process for them to appeal? Because I think that
is where the pressure comes in the situation. I assume that is
a ``no?''
Ms. Kelly. We have a consumer complaint department that
they could go--
Mr. Pearce. How strong is it? Can the consumer complaint
department overturn the regulator?
Ms. Kelly. The bank makes the decision about whether or not
to make the loan--
Mr. Pearce. No, the regulator makes the decision and the
bank says, ``Yes, we are afraid of you and we are going to do
what you said.''
So is anybody--does the borrower have the right to appeal
your decision to you?
I guess that is a ``no.''
Ms. Kelly. But it is not my decision.
Mr. Pearce. The--I would follow up with Mr. Westmoreland's
questions. Can I get a copy of the postmortem on Charter Bank
in Albuquerque? I would like to see that. Is that information
available to me--your process, your demand?
Ms. Kelly. I would have to check with our attorneys--
Mr. Pearce. That is a formal request. I would like for you
to check with your attorneys.
Ms. Kelly. Absolutely.
Mr. Pearce. Is that process transparent? That process of
closing banks, is it transparent?
Ms. Kelly. What about the process?
Mr. Pearce. Is it transparent? Do you have it available to
people? Is it something that you are proud of? Is it something
that you would share readily?
Ms. Kelly. I do not understand what you mean by process. If
you could clarify for that.
Mr. Pearce. The process of closing a bank.
Ms. Kelly. The decision to close--
Mr. Pearce. The decision and the process.
Ms. Kelly. Our enforcement actions are public.
Mr. Pearce. Is that transparent?
Ms. Kelly. They are public.
Mr. Pearce. Then why do you have a gag order on Mr.
Werthheim and all the Charter board members? Why did you come
in and threaten him that if he did not sign a gag order that
you were going to prosecute him? Why do you have a gag order on
a simple closing of a bank?
Ms. Kelly. I--
Mr. Pearce. I would like an answer to that also.
Ms. Kelly. I will have to follow up later--
Mr. Pearce. I would like an answer to that in writing.
Ms. Kelly. --have to follow up with you on that.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. French, you declare on page 4 that there
are common misconceptions. One is that the regulators require
the write downs of loans to creditworthy buyers.
If I provide you one, two, three--if I provide you three
people who say that their creditworthy loan was written down
because of a regulator, will you retract your statement
publicly that it is a misconception?
Mr. French. I guess we would have to see what--
Mr. Pearce. No, I am asking if I bring them to you and I
provide them to you to talk to you, will you recant this
testimony? Because I do not think it is a misconception. I
believe that they are a write down. I do not think those groups
of three States of Indian hotel owners came and asked me to
meet with them in El Paso, Texas, a year ago to complain that
they had never missed a payment, and yet you--somebody had
caused their loans to be written down. I do not think they were
misleading me, not every single one of them.
Mr. French. My understanding, sir, is that there could be
situations, for example, where there is the projects, lending
project. Maybe the borrower, his tenants are behind on their
rent--
Mr. Pearce. Every single one of them has--
Mr. French. --the borrower may come to the bank and say,
``I am not going to be able--''
Mr. Pearce. Yes, I find your comments to be quite hedging,
much more hedging than your testimony here.
I go on and read here, ``The agencies look to the ability
of the borrower to repay.'' What criteria do you use to
determine if a loan is going to be repaid?
Mr. French. That is a fact-specific and individual--
Mr. Pearce. Do you actually use that the payments are
received on time and never missed? Is that one of the criteria
fact-specific?
Mr. French. Of course. That is one of the major--
Mr. Pearce. And each one of these hotel owners had never
missed a payment, and they were being asked to come up with
$750,000 more capital for a $3 million hotel, and you are
telling me that it is not good enough that they have never
missed a payment, that there is something else.
And I will tell you that something else had to be the mark-
to-market, it had to be the fact that they were being
downgraded, exactly what you tell me is not occurring that you
describe as a misconception in your report. And I would like to
bring enough pressure on you to where you actually acknowledge
that there are questions on the other side because your report
simply declares it a misconception, you dismiss it.
Mr. French. I certainly want to acknowledge the serious--
Mr. Pearce. You mean, you have never heard one person tell
you publicly or privately, personally, that their loan was
written down? You have never heard that? Never? You have never?
Never? You say it is a misconception.
Mr. French. I have certainly heard of loans being written
down.
Mr. Pearce. But you do not believe them, it is a
misconception, you declare it is a misconception.
I would like to continue the discussion in my office some
day if you get the chance.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Grimm. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Manzullo, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you. I would yield to you, Mr.
Chairman, for 30 seconds.
Oh, I am sorry, Mr. Renacci is not there, right? I do not
know what happened to him.
Mr. Grimm. I appreciate it anyway--
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you.
Ms. Kelly, I discussed with Mr. Renacci, would you be
willing personally to meet with the applicants for loans who
were turned down? Would you be willing to go out there and
personally meet with these people face to face?
Ms. Kelly. Sure. Yes, I would be happy to.
Mr. Manzullo. Good. I knew you would say that, because the
disconnect is so extreme here. If we could find people acting
in bad faith, then you can point the finger.
The regulators acted in good faith. The examiners are
acting in good faith. The bankers are acting in good faith. And
the consumers are acting in good faith. So this is not a matter
of good versus evil. It is not ``Spy vs. Spy'' out of MAD
Magazine. It is a matter of the system is not working.
Let me give an example, Ms. Kelly. On page 11 of your
testimony you state, way at the bottom, ``Examiners are
criticizing or borrowers simply''--``Examiners are criticizing
loans or borrowers simply because the current market value of
their collateral has declined are forcing bankers to write down
loans to current distressed market values.''
You were a bank examiner, I believe, for 27 years.
Ms. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Manzullo. When you--if you went into a bank yourself
and looked at their portfolio, and let us say somebody has a
million dollar loan on a business and the property value has
fallen from a million dollars, say, to $700,000, but the person
is otherwise current, what would you do in that case, as the
bank examiner?
Ms. Kelly. I would have to look at the specifics of the
loan and the borrower's financial information--
Mr. Manzullo. Let us just say that everything is fine, the
loan is fine, the cash flow is fine.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. There is clear information supporting the
fact this borrower is going to be able to repay the principal
in full.
Mr. Manzullo. That is correct. No default.
Ms. Kelly. Then I would not write the loan down.
Mr. Manzullo. Then you need to talk to your examiners,
because what they are doing is they go in, in a situation like
this, and the examiners are forcing appraisal after appraisal
after appraisal. These commercial appraisals are
extraordinarily expensive. And the value of the property keeps
on going down, but the borrower is in business, he is making it
through, he is slugging it out, and then all of a sudden, he
gets pressure from the bank. And the bank is saying, ``Well,
you have--we are going to call your loan, even though you are
current,'' and they blame it on the examiners.
I was going to ask the question, do you understand the
frustration going on here, but it is obvious that you do.
Ms. Kelly. I do. I absolutely understand. Bankers are in
very difficult times, borrowers are in very difficult times.
And bankers have to manage their risk.
And this is why someone made the comment about all the
heads of the agencies have said, ``If you want to bring us an
individual loan, then we will look at it.'' Because when you
tell me this is a creditworthy borrower, I accept you at face
value. But, I have not looked at the financial information to
determine that, based on that person's financial situation
today, that their financial statements support their ability to
repay the loan.
Mr. Manzullo. If I could follow up on Mr. Pearce's
question, if an examiner comes in, tells a bank that this loan
is risky, and the bank ends up--and the examiners end up
classifying the loan, now in that case, where the bank has
acted in direct response to the statement of the examiner, does
the consumer have recourse against the FDIC or the OCC to
reverse that decision?
Ms. Kelly. But the classification of a loan simply reflects
the risk that is associated with that asset on the bank's
balanced sheets at that time. It does not preclude the banker
from continuing to carry that loan, from continuing to work
with the borrower. We encourage that. It is just a way for us
to reflect the current condition.
Mr. Manzullo. But it causes the bank to have to put up more
reserve capital.
Ms. Kelly. Yes, because it is reflecting the fact that
there is greater risk associated with that--
Mr. Manzullo. And that makes the bank want to get out of
that whole transaction altogether.
Ms. Kelly. It may. But if they believe it is someone who
has been a customer for a long time and they are going through
tough times--
Mr. Manzullo. But the question was, if that was reversed
and the bank does not have to put up more reserve capital, the
bank can keep on going and making further loans. So there is no
appeal system.
Ms. Kelly. But if there was greater risk associated with
that credit and the bank does not reserve for it properly, then
it weakens the condition of the bank because if that person is
not able to repay the loan the bank has less of a cushion to
absorb that loss.
Mr. Manzullo. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Grimm. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Delaware, Mr. Carney, is recognized for
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And first, let me apologize for missing the bulk of this
hearing, so I am coming into this conversation at the very end.
I have heard considerable frustration from Members about
things that are happening with folks trying to get loans in
their States and I have heard, not just today but other days,
testimony from the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Westmoreland,
about some of the bank failures in his district. I have quite a
bit of sympathy for that. And I want to congratulate him for
bringing the resolution forward to look at that issue.
But, I am kind of caught betwixt and between because we
have testimony about a lot of banks failing, and obviously that
is the case, and I hear the same thing from small-business
owners in my State, which is my district, the whole State of
Delaware, that they are not able to get loans for working
capital, that they have performing loans that are being called,
and a whole range of things similar to what you are been
hearing from members on the other side.
And we had the distinguished professor from MIT here this
morning who talked about the need to be careful about what we
would do here with H.R. 1723.
So I think the challenge is really to strike some balance
where banks are making prudent loans. Sheila Bair was here not
long ago for incredible testimony where she said that they were
encouraging banks to make good loans because that is the way
banks make money.
What is your perspective on what needs to be done at this
point in time, whether the pendulum has swung back too far the
other way, what you are seeing in the field. We are still, I
suspect, seeing banks that are under stress. And is this second
resolution, 1723, as Mr. Johnson said, going too far? How would
you characterize that?
Mr. French. Let me start. We are seeing some signs of
improvement in banking performance, looking at it as a whole,
in terms of the level of nonperforming loans, while still high,
is starting to come down, earnings starting to improve,
provisions for loan losses starting to come down, percentage of
profitable banks increasing.
We are seeing some peaking of the problem bank list that we
have, it is starting to plateau and perhaps looks like it is
going to start inching downwards.
We have about 12, 13 percent of the FDIC-supervised banks
that are considered problem banks.
Mr. Carney. Say that number again.
Mr. French. About 12 or 13 percent. So 87 percent are not.
So, I think there is a tendency for--when you get to a
turning point in the economy it tends to come--you always think
you are at the--things cannot get any worse, and that is when
they start getting better.
So--
Mr. Carney. So as my time is running--sorry for cutting you
off, but do you have a view of H.R. 1723?
Mr. French. Sir, yes, I am sorry. We do not support that
because we think it will require us to have regulatory capital
that is less stringent than GAAP. And so we do not support that
aspect of it.
Mr. Carney. So that would be going too far the other way.
Mr. French. That is our view.
Mr. Carney. And it is just not good accounting from your
perspective?
Mr. French. That is correct. We think that it would
basically require us to have--that banks have regulatory
capital that was less stringent than what they are required to
count as capital under GAAP. And we do not think that is a
good--
Mr. Carney. We heard earlier this morning from a very
successful business person from Iowa, I believe, who talked
about the difficulty he had and talked about his financials,
his balance sheet, which sounded very strong to me. But he had
been turned down by, I think he said 12 or 13 banks.
Is there any way to--obviously, I do not know the details,
but could you comment on a situation like that, obviously,
anecdotal? I hear the same thing again from borrowers in my
district. But, as somebody who represents these folks, it gets
your attention.
Mr. French. I would imagine it would. And that gets our
attention, too, believe me. And we--
Mr. Carney. Sheila Bair said, then let us know who they
are. Yes, banks should be making those kinds of loans.
Mr. French. We have the hotline that I mentioned for
borrowers. Business borrowers can call and let us know what is
happening out there, what their concerns are. And, hopefully,
we will get a better understanding of what the issues are. It
is just--
Mr. Carney. Thank you.
And I want to thank the Chair--I guess the acting Chair;
the Chair is not here--for calling the hearing today.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you.
And the Chair recognizes Mr. Posey for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The first thing I would like to do is set the record
straight a little bit. This bill has been mischaracterized as
changing accounting standards. And late last night, I received
correspondence from the American Institute of CPAs, and I want
to quote from this correspondence: ``It does not legislate
accounting standards. You are dealing with regulatory capital
issues.''
So, for everyone who has alleged that this changes
accounting standards, it is just not true, if you have any
respect for the CPAs. And I think they are the authorities on
that issue far and away.
Everything would be good, if out in our districts reality
reassembled even remotely the picture that you have painted
about regulation. Saying that this would preclude you from
being able to examine or monitor loans, if you could not put
them on nonaccrual basis, it is just not wrong and it is just
not true.
You could still monitor. You could still prosecute for
fraud. You could prosecute for abuse. There is nothing that
would stop you from doing that at all.
And this is not forbearance, if we statutorily define
performing loan as a historic performing loan. Too many people
want to paint this as forbearance so they can tar and feather
it in a public arena. And that is just underhanded and
dishonest in my humble opinion.
I agree with you that accurate reporting is critical. And
that is accurate both ways. Again, I think it is atrocious that
a regulator can say, ``Well, we are going to put this on
nonaccrual, because we do not think he should be able to make
the payments in this economy.''
Maybe they did not calculate it that the people are eating
beans or rice or doing whatever it takes to make their payment.
But I think that is pretty sad.
You pretty much describe the current state of affairs of
regulation being fair, balanced, and realistic. And I think it
is just the opposite. You have painted a picture that
regulators are all perfect, and everything is in perfect order.
Nothing can be done to help create jobs and stop people from
having their property foreclosed on.
And I think I just have to disagree with you there. I
wonder what testimony of the previous witnesses or the other
members of this committee you particularly disagree with or
think it is misleading or dishonest, because you speak to us
like none of the things they have said is true. And I am
inclined to believe it is just the opposite.
We know about the hotlines. We know about the ombudsmen. If
you have a problem with the regulator, call the ombudsman. But
what happens when a bank calls an ombudsman? He tells the
ombudsman how unfairly he is being treated. And the next call
made is the ombudsman calling the regulator saying, ``Guess
what jerk idiot just called me today to complain about you?''
There is retribution out there in our homeland. Trust me.
Ask any banker. They will not want to come up here and get more
retribution, but it is out there. They have all testified to
that pretty much already.
We all know what some of the most fearsome words are to
Americans across this great country: ``I am from the
government. I am here to help you.'' And some of the reasons
people fear that have been expressed very clearly today here.
It is disappointing to me that you fail to acknowledge even
remotely that there is even the minutest problem anywhere and
that there is any solution that is needed other than more
regulation--regulate them more--and that there is an abundance
of capital.
Why weren't these loans being made that people talked about
today, if there is an abundance of capital just looking for
good loans? It is because they fear the overregulation.
How do you close a bank that has significantly greater
assets than it does liabilities? We are probably going to run
out of time before you have time to answer that, and with the
chairman's permission, I would like to request that you respond
to that in writing.
Give me a couple of scenarios as to how you close banks
with more assets than liabilities. And do not fail to mention
how much of the assets have been put on a nonaccrual basis so
that they could not use them to operate the banks.
I want to know how many regulators you have. And I would
like to know how many have ever been disciplined for abusing
their regulatory authority, if any. What kind of grading do you
do on the regulators to make sure that they are fair and
balanced?
I hope that you can work out some way to support this
solution or another one internally if--
We have run out of time. The bottom line is that if, in
fact, you continue just to dispute the findings that have been
clearly been put forth by our witnesses and members of this
committee, it is just personally very disappointing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Renacci. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair is going to make a recommendation, Mr. Posey,
that you maybe put those questions, all of them, in writing, so
that they can be responded to in writing, because you have gone
pretty quickly, and we want to make sure all those questions
are answered. So thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the Chair for yielding and I
apologize. It is a busy, busy day with the unemployment numbers
coming out, the debt ceiling debates, and all kinds of policy
decisions being made, which brings me to a question related,
really, to the stagnant economy that we are having.
There has been an austerity program, where there have been
many cutbacks. The economy is not growing. We just created
18,000 jobs, similar to last month. To what extent do you think
the lack of the loans are people are not applying in this
stagnant economy, number one?
And number two, under the Basel program we are now calling
upon Europe and other countries to have more stringent capital
requirements. That is part of what Chairman Bernanke and our
entire economic team is working for. To what extent would
relaxing our risk weighting of nonaccrual loans, as this bill
would permit, be inconsistent with and undercut those efforts
that we have on our national level?
Lastly, I am very sympathetic to the financial crisis that
many of our community bankers are facing. Are there other ways
that regulators could accommodate time for them to get their
house in order or to re-capitalize without moving into close a
bank, but working with them to become solvent, so they can
become strong and serve the communities?
Thank you. And thank you for your service and for being
here today. Thank you.
Mr. French. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We are--the FDIC is a strong supporter of the effort to
basically increase the overall capital requirements of the
banking industry, as you know. So we agree with the thrust of
what is going on in the Basel process, and we think it is very
important for the banking industry to have a solid base of
capital that will enable it to be a source of credit to the
economy through good times and bad times.
So one of the issues with, as you allude, with 1723 is that
it, for a certain class of loans, it says that certain losses
that would otherwise be recognized for accounting purposes
would not be recognized for capital regulation purposes. And
that is inconsistent with the overall direction of where we
would like to go in terms of capital.
So in terms of what else we can do, giving banks more time,
I think that is very appropriate. The prompt corrective action
system really kicks in for a pretty small group of banks. As I
said before, most of our banks are not in problem status. Most,
when you look at their balance sheets and financial reports,
purport very strong capital ratios.
But when that is not the case, we have the prompt
corrective action system, where we work with them, hopefully,
as early as possible, to address capital--
Mrs. Maloney. But as I understand it, the prompt corrective
action gives them 90 days to correct their situation. And given
the fragile economy, that may not be enough time for a good
community bank that really would need more time to
recapitalize.
So I am wondering, is there flexibility to extend that
time, or is it a 90-day cutoff?
Mr. French. There is flexibility. And I would also
emphasize that it is a very small number of banks that ever
gets to dealing with that 90-day issue. That is a really low
level of 2 percent capital. But once we get that--
Mrs. Maloney. But when I talk to the gentleman who was
speaking earlier from Georgia, he was talking very passionately
about 65 banks that have been closed in his great State. And I
would assume all 65 of them went through prompt corrective
action, right?
And I know that in my State, there have also been a number
of community banks and large banks that have closed. So they
all went through prompt corrective action. So it is not a small
number, when you are representing a community that has one of
those banks that is affected. And in some cases, it may be the
only bank in the community, so it is really very, very
important.
How do you get an appeal from the 90-day to extend? Would
you have to legislate that, or can you--is that a discretion
of--
Mr. French. It is built into the statute. And if we think
that the bank has a prospect--if we think it is in the best
interest of the insurance fund and that the bank is expected to
be able to raise the capital, that would have to be something
that we really--looks like it is going to succeed.
If it is just a matter of, we are still looking around, and
we have been doing that for years and it has been--at some
point, you have to make a judgment as to what has the most
cost-effective approach.
Mrs. Maloney. Is it appealable, if a judgment is made to
close a bank? Can a bank appeal to a higher person?
Mr. French. Not being a lawyer, I would want to get back to
you on that.
Mr. Renacci. The gentlewoman's time has expired, but if Ms.
Kelly would like to give a response?
Ms. Kelly. I just wanted to add something--I would agree
with everything that Mr. French said, but just to add the point
that the 90 days is really the very end of the process. If you
look at some of the I.G. reviews that have been done at various
closings, you will see that our regulatory interaction with a
bank that is developing problems starts very early.
And this goes back to the point I made earlier about the
sooner that a bank recognizes its problems and starts working
constructively on them, the more time and more flexibility they
have to solve it.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
The gentlewoman's time has expired. The Chair will yield 5
minutes to himself for questioning.
First of all, thank you, Mr. French and Ms. Kelly. We do
appreciate your time in coming to testify. It has been a robust
discussion so far.
There is one thing, though, I think we walk away. There
cannot be any question or ambiguity in your minds at this point
that there is certainly a disconnect somewhere. The passion in
the Members is coming directly from the people they represent,
our constituents, many of whom are the hard-working people who
have created the jobs for decades. And we had a gentleman, I
believe his name was Mr. Whalen, who was testifying earlier
today, that over 33 years, he built a company, a solid, solid
company. And one of his loans on a project that he was doing
was written down, even though he made every payment and made
every payment on time.
Regardless of how bad the meltdown was, regardless of what
we have been through, the pendulum has swung way too far. When
that is happening for a successful entrepreneur like Mr.
Whalen, and it is a story we are hearing consistently through
every part of the country from New York to Iowa to
Pennsylvania, Indiana, Florida, throughout the country, we
cannot put our heads in the sand and ignore it.
There is a disconnect. Every banker I have spoken to says
they are afraid of their regulators. They are saying that loans
they would normally--that do fit the guidelines, but they are
just not willing to go for it. So when I hear things like,
``there is capital out there,'' they are absolutely right. They
are just not lending it.
We heard before bankers are in difficult times. Borrowers
are in difficult times. That is accurate. That is true. But I
submit to you that the regulators are making it worse, instead
of better. And I, for one, completely agree that we need to
have strong rules to prevent another financial breakdown or a
meltdown or a crisis. But there is a tipping point and we have
tipped.
And I do not think that you can have so much consistency
among the members of what they are hearing from their
constituents without recognizing we have a serious problem. And
if it continues we are going to see what we have seen today:
unemployment increase yet again.
Something is not working. Something is broken. And it
certainly is not the entrepreneurial spirit of the American
workforce. It is not the relentless work ethic that built this
country. It is the fact that we had some problems, and what the
government does to address them is always over-address. We have
seen this time and time again.
But I think there is another problem that I have seen as
someone who worked in the Federal system for 16 years. I have
seen it myself. When there is a problem, those at the top do
not want that problem to happen again no matter what because it
is their watch. ``Not on my watch is that going to happen.''
So they do everything they can, and this in all sincerity,
with all good intentions not to allow that to happen again. And
they get so focused on making sure it does not happen again
that those under them are told in no uncertain circumstances we
better not have a pattern of defaults or problems or anything.
So everyone goes into CYA mode and everyone clamps down. And
what happens is you create an environment that no business can
be done.
And the reality is if no business is done, from a
regulator's point of view, you will not have any problems. It
is very true. But that is not sustainable for our overall
economy. It is not even close to sustainable.
And what is happening now is the frustration level of those
who have worked their tails off to build businesses and are
passing those businesses on to their children, are seeing it
dwindle away and circle the drain. And that is reflected every
single day in all the economic forecasts and it is seen in the
unemployment rate.
If we do not alleviate and get out of our own way, and
allow these entrepreneurs and innovators to access the capital
they need, to grow their business, to expand their business, to
start their new businesses, I submit to you that we can never
recover from this recession.
I would just ask in closing that as you leave here today, I
think you have the most noble of intentions. I really do. But I
think in the interests of ensuring that we never have another
calamity, we have become so laser-focused on the problem that
we have restricted business to a point that you are right, we
will not have any more financial meltdowns, but we will not
have any finances to worry about.
So, I would please ask you to really reflect on that and
work with your regulators that are out there making life very
difficult for a prosperous economy to grow and to be robust in
this country.
And with that, I thank you for your time and your
attention, and we will close up.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.

A P P E N D I X

July 8, 2011


