- THE SECTION 8 SAVINGS ACT OF 2011: PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE ECONOMIC INDEPENDENCE FOR ASSISTED FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE SECTION 8 SAVINGS ACT OF 2011:
PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE ECONOMIC
INDEPENDENCE FOR ASSISTED FAMILIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INSURANCE, HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 13, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-74

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-615 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity

JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois, Chairman

ROBERT HURT, Virginia, Vice          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
GARY G. MILLER, California           MAXINE WATERS, California
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BRAD SHERMAN, California
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 13, 2011.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 13, 2011.............................................    33

WITNESSES
Thursday, October 13, 2011

Boldon, Hope C., President and Chief Operating Officer, Human
Development Division, The Integral Group LLC...................     8
Fischer, Will, Senior Policy Analyst, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.....................................................    13
Russ, Gregory P., Executive Director and Chief Operating Officer,
Cambridge Housing Authority....................................    15
Warren, Kris, Chief Operating Officer, Chicago Housing Authority.    11
Woods, Larry C., Chief Executive Officer, Housing Authority of
Winston-Salem..................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Boldon, Hope C...............................................    34
Fischer, Will................................................    72
Russ, Gregory P..............................................    86
Warren, Kris.................................................    90
Woods, Larry C...............................................   100

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Biggert, Hon. Judy:
Written statement of the Council of Large Public Housing
Authorities (CLPHA)........................................   107
Written statement of the Columbus Metropolitan Housing
Authority (CMHA)...........................................   117
Letter from a coalition of housing industries................   123
Letter from HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan, dated October 11,
2011.......................................................   124
HUD Report to Congress entitled, ``Moving to Work: Interim
Policy Applications and the Future of the Demonstration,''
dated August 2010..........................................   126
Written statement of the National Affordable Housing
Management Association (NAHMA).............................   199
Written statement of the National Multi Housing Council
(NMHC) and the National Apartment Association (NAA)........   207
Written statement of the Public Housing Authorities Directors
Association (PHADA)........................................   209
Written statement of the Riverside County Board of
Supervisors................................................   214
Gutierrez, Hon. Luis:
Written statement of the National Low Income Housing
Coalition (NLIHC)..........................................   215

THE SECTION 8 SAVINGS ACT OF 2011:
PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE ECONOMIC
INDEPENDENCE FOR ASSISTED FAMILIES

----------

Thursday, October 13, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing
and Community Opportunity,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Judy Biggert
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Biggert, Hurt, Miller of
California, Capito, Westmoreland, Dold, Stivers; Gutierrez,
Waters, Watt, Sherman, and Capuano.
Also present: Representatives Chabot and Al Green of Texas.
Chairwoman Biggert. This hearing of the Subcommittee on
Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity will come to
order. We will begin with our opening statements, and I will
recognize myself for 4 minutes.
Good afternoon, and welcome to today's hearing, the second
in a series to examine proposals to reform HUD's Housing Choice
Voucher Program, or Section 8. As I mentioned during our first
hearing, over the last decade, the Section 8 Program's costs
have grown by almost 80 percent and consume over 61 percent of
HUD's budget. In 2002, Section 8 appropriations were $15.6
billion, and in Fiscal Year 2011, they amounted to $27.6
billion. This rate of growth is unsustainable. The draft
legislation that we will examine today aims to address these
escalating costs.
In addition, for many years we have heard about the long
waiting lists, hundreds of thousands of individuals and
families simply having their name on a list and never receiving
a dime of housing assistance. Thus by cutting red tape,
enhancing the delivery of housing assistance, and promoting
economic independence, today's proposals aim to help public
housing authorities and communities across the country to
improve services to the people currently receiving assistance
and ultimately serve more people.
For too long, both HUD and Congress have allowed assisted
housing to continue in a form deemed good enough, the results
of which are clear to see in ever-impoverished neighborhoods
across our country. The Section 8 Program has its results:
never-ending, indeed, hopelessness and despair.
In my opinion, the Section 8 culture of ``good enough'' is
not good enough. We can and we must do better. Today, we
welcome a number of witnesses who will highlight creative
solutions that their communities have implemented to achieve
the goals of better serving people in need and maximizing the
impact of taxpayer dollars dedicated to the Section 8 Program.
They represent organizations that have cut red tape, improved
services, and are willing to work to help people stand up on
their own two feet so that others who are standing in line can
also be served.
One of today's witnesses, Ms. Warren, will discuss many of
the successes that have been achieved in Chicago, Ranking
Member Gutierrez's and my hometown. Families in Chicago are
succeeding in breaking the cycle of generational poverty. We
will hear about the positive citywide impact of Chicago's
redevelopment efforts. Gone are the days of Cabrini-Green.
Our goal for Section 8 reform is to provide more than just
a roof over the heads of struggling families. A modern,
efficient, effective Section 8 Program should give local
housing authorities the flexibility they need to help
recipients get back on the path to self-sufficiency. By linking
rental assistance with new opportunities for job training,
employment, financial literacy, and education, we can help more
families achieve economic independence. Today's hearing will
shed light on how Congress, HUD, local public housing
authorities, and communities can improve the Section 8 Program
to do a better job of helping individuals and families in need.
I would also like to note for the members of the
subcommittee from both sides of the aisle that similar to our
effort earlier this year to shape reforms to the National Flood
Insurance Program, as we continue to draft Section 8 reform
measures, I welcome your concerns, your ideas, and your
participation in this process.
With that, I recognize Ranking Member Gutierrez for his
opening statement.
Mr. Gutierrez. Good afternoon. I want to thank the
gentlelady from Illinois, my friend and my colleague, and of
course, the chairwoman of the subcommittee, for holding this
hearing and for keeping housing voucher reform on the agenda. I
would also like to welcome our witnesses and thank them for
being here today as we discuss the newest draft of the Section
8 Savings Act, or SESA.
SESA represents a lot of effort from both sides of the
aisle. We all understand how important this issue is, and we
continue to hear from public housing authorities, tenant
groups, policy experts, and HUD, all of whom want us to enact
commonsense improvements to Section 8 that will save money and
help agencies be more efficient and effective in serving
families in need.
Like previous versions, the newest draft contains some
important provisions on which we can all agree. These
provisions streamline inspection requirements, simplify rent
rules and economic calculations, and expand family self-
sufficiency Programs. They give public housing authorities more
needed flexibility to meet the needs of their communities in
the face of funding cuts.
I have concerns about some provisions in the new bill that
I believe would undermine these vital reform efforts. The draft
includes a higher minimum rent that could lead to increases in
homelessness by pricing out the lowest-income families. The
proposal also ties many of the much-needed reforms to a new
self-sufficiency demonstration that comes with a real cost to
the agencies. I believe there are better ways to encourage
voucher recipients to work and save.
I also have to voice my serious concerns about the second
bill for discussion, which proposes a massive expansion of
Moving to Work demonstration Programs and makes it permanent.
Although some public housing authorities, including a few
represented here today, have been able to claim success under
MTW, there is little evidence to justify a wholesale expansion.
The design of MTW demands that we take a good look at this
Program. As it currently exists, it does not require the
necessary assessments and reviews to establish the Program's
impact. For example, in some cases it seems that fewer families
are served and the allowed flexibility has made it harder for
extremely low-income families to get housing assistance of any
kind. This is exactly what effective reform should prevent.
Furthermore, there is reason to doubt HUD's capacity to manage
a large-scale expansion of MTW, especially if no additional
funds are authorized. The risks of this proposal far outweigh
the potential rewards. Again, there is reason to doubt HUD's
capacity to manage large-scale expansion, especially with no
additional funds authorized.
The Section 8 Savings Act contains many provisions that we
can agree on. I hope that we can focus on those points of
agreement instead of dwelling on the issues that divide us. We
have an opportunity here, and I hope we take it. Our
constituents deserve no less.
I want to thank my friend, Chairwoman Biggert, and I look
forward to hearing all of the testimony today, and I would also
like to enter into the record a statement from the National Low
Income Housing Coalition.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Gutierrez. I thank the gentlelady.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Gutierrez.
I ask unanimous consent that Representative Chabot of Ohio
be allowed to be seated and to participate with the
subcommittee at today's hearing. So ordered.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Miller of California for 3
minutes.
Mr. Miller of California. Thank you. I would like to thank
the chairwoman for convening this hearing today on the Section
8 Program.
In addition to the Section 8 Savings Act discussion draft,
the hearing includes consideration of a discussion draft of the
bill I plan to sponsor on the Moving to Work Program. In
general, this bill would make the Moving to Work Program
permanent, remove the cap on the number of agencies that can
participate, improve reporting requirements so HUD can
effectively evaluate the PHA Program, and increase protective
measures for assisted families.
During the drafting process of this bill, I heard concerns
regarding resident protection and incidents of management
misconduct that have drawn some attention away from the great
work so many of the MTW agencies have done. I acknowledge it is
impossible to entirely prevent misconduct, or management or
mistreatment of a resident at any PHA, whether an MTW agency or
not. We must do our best to prevent it on a systematic level.
To address this valid concern, my bill includes provisions to
protect residents and hold management accountable for their
performance without losing the flexibility that allows MTW
agencies to be at the forefront of innovation.
For far too long, we have accepted the notion that
compassion in housing assistance was defined by the amount of
dollars spent and not by the manner in which assistance is
provided. At this time of considerable budget constraints, it
makes sense to give PHAs flexibility to help them improve the
quality and effectiveness of their Programs without increasing
costs. The MTW Program allows PHAs to have the flexibility they
need to be innovative in serving residents and helping them
become employed and economically independent.
Last year, HUD released a report about the Program and
found that the agencies with the MTW designation are
encouraging economic independence through rent reforms and
services, while reducing costs without negatively impacting the
residents. Specifically, the report states that, ``MTW agencies
have actually served substantially more families than they
would have been able to serve without MTW by streamlining
operations and using accumulated funds to administer new
assisted housing units.''
There are currently 33 PHAs of the Moving to Work
designation out of over 3,000 MTWs. That is over 1 percent of
the housing authorities in the United States. It is time for
Congress to remove the arbitrary cap on this successful
Program. Any bill our subcommittee passes on Section 8 reform
must include an expansion of the Moving to Work Program.
I am grateful that the chairwoman included my discussion
draft in today's hearing, and I look forward to working with
her to include it in the broader Section 8 reform bill, and I
really look forward to hearing the panel today and the
witnesses. You have expertise we are really looking forward to
hearing, and I just support you in all you are doing. Whether
you are a PHA or an MTW, it doesn't matter, you all are doing a
great job. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Watt, is recognized for such time as he may consume.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for that generous
recognition. As much time as I may consume, that is pretty
generous.
Chairwoman Biggert. Within 7 minutes.
Mr. Watt. Oh, up to 7 minutes, okay. I thought there had to
be some catch to this.
I appreciate the gentlelady yielding me time, and I
appreciate the hearing. I am not going to comment on the bill
itself, the proposal, but I did want to go out of my way to be
here to welcome one of my outstanding housing authority
directors, Mr. Larry Woods, who is one of the witnesses today.
He is one of a number of very outstanding housing authority
directors in my congressional district in Winston-Salem, in
Greensboro, in Salisbury, in Charlotte, in High Point, and a
couple of smaller ones in Davidson County, North Carolina, who
have really done outstanding jobs trying to professionalize the
housing authorities. Sometimes that has worked very well, and
sometimes it has worked to their disadvantage, because over the
last few years, as the chairwoman knows, there has been a
strong move to make housing authorities be more self-
sufficient. And, in fact, the Winston-Salem Housing Authority
is one of those housing authorities that has used that
flexibility to become more self-sufficient, and built up
substantial reserves only to have our institution now saying to
them, we are going to take back those reserves that you have
built up over time, using the business model that you all have
been pushing over all this time.
It does not provide the kind of incentive for these housing
authorities to do what you all ask them to do, to be innovative
and entrepreneurial, if as soon as they innovate and
entrepreneur and build up reserves, following that process, the
appropriators in our institutions say, we have a budget crisis,
and therefore we are going to take your reserves that you have
built up over time using this entrepreneurial approach and use
them to balance the Federal Government's budget.
So I wanted to put that on the table. It is a concern that
a number of my housing authorities have expressed, in
particular the Winston-Salem authority. I am sure he is not
here to testify about that today, but I am not as constricted
as he is or might be in the things I can comment on, especially
since you yielded as much time as I may consume.
So in the area of innovation, with respect to moving people
to work, our housing authorities have also been very
innovative, but I would encourage the Chair and the members of
the committee who invited Mr. Woods as a witness to be here to
listen carefully to what he is saying in his testimony, because
the notion that this bill would move us more toward a one-size-
fits-all approach with a set of regulations that constrict
local housing authorities to really innovate and partner with
social services organizations in their communities--listen
carefully to what his testimony is saying. If you constrict
that, he is going to tell you pretty clearly, I am not a social
worker, I am not--I am in the housing authority business, and
you can't expect the housing authorities to solve all of the
problems and put everybody to work doing a bunch of things.
So I don't want you to miss the point that you invited the
witnesses here to try to advance the cause of moving this bill,
because while the concept of moving people to work is
absolutely something that we support and not making them
permanent public housing residents, the method by which that is
done can vary from community to community, and to set up a
bunch of rules in a piece of legislation that makes it
impossible for communities to really take advantage of
community partnerships or social services departments, the
Urban League, some of the partners that Mr. Woods has partnered
with in the community to accomplish that, I think you might be
tempted to miss the point.
So I appreciate the gentlelady yielding me a generous
amount of time, and I appreciate the gentlelady having the
hearing. Unfortunately, I have a Judiciary Committee markup
that I have to be in, so I may miss the testimony, but I didn't
want to miss the opportunity to welcome Mr. Woods in
particular, and all of the witnesses, and to make the points
that you so generously gave me time to make.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And I might just say that on your first point, we really
need to look to the appropriators, and that is really not this
committee, because I would agree with you as far as what is
happening.
On the second point, I think if you look at the
legislation, we really--the thing that we are trying to do is
have more flexibility and to have more local partnerships and
coalitions, so I think that you will be pleasantly surprised to
see that really is in the legislation.
Thank you for being here.
With that, I recognize Mr. Westmoreland for 1\1/2\ minutes.
I can't be as generous on this side.
Mr. Westmoreland. I want to thank the chairwoman for
yielding and for holding this hearing.
Every year, the Section 8 Program consumes a larger share
of HUD's annual budget. For 2011, Section 8 Programs consumed
61 percent of HUD's budget. This is unacceptable. The committee
and HUD must get serious about structural reforms to both
Section 8 and HUD.
I applaud the chairwoman and her staff for working
diligently on the discussion draft. It is much improved from
prior versions and focuses on moving public housing authorities
in the Section 8 Program to do more with less by leveraging
public/private partnerships to serve the community.
I also want to thank Mrs. Hope Boldon for testifying today.
Mrs. Boldon, I appreciate your drive and all your commitment to
all Georgians in what you do. Your work with the Atlanta
Housing Authority is a model for large metropolitan areas to
integrate their services to the community, and I thank you for
that.
Importantly, the Section 8 bill being discussed today is
only the first step in what must be a larger effort to reform
HUD itself. HUD's problems are systemic and cannot just be
addressed on a Program-by-Program basis. For too long, HUD
Programs have been poorly managed, and taxpayers' hard-earned
money has been wasted. It is time for HUD to wake up and
realize that these lapses in public confidence cannot continue.
I look forward to hearing all the witnesses today, and,
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Mr. Dold of Illinois is recognized for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Dold. I want to thank the Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman, for holding the hearing and giving us an
opportunity to talk about these important issues on housing.
I think that most Democrats and most Republicans can agree
on several fundamental housing principles: first, we must have
a basic safety net to help provide housing for those who cannot
provide for themselves; second, our ultimate overall objective
is to move as many people as possible into self-sufficiency as
quickly as possible; third, we must carefully consider the
viewpoints of our public housing authorities who have the
expertise, the experience, and we must provide them the
adequate flexibility; and finally, as with all other government
Programs, we must ensure that we have the adequate checks and
balances, systems and controls to ensure that transparency,
accountability, cost-effectiveness, and ongoing improvements
are made. We must ensure that the scarce taxpayer resources are
used efficiently and wisely, while also minimizing and
detecting fraud and waste. We must establish standards and
benchmarks against which we can systematically measure the
results and identify improvement areas for both beneficiaries
and taxpayers.
Failing to do these things will harm Program beneficiaries
the most because their resources get wastefully diverted while
taxpayers become less willing and less able to fund the
necessary Programs. I think this discussion draft moves us a
long way towards those fundamental common principles, and I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses and working with my
Democratic colleagues and Republican colleagues to make this
positive difference for the housing beneficiaries, service
providers, and our taxpayers.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
The gentleman from Virginia, our vice chairman Mr. Hurt, is
recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I am grateful for your commitment to reforming and
strengthening the Section 8 Voucher Program. This Program
consumes a growing portion of HUD's annual budget, growing from
$15 billion in 2002 up to $28.5 billion in the Administration's
Fiscal Year 2012 budget requests, and now accounting for over
60 percent of HUD's budget.
With our Nation over $14 trillion in debt, the citizens of
my district, Virginia's Fifth District, expect us in Congress
to closely scrutinize Federal Programs, eliminate costly
administrative inefficiencies, and enact reforms that yield
results. The legislation our subcommittee is considering today
will reform the Section 8 Program to better serve those who are
in most need of assistance by promoting independence, self-
sufficiency, and prosperity for the Program's beneficiaries.
It is my hope that the witnesses testifying before our
subcommittee today will prove that when given sufficient
flexibility, local housing authorities can innovate, develop
solutions, and achieve those results. By removing bureaucratic
red tape and burdensome regulations, we can empower these
entities to better assist the populations that we all serve.
Again, I want to thank the Chair for holding this hearing
today, and I look forward to the testimony of each of you who
have joined us today. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Mr. Green, do you have an opening
statement?
Okay, thank you.
I would ask unanimous consent that Mr. Chabot from Ohio
have 1 minute for an opening statement.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I thank you
and the ranking member for allowing me to speak and be a part
of this hearing. Like Mr. Watt, I also have a markup in the
Judiciary Committee, and, in addition, I have a markup in the
Foreign Affairs Committee as well, so I will be bouncing back
and forth.
The Section 8 Program, in my view, is broken, and I applaud
this committee for taking up this important reform legislation.
Any reform legislation we pass in this Congress must include a
path for people to achieve self-sufficiency. A part of that
path is enforcing--setting enforceable time limits. A Section 8
voucher, for example, is not intended to be, and should not
become, a permanent entitlement. Temporary assistance should be
just that, temporary.
We also need to ensure that this legislation protects our
neighborhoods, holding both tenants and the owners of Section 8
and public housing responsible for the quality and the safety
of the buildings, the residents, and the community. Convicted
felons, sex offenders, and illegal aliens should not be allowed
to participate. Those who violate our local laws and ordinances
should also be barred from eligibility.
Lastly, we need to support efforts to expand the Moving to
Work Program, which has been mentioned here already this
afternoon. Our goal should be to ensure that local public
housing authorities are accountable not to the bureaucrats in
Washington, but to the communities they serve. I look forward
to working with this committee to come up with more sensible
solutions to protect our communities, and I thank you again for
allowing me to participate.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Without objection, all Members' opening statements will be
made a part of the record.
Now, I would like to introduce the panel of witnesses.
Thank you so much for being here.
We have: Mrs. Hope Boldon, president and chief operating
officer, Human Development Division of The Integral Group LLC;
Mr. Larry Woods, chief executive officer, Housing Authority of
Winston-Salem; Ms. Kris Warren, chief operating officer,
Chicago Housing Authority; Mr. Will Fischer, senior policy
analyst, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities; and Mr. Greg
Russ, executive director and chief operating officer, Cambridge
Housing Authority.
Thank you all for being here. Without objection, your
written statements will be made a part of the record, and you
will each be recognized for 5 minutes to summarize your
testimony. And we will start with Mrs. Boldon. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HOPE C. BOLDON, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT DIVISION, THE INTEGRAL GROUP LLC

Ms. Boldon. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Biggert,
Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee. I am
honored to appear before you to discuss with you the Human
Services Management Program that we have evolved, developed,
and implemented in Atlanta over the last 10 years.
Knowing that I don't have much time, I would like to start
with a story that demonstrates exactly what we do. Early in
HOPE VI--and this is an evolution from the HOPE VI model that
we developed using that framework, and those funds, and the
requirements--and early when we were working with the first
HOPE VI communities, we had a family on our roster. This family
had two disabled parents. One had a mental disability, and the
mother had a physical disability and was wheelchair-bound. They
had two able-bodied children, very bright, very smart. The
daughter, who was 12 years old at the time when we started
working with her--understand that these children became
teenagers on our watch. The daughter was 12 years old. She was
managing the family business, and she was handling the family's
financials at 12.
We started to work with the family, and discovered that
though she was doing a pretty decent job, she had begun to
become disrespectful to her parents. There was no adult
leadership in the house, and our staff took that place in the
household. They became--they had the vision for the family,
they engaged the family in positive thinking about their
futures, they began to go to PTO meetings with the mother and
then for the mother. They made sure they had summer Programs.
We got them a tutor from one of the close colleges, and they
started to pick up with their schoolwork. In the meantime, we
made sure that the parents met their appointments, got their
therapy, whatever they needed, and even had their wheelchairs
repaired.
When she was 17, she became pregnant. We supported her
through the pregnancy, got her back in school, and she
graduated a year later.
When our contract ended--and this took about 5 years
because this was HOPE VI funds--when the contract ended, we
thought, at least we had given them some stability as young
adults. Fast forward to August 2011. One of my staff, the one
who had worked with that family for 5 years, came back from
lunch all excited and said, ``I just went to the Chase Bank to
see about my money, and my teller was that young lady that I
helped from the time she was 12 to the time she was 18. She
says she has left public housing, she is looking after her
mother in her own condo, she is looking after her 5-year-old
daughter, and she is back in college.''
I tell you that story because the work that we do is so
complicated, I could never tell you about it in 5 minutes, and
I want to leave you with a PACT, P-A-C-T. This is what our
Program is about. First of all, we designed it with principles
of human development that have been proven; that is the ``P.''
We hold everybody accountable; there is your ``A.'' We hold the
housing authority accountable, we hold all the agencies and
other service providers that work with us accountable, and we
hold our own staff accountable. ``C,'' we counsel, coach, and
connect our staff. We don't give direct services, but we are
the conductor of the symphony that is people's lives, and we
make sure that we pick the right agencies and hold everybody
accountable to the outcome of the family's goals for life. And
then ``T,'' we recognize that this kind of work took a long
time in the happening, and so it is going to take a long time
in the solution, and so we realize that families don't start to
work with you unless they trust you. So there is our double
``T,'' time and trust.
Now, on our way here from Atlanta, we were able to upload
the boarding passes onto our BlackBerrys if they work and then
scanned them in the airport, and I just thought what an
enormous source of brain power allowed that to happen. Now, I
know that source of brain power can be focused to solve the
problems in public housing.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Boldon can be found on page
34 of the appendix.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you very much.
Mr. Woods, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LARRY C. WOODS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, HOUSING
AUTHORITY OF WINSTON-SALEM

Mr. Woods. Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member Gutierrez,
and members of the subcommittee, good afternoon. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify.
My name is Larry C. Woods, and I am the chief executive
officer of the Housing Authority of the City of Winston-Salem
in North Carolina. I have over 25 years of leadership
experience in the field of housing and economic development. I
also grew up in public housing. The authority I represent has
approximately 1,300 public housing units. We administer 4,600
housing choice vouchers. We manage another 400 nonpublic
housing units as well as two office buildings.
I joined the housing authority in December of 2006, knowing
that funding was shrinking. I realized that in order for the
housing authority to survive and fulfill its mission, there had
to be operational changes. Additional income streams needed to
be created, and the creation of new private- and public-sector
partnerships developed.
It is clear to me our focus is and needs to remain housing
management and community development. I also recognize that the
availability and accessibility of performance-based residence
services are vital to the advancement and well-being of the
individuals and families we serve. Each family problem is
extremely complex and uniquely challenging, requiring a
multidisciplined and holistic approach.
As real estate managers and development professionals, we
need to do what we do best, and that is real estate. We are not
educators, we are not health care providers, we are not mental
health professionals, we are not workforce development experts.
Our City of Winston-Salem has a wealth of agencies with the
expertise and experience. They are more qualified to provide
these services than we are. To mimic their operations would
only result in the duplication of services, and that clearly is
not the best use of taxpayer dollars.
In order to provide these services, we developed
partnerships with these local agencies through performance-
based contracts. For example, we contracted with the Urban
League to evaluate resident skills, prepare them for
interviews, and make job placements. Forty-three individuals
have been placed in jobs for a total annualized salary of
$648,000 at a cost of only $29,000.
Chairwoman Biggert, although we have made great strides and
progress, we have needs that cannot be resolved with the
inflexibility currently found in existing rules and
regulations. To address this, I believe Moving to Work must be
considered as you continue to work on housing reform
legislation. With the flexibility of MTW, we are able to align
resources with our needs, and it is currently the only means to
provide a lasting impact.
Local housing authorities like mine must be allowed to
develop and implement strategies to best serve the needs of
their jurisdiction. The ability to become an MTW agency should
be a choice open to housing authorities meeting basic
qualifications rather than through a competitive process, and
contracts must be unique to each housing authority.
MTW does not result in any increase in Federal funding to
an authority. However, MTW does provide the significant
flexibility to use our available resources in more innovative
and creative ways that are currently unavailable to us. As an
MTW agency, our goal would be to achieve real results that
would provide greater incentives for families to become less
dependent on subsidies and move away from outdated policies
that perpetuate low-income individuals and families living
within distressed neighborhoods that provide no hope for a
better life.
As an MTW agency, we would have at a minimum the
opportunity to design Programs as a stepping stone for self-
sufficiency, provide a means for individuals entering housing
assistance to proceed to a series of services so that
individuals can reach a point where housing assistance is
either significantly reduced or no longer needed, create
partnerships to develop individual plans and goals for those
receiving assistance since the needs of each individual are
unique. Given the current pressure on the Federal budget, it is
now more important than ever to empower local housing
authorities to do all that they can for their communities with
the funds available to them.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the subcommittee, I am
requesting that the Housing Authority of Winston-Salem be given
the tools to do what we can do best, and I am requesting that
you hold me responsible and hold me accountable. This concludes
my testimony. I want to thank you again for the opportunity to
address the public policies based upon our efforts in Winston-
Salem, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Woods can be found on page
100 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Woods.
Ms. Warren, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KRIS WARREN, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, CHICAGO
HOUSING AUTHORITY

Ms. Warren. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Biggert,
Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee. My
name is Kris Warren, and I am the chief operating officer at
the Chicago Housing Authority. Thank you for the opportunity to
give testimony on the importance of the Moving to Work
demonstration Program and its impact on low-income families in
Chicago.
In 2000, Chicago became one of the fortunate agencies to be
granted MTW status. I am here to share the lessons learned and
provide concrete examples on the impact of the MTW Program.
The landscape of Chicago and the life trajectory of
thousands of low-income families would not be the same without
the local flexibility the MTW Program provides. Congress, with
its great foresight, created MTW in 1996 to allow cities and
housing authorities to develop and implement localized plans,
incorporating the intent of Congress and the accountability
required by HUD, but also the local conditions, political
realities, community dynamics, and range of partnerships. MTW
allows the relationship between HUD and the housing authority
to be a partnership to solve issues, and not a cookie-cutter
approach to compliance and regulations. Simply put, MTW allows
PHAs to create specific housing models and services that are
unique to their community needs.
With this flexibility, Chicago has implemented the Plan for
Transformation, one of the largest and most ambitious
redevelopment efforts of public housing in the history of the
United States. The goals of the Plan for Transformation are to
ensure that all public housing is of the highest quality and
contributes to the well-being of the renters and the
neighborhood in which it is located. We develop the land on
which former failed housing stood into mixed-income communities
that are assets to their residents and surrounding
neighborhoods, and build and strengthen residents and
communities by encouraging economic independence and
integrating the formerly isolated public housing and its
leaseholders into the larger social, economic, and community
fabric of Chicago.
MTW allowed Chicago to demolish dilapidated high-rise
housing that blighted the lives of residents and the
surrounding community, while rebuilding, financing, and
acquiring over 20,000 units so far. The developments that
replaced the housing now reflect the housing patterns in the
rest of the City, with low- and moderate-income families as
well as market-rate families and mixed-income development. Home
values around the surrounding communities have increased.
Private investment in new businesses brings needed retail,
services, and jobs, while City investments in infrastructure,
schools, and parks have amplified the impact of CHA's work. To
make these new communities a reality, CHA worked with private,
public, nonprofit, and investor partners to leverage $1.7
billion, including $1 billion of direct investment and
infrastructure improvements by the City of Chicago.
Perhaps most importantly, the Moving to Work demonstration
Program has allowed us to serve substantially the same number
of people as when CHA entered the MTW Program, but we are able
to serve those families in safer and more dignified
environments. In Chicago, those who rent through CHA are no
longer warehoused in isolated islands of poverty. They are now
integrated into the fabric of the City and part of the social
structure of Chicago's great neighborhoods.
While the change to Chicago's public housing buildings and
communities is impressive, the plan's impact on residents'
lives is perhaps most dramatic. People not only report feeling
healthier and safer, but more people are working, and income
from employment has risen from an average of $10,000 a year to
$20,000 a year.
Through the Plan for Transformation, CHA has learned the
critical importance of linking housing assistance with
supportive service Programs, including job training, financial
literacy, and educational opportunities. Due to the MTW
Program, CHA has been able to offer services that under statute
could not otherwise be funded with Section 8 or public housing
operating dollars. These services provide a multitude of
opportunities that encourage resident accountability and
progress toward economic independence. They are vital to the
success of the Plan for Transformation and our goals of ending
isolation, breaking the generational cycle of poverty, and
ultimately encouraging movement out of the Federally subsidized
Program.
To date, Chicago's participation in the MTW Program has
allowed us to help over 6,000 residents find employment, many
for the first time in their life; increase the employment rate
from 15 percent in 1999 to 60 percent among work-eligible
residents today; place nearly 2,000 residents in transitional
jobs, connecting them to real work; assist over 300 families in
buying their first home; and ensure thousands of youth have
employment, academic enhancement, and summer opportunities
every year.
We are proud of these accomplishments, but the numbers
don't fully capture the human impact of the MTW Program. No one
is more familiar with that impact than Crystal Palmer, who is
here with us today. Crystal grew up in a CHA high-rise and
returned as an adult, where she became a resident leader.
Drawing on lessons learned in her own life, she has worked for
CHA and our providers to help other residents connect to these
services needed that will forever change residents' lives. And
with that I want to welcome Crystal and thank her for joining
me and offer her to answer questions if you deem it
appropriate.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Warren can be found on page
90 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
And for the purpose of receiving additional expertise and
input from the Chicago Housing Authority, I ask unanimous
consent that Ms. Crystal Palmer of the staff of Ms. Warren be
allowed to assist her in answering questions.
Ms. Warren. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Fischer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILL FISCHER, SENIOR POLICY ANALYST, CENTER ON
BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

Mr. Fischer. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert, Ranking Member
Gutierrez, and members of the subcommittee. It is an honor and
a privilege to testify before you today. I want to talk first
about the proposal to expand Moving to Work and then turn to
some of the self-sufficiency provisions in the Section 8
Savings Act.
The proposal to expand Moving to Work would allow HUD to,
and possibly require HUD to, admit an unlimited number of
agencies to the demonstration. This would fundamentally change
Federal housing assistance. MTW, despite its name, isn't
focused on promoting employment. It allows agencies to operate
outside a wide range of Federal statutes and regulations and
HUD to establish special funding formulas for participating
agencies.
MTW has commendable goals, such as testing innovative
policies and providing streamlining and flexibility, and as you
are hearing today, many MTW agencies have implemented promising
initiatives. But despite that, MTW is not the best way to
pursue those goals, and a major expansion of the demonstration
isn't the right way forward for housing assistance for several
reasons.
First, MTW has not been effective in determining what
policies really work in promoting self-sufficiency. It has
generated a lot of anecdotal and other results, but it has
generated few concrete policy findings, and that is because the
demonstration really isn't structured in a way that lends
itself to rigorous experimental evaluation. As a result, it is
hard to know whether an outcome stems from a Moving to Work
policy, or from changes in an agency's caseload, or underlying
economic circumstances or other factors.
More broadly, we really don't know very much about what
kind of policies are effective in helping families with housing
assistance to increase their earnings. It is a critical
question, but if we really want to find answers to it, what is
needed isn't more MTW; what is needed is targeted rigorous
evaluations that test policy alternatives in a range of
circumstances and really find out what works. The rent policy
demonstration in SESA is an example of something that moves in
this more promising direction.
MTW also isn't the best way to provide streamlining and
flexibility. On the one hand, MTW allows agencies to remove
basic Federal standards that have been key to making housing
assistance Programs effective. On the other hand, its
flexibility only reaches participating agencies and not the
remaining housing agencies. There are definitely areas where
flexibility and streamlining are needed, but the best approach
to that is for Congress to provide, to pass targeted
legislation that applies to all housing agencies in those
areas.
The last point I want to make on Moving to Work is that a
major expansion of Moving to Work would create a real risk that
there would be a really large transfer of resources away from
housing assistance for the lowest-income families to other
purposes, and that is partly--already under Moving to Work, MTW
agencies in 2010 transferred about $400 million in housing
voucher funds to a range of other purposes.
In addition, MTW has income-targeting rules that are much
weaker than those that apply especially in the existing voucher
Program. There would be a risk, especially in a tight funding
environment, that agencies would feel pressure to shift
resources to assist somewhat higher-income families who require
less subsidies, and the result of that would be that you would
have a lot less assistance for the lowest-income families with
disabilities, for families at risk of homelessness, and for
others who need the help the most.
I want to turn now to the Section 8 Savings Act, which
overall is a well-crafted, important piece of legislation that
would improve housing assistance Programs and generate large
Federal savings. There are several new provisions in the
current draft that haven't been included in previous drafts,
and I want to touch on two of those.
One of them is that the new draft would permit housing
agencies to charge families up to $75, the higher of $75 or 12
percent of the local fair market rent, even if this is above 30
percent of their income. It is not clear that even the increase
of $75 is warranted. That would place as many as 350,000
families at risk of rent increases. But the increase to 12
percent of the fair market rent is especially problematic
because that could result in substantially larger minimum
rents, especially for large families and for people who live in
high-cost areas. So I think it will be important as this
legislation moves forward that Congress take a look at these
provisions and reconsider them.
SESA also contains a new self-sufficiency initiative that
encourages agencies to enter into partnerships with local
providers of employment and supportive services. This is
generally a promising and important initiative. We have some
significant concerns and suggestions for improvements, which
are detailed in my written testimony.
I will close with that. Again, thank you for the privilege
of testifying before you today, and I will be happy to take any
questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fischer can be found on page
72 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Fischer.
Mr. Russ, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY P. RUSS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND CHIEF
OPERATING OFFICER, CAMBRIDGE HOUSING AUTHORITY

Mr. Russ. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Biggert and Ranking
Member Gutierrez. And my thanks to the members of the
subcommittee for inviting me here to speak.
I am Gregory Russ, the executive director of the Cambridge
Housing Authority. And I have been operating or working in one
way or another in this business for 37 years, actually prior to
the creation of the housing voucher Program that we are talking
about here today--an interesting point that wasn't lost on me
when others were testifying.
I want to point out that the CHA was one of the original 24
MTW agencies. And since that time, since we started down this
road in 1998, 1999, we have pursued a number of policies that I
believe address a number of the points that were made earlier
when the various members of the subcommittee and various
Members of the Congress had an opportunity to speak.
We really have to think about a way to make structural
reforms, and MTW does that. It does that in several ways. One,
it balances the demands of the local market and conditions that
we are in with the larger objectives of the Federal policy.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, is one of the most expensive
housing markets in the country. If you look at our three-
bedroom payment standard, which we are only allowed to set due
to MTW, it is $2,000. In some of the communities around the
country, that would be three vouchers. So we have this very
expensive, very difficult market to work in.
And it has not been lost on us that one of the things we
must do is preserve the hard stock that we have in Cambridge in
order to allow the community to continue to serve low-income
families. And, in fact, that is one of the themes you will see
in our Moving to Work plans and reports.
We also wanted to simplify the business relationship with
the families. Most of you have talked about structural reform.
Try and calculate a rent under the current rules. It is very
difficult. And it is very difficult for the family to
understand not only what the rent is, especially on the voucher
side, but how much money they will have to operate when they go
out and try to rent the unit. These are structural changes that
we have taken on, and one of the policy innovations I will talk
about in a minute.
We have also concluded that we have to provide a variety of
incentives and approaches, working with our nonprofit partners
in our community, to encourage and promote work for the
families who participate in these Programs. And one thing that
MTW has allowed us to do, much like some of the other agencies
here, we are partnered up with the nonprofits who work in
Cambridge and across the Boston region in ways we could not
have imagined 5 years ago. It is very powerful in terms of
forming partnerships with groups that are helping populations
that you may not be able to typically serve through the
conventional Program.
Some of the things in Cambridge that we are attempting: We
have created a Program called a sponsor-based voucher, where
the subsidy is provided to organizations that are service-rich
or dealing with transitional housing Programs or for unique
populations, such as those who are homeless or victims of
domestic violence. We currently have 59 subsidies doing that.
We have partnered with nonprofits, four of them, working
with families who are in shelters and are homeless. And we have
55 subsidies dedicated to that Program, which envisions
training, support, budget, building savings, and, finally,
families moving on to self-sufficiency. These subsidies start
as a sponsor-based and then transform to a tenant-based and
allow the family to--the subsidy flexes, in a way, as the
family is moving along the path to self-sufficiency.
We have another 20 subsidies dedicated to a Program we call
the Career Family Opportunity, with the Crittenton Women's
Union, which is a 103-year-old nonprofit that has been working
with women in the Boston region for a long time. And this is
another effort to bring households, typically single-headed
households, into the working world. This is a subsidy that, on
graduation, the family who has a voucher voluntarily agrees
after 5 years to give up the voucher. So it kind of flies in
the face of what we think of when we think about families who
are economically disadvantaged. That is part of the requirement
of the Program. There are shallow subsidies available to those
families, and that Program looks very different than anything
we could have done in the conventional forum.
Two other things I will mention. We have changed the way we
project-base vouchers to allow for the preservation of units in
Cambridge, and we adopted a rent-simplification policy. And
what is potent about the rent-simplification policy is people
understand how the rent was calculated.
These are the kinds of reform that SESA is getting at and
we think that Moving to Work can expand upon. And we are very
interested in taking your questions or talking about these
ideas as we try to bring them to scale.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russ can be found on page 86
of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Russ.
We will now turn to Member questions, and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Warren, you made a really interesting statement in your
testimony that I would like to revisit. You said the landscape
of Chicago and the life trajectory of thousands of low-income
families would not be the same without the flexibility that the
Moving to Work Program provides.
Could you expand on that concept for the committee?
And then, I do have a question for Ms. Palmer.
Ms. Warren. I would be happy to.
I think all you need to do is look at the landscape of
Chicago today, and you will see the difference from what it was
10 years ago. The high-rise, isolated, miles of public housing
that was desolate, didn't have retail, didn't have markets,
families couldn't get their mail delivered, is no longer there.
What you see now are beautiful mixed-income communities that
are built into the fabric of the entire Chicago community.
Chicago, 10 years ago, had 14 of the 16 poorest census
tracts in the United States. And I hate to say it, but the
Chicago Housing Authority, 10 years ago and longer, was the
poster child for what public housing shouldn't be and how
government and public housing didn't work. Today, with the MTW
flexibility and the creativity and innovation of the City of
Chicago and the agency, they have been able to tear down and
rebuild brand-new communities and be able to provide residents
opportunities to be prosperous.
The reason that residents can be prosperous is not only
because they are in brand-new communities but because we have
been able to provide wraparound services. These services are
put together through what we term our FamilyWorks Programs,
which are social service agencies that do holistic approaches
with our families. And so if there is any--we set up specific
Programs with each individual family to work within the fabric
of that community.
So I think it is really simple, just looking at what
Chicago is today versus what you saw 10 years ago.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you. And I certainly have--it
certainly has changed the skyline of Chicago, too. I have been
in the Robert Taylor Homes, I was in Cabrini-Green, Henry
Horner, and just about all of them, and it really has changed
and made it a beautiful area.
With that, Ms. Palmer, maybe you could--this is going to be
kind of awkward, but we will see what we can do here. I know
that you are a Chicagoan and that you are in Congressman Danny
Davis' congressional district. And you have had firsthand
knowledge of the impact of supportive services like those being
discussed today.
So, from your experience, do you believe that the MTW
Program has made a difference in linking services to housing?
Or is housing alone enough to help a family achieve economic
independence?
Ms. Palmer. I will answer the last question first.
Bricks and mortar do not build a family. You can build a
house, but it is the support that you give the family to help
maintain those families. So the wraparound services that we
have for employment, child care, mental illnesses, and clinical
services is the kind of services that our families need. When
the high-rises were up, our families were just isolated, didn't
have services, didn't have adequate child care, didn't have
employment. These services now come into play where our
families are able to engage in employment, education, and make
their lives better and better for their families.
And I think what is really important to me is that our
youth, our young generation gets to actually see their family
members actually going to work, going to school, trying to
become self-sufficient, so when they, too, become adult age,
they can follow the same pattern.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
Then just briefly, linking the services, how does that
happen?
Ms. Palmer. So there is, again, the FamilyWorks Program,
whose outreach workers actually go out and knock on doors and
talk to families and tell them about the services. As a matter
of fact, I used to be an outreach worker for one of the
services, and I would go out and I would just talk to the
families about the services that they need.
Because I am a friend of that community, people began to
trust me. And in trusting me, they would allow the clinicians
or the outreach workers to actually come in and engage with
them. Once they got inside of the houses, they found that there
were many, many issues. Families didn't identify themselves
because it was a norm for them. And so, by them being able to
get into those houses and address some of the issues, a lot of
those families have moved toward self-sufficiency.
Chairwoman Biggert. Okay. I thank you so much. And my time
has expired.
Mr. Gutierrez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you so much. I really appreciate it.
I hope that the next time maybe we can have a hearing--
because it seems like every time we talk about public housing
we have to mention crime, as though they are interwoven--crime.
Maybe the next time we talk about the $100 billion that we
subsidize housing in America through the deduction we give
people on their interest, we should talk about crime, too. But
people say, Luis, what are you doing that for? Maybe we should.
So I always kind of worry about crime and public housing.
We are all concerned about crime, but it always seems to be
that one thing always seems to be linked with the other. And
then, lately, it is the illegal immigrants; you have to throw
them in. You have black people; let's throw in the brown
people, too. Kind of like in Alabama, 40 years ago, you know
what happened there. So let me just make that statement for the
record.
And then, Ms. Warren, I would like to ask you, what are
things that we can do from our perspective that can help you in
Chicago?
And, first of all, I want to say, thank you for coming. And
please give my best and warmest regards, as he left Charlotte
to come to Chicago, lost to my colleague, Mr. Woodyard. Thank
him for coming, and tell him I wish him Godspeed.
Tell us, what can we do to help you?
Ms. Warren. I will make sure to pass along your kind words.
We look forward to his starting, as well.
I really appreciate what Congress has done thus far with
the MTW Program, because it has made all--we would not be where
we are today without it.
I do think continuing the flexibility with the Program is
key. I know there have been some discussions about trying to
rein in some of the flexibility and maybe putting a few more
regulations on the Program, and that is a little concerning,
because I think our Program has been so successful because we
have been able to cater it and mold it and evolve it to where
we know it works. And we continue to evolve it. And we have
been--
Mr. Gutierrez. So, of every 100 public-housing residents
that you had, how many leave public housing? What percentage
leave to private housing? How many leave the voucher system to
non-voucher-system housing?
Ms. Warren. As of today, I don't have exact numbers for
you. What I can tell you right now is, as an example, we have
over 300 families who have purchased homes through the Choose
to Own Program. We have over 827 families who have graduated
out of our Family Self-Sufficiency Program, with a total of
$7.4 million--
Mr. Gutierrez. And they have gone on to non-assisted
housing?
Ms. Warren. Many of them have.
What I will also just back up and explain is that, through
the last 10 years of the Plan for Transformation, we have been
working with the same population who started and helped us
through the Plan for Transformation. So a number of those
families are still with us and will probably end up remaining
with us.
What we are working on now with those families is that
younger generation so we can break that generational cycle of
poverty, we can encourage the youth, through education and job
training, that there is something you can do when you turn 18
besides moving into another public housing unit.
One of the things we offer through the MTW flexibility is
free city college tuition to any public housing resident after
financial aid.
Mr. Gutierrez. I thought you might say that. I was hopeful.
So, in other words, if Congress increased Pell grants so that
people could go to college instead of refuse to increase Pell
grants, that might help you take people to self-sufficiency. If
Congress actually supported increasing minimum wage in this
country, that might help you take people to self-sufficiency.
If Congress somehow increased Head Start Programs and
nutritional Programs for people, that might actually help
people get--if we sponsor job training Programs and skill
training Programs so they would have new skills so they could
go out in the market, that might actually help you.
Ms. Warren. Absolutely.
Mr. Gutierrez. Because I think, many times, unfortunately--
and I go back to what Mr. Woods suggested to us--we kind of say
here, ``You are only supposed to be there a short amount of
time, and then you are supposed to get off. It is only supposed
to be a short period of time.'' But when it comes to all of the
other substantial things that we might be able to do to help
people get to self-sufficiency, we vote against it. But then we
ask you, the managers of public housing, to do more with less
and, at the same time, give less to the very population that
you represent.
Ms. Warren. Exactly.
Mr. Gutierrez. So I just wanted to draw on that and to
thank you, because it is a hard job. And I know a lot of the
work that goes into making--and I just want to state for the
record that those of us who believe in public housing, we are
some of the strongest people against those who sell drugs, who
are gang members, who cause violence. We are strong. And we
don't need anybody pontificating to us what it is we need to do
when it comes to that. We are strong. We want a good, clean
community. We would only hope people would help us achieve
that, given the wealth and the depth of richness that this
Nation has.
Thank you so much.
Ms. Warren. I really thank you for your comments.
Chairwoman Biggert. And thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Hurt, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I thank each of you for testifying today.
My district is mostly rural, southern Virginia. And my
question is for--I would like to hear from Mr. Woods about the
Program that he is involved in, in Winston-Salem, maybe because
it is the closest one to where I live.
But it sounds like to me, in the last 15 years, this has
provided a real improvement to what you all do. And I think it
sounds to me that most people recognize that the model
previously demonstrated it was not working very well and
improvements were needed.
And so I was wondering if you could maybe cite specific
examples of where the inflexibility of the current rules and
regulations for PHAs, where--could you offer some specific
examples of how that keeps you from meeting your objective?
Mr. Woods. Thank you very much.
One of the problems that we see in Winston-Salem is the
fact that we are unable to help families move because of in-
place rules and regulations. One has to do with something
called ``split families.'' It allows an individual who is
living in a unit who is an adult to come into our management
office and say, ``I am not getting along with my brother, I am
not getting along with my sibling, I want a split family.''
Now, that is a problem because we have a large waiting
list--200, 300, 400 individuals at any one time. This
individual is already receiving some benefit of public tax
dollars, living in a unit. Now they are jumping ahead of the
waiting list, and they get preference to move into a unit over
someone who has been waiting on the waiting list. And that is a
problem for us because we are unable to move families who have
been waiting for affordable housing or assisted housing to move
in. That is one of the regulations that hurt us.
Streamlined reporting: Mr. Russ talked about rent
calculation. It is complicated. It is also complicated when one
part of HUD asks you to keep your financial records on an
accrual basis and another is asking you to keep it on a cash
basis, and then you get somebody who says, ``Reconcile the
two.'' It is impossible. Those are just two examples.
Mr. Hurt. Do you--
Mr. Woods. Income exclusions: An individual has been
unemployed for over a year. When they do get a job, for the
first year the new income cannot be included as part of a rent
calculation. So what happens? They go out, they get a credit
card, they buy additional appliances. Then when it is time for
the rent to kick in, guess what happens? They come to us and
say, ``I quit work, so my rent stays the same.'' So, for a full
year, they have had that benefit--
Mr. Hurt. Right.
Mr. Woods. --and we have been having to subsidize that, and
now, when it is time for them to pay a portion of a higher
rent, they quit work because there is no real work requirement.
They can just say, ``I quit work,'' and there is nothing we can
do.
Those are several examples that hamper us in really helping
a larger number of people on our waiting list.
Mr. Hurt. Do you believe, for the individuals and the
families who receive the Section 8 assistance, do you believe
that the opportunities for job training and education and
employment are more readily available for those PHAs that have
the MTW Program as opposed to others?
Mr. Woods. Oh, no doubt about it. They can come up with
different types of incentives, as both agencies here talked
about. I love the idea of an incentive of providing some type
of college tuition. That is a carrot-and-stick approach. That
is what is going to motivate individuals. There has to be a
light at the end of the tunnel.
Mr. Hurt. All right.
And let me just--one final question. How do you respond to
some of the concerns that were raised by Mr. Fischer in terms
of the suggestion that these principles are not proven and that
somehow we are going to actually end up hurting the communities
that we are trying to serve as opposed to helping them?
Mr. Woods. I think Ms. Warren's testimony is the proof in
the pudding: transformation of Chicago; better lifestyle; the
integration into the broader community; mainstreaming families.
What we believe is that, given the opportunity to come up
with a unique Program guideline for our City, we can help more
people move through the system quickly so that we can then move
people from our waiting list to backfill that number.
We have looked at it; we have been visiting other cities,
such as Atlanta. We visited Chicago, we visited Kentucky. They
all have great MTW Programs. We are looking for our
opportunity.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you.
The gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I am between two committees, but I wanted very much to be
here today because I think we really do have to understand more
about Moving to Work; I have to understand a lot more about it.
So I am going to start with Mr. Fischer. In the previous
Congress, we had a bill called the Section 8 Voucher Reform
Act, which expanded the Moving to Work Program but did so in a
manner that protected residents and the housing stock. One of
the important features of that bill was the inclusion of
retained provisions, parts of the 1937 Housing Act that Moving
to Work agencies could not waive. The retained provisions
included things like tenant representation on the public
housing authority's board, procedural rights for a tenant,
lease requirements, resident choice portability, and other
important parts of the public housing and Section 8 Program.
Can you speak to the harm tenants would face if every
housing authority in the country can waive provisions I just
described?
Mr. Fischer. Sure. I think that there would be harm if
there were an unlimited Moving to Work demonstration where
agencies were able to waive the full breadth of housing
assistance rules.
I will just give one example, which is voucher portability.
Under the existing voucher Program, families have to have the
right to move anywhere in the country where there is a voucher
Program. It is a critically important right that helps people
get the most out of their housing assistance, and it is the key
policy decision that Congress made in establishing the Program.
Under MTW, if there aren't any--under MTW agencies, in a number
of cases, have curtailed that right in various ways, and this
makes having the assistance less useful to the families who
receive it.
And that is just one example of something that, in a
sweeping MTW situation, can get moved aside. It is a provision
that helps to make housing assistance more effective. There are
a lot of other examples of these provisions, like the ones that
you mentioned, that could also be removed.
Ms. Waters. Additionally, you say MTW isn't a good deal for
taxpayers. What do you mean?
Mr. Fischer. I think what has happened in MTW is that there
is a lot of funding--MTW permits funding shifts from the
voucher Program to a range of other purposes. And one of the
effects of this is that MTW has been less cost-effective in
providing housing assistance to the lowest-income families.
Housing agencies have used that money for a range of
purposes, including some of the initiatives you have heard
about today that are effective policies. In other cases, there
have been situations where money has been wasted. For example,
in the Philadelphia Housing Authority, which is one of the
largest MTW agencies and in 2010 accounted for about one-sixth
of the funds that were transferred, there have been a series of
allegations of misuse of funds for a whole range of purposes,
from payments for expensive professional services contracts,
for gifts to employees, for very unnecessarily expensive
construction projects.
And so what has happened is that there have been--some of
these funds have been used well, but other funds have been used
less well.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Now, I take it we have some of our housing authorities that
are represented now that have Moving to Work Programs?
Ms. Warren. Yes.
Ms. Waters. You and you? How do you use your resources? How
do you administer your Moving to Work Program? What do you do
with the additional money?
Ms. Warren. I am sorry, with the initial--
Ms. Waters. Resources that you get for the Moving to Work
Program. How do you use those resources?
Ms. Warren. We are a part of the--we have the Plan for
Transformation--that is the terminology that we use in
Chicago--which is a 15-year, very strategic plan that has been
in place since 2000. And that plan has allowed us to
strategically work through all of our public-housing high-rises
as well as work with our resident populations.
So, every year, we have--again, we have a long-term plan,
but every year we refine and evolve that plan and tailor the
needs of the funding to what that year brings about, whether it
is demolishing and rebuilding, whether it is financing of
housing, whether it is adding different Programs to our
resident services portfolio to help families with, say, early
childhood--
Ms. Waters. Give me an example of your Programs that you
have.
Ms. Warren. On the resident services side?
Ms. Waters. Yes.
Ms. Warren. Okay. So we are set up through what we call the
FamilyWorks Program, in which we contract with five service
providers. And these service providers provide holistic, hands-
on wraparound services to our families. They literally go door-
to-door and work with our families on measured outcomes and
plans to help them achieve either self-sufficiency or some type
of economic gain. And we will do that with each family. We
will--
Ms. Waters. This service helps to get them into job
training Programs, and you have a job developer who gets jobs
for them?
Ms. Warren. That is correct. We have job training, we have
transitional jobs that we work with, we have a workforce
development component. We also have a huge educational
component. I mentioned--and I am not sure if you were here
earlier--that we actually pay for city colleges for any family
who is in our public housing development.
Ms. Waters. So you are helping the residents to become
independent, and you have actual statistics on how many jobs
and all of that?
Ms. Warren. That is correct, we do.
Ms. Waters. So, Mr. Fischer, how could you say that it is
not money well spent?
Mr. Fischer. It is not that I think that--I think, like I
said, some of these uses are good expenditures of funding. We
strongly support having adequate funding to revitalize public
housing. Targeting services on families in housing assistance
would also be a good use of funds.
What I object to is funding these uses by shifting money
out of the housing voucher Program. Federal housing assistance
today only reaches about one in four eligible families. There
are long waiting lists in communities across the country--
Chairwoman Biggert. Time has expired. Maybe you can come
back to that because--
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. --Ms. Boldon is a service provider, and
Mr. Russ, I think, had an answer, too.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Miller, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Miller of California. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to applaud all of the witnesses today. I think your
input has been excellent. And your knowledge and your breadth
of knowledge is really quite astounding.
Mr. Fischer, you made a couple of comments that concern me
a little bit. You said MTW hasn't determined specific policies
that should be used; that is a concern for you. And you don't
know what policies should work. I suggest it is not for you. I
think MTW will not work for you. That is not a question. I just
don't think it is good for you, based on what you have said.
The Public Housing Authority Directors Association, though,
responded to some of your writings, and they said, ``PHADA
wishes to bring some matters concerning the Moving to Work
demonstration to your attention, particularly as they relate to
recent criticisms of the Program based on faulty, incomplete,
and inconsistent assessments by the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.'' I believe that is you.
``Based on assessments by the Urban Institute, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the
independent study sponsored by MTW agencies, PHADA believes
that the demonstration has been one of the most fruitful
sources of innovation and growth for deeply assisted housing
Programs during the 13-year history of the Program.'' I think
that speaks volumes.
And I would like to applaud you, Mr. Woods, because you
said some things I believe in. You said, ``Empower me.'' That
is what my bill tries to do. You said, ``Hold me accountable.''
My bill does that through verifying and evaluating your
accountability. You said, ``I have innovative ideas.'' We are
looking for those. You said, ``I believe in resident
protection.'' I think that is wonderful; so do we.
Ms. Boldon, you said moving toward economic independence is
huge and it has really worked for you. That is what this does
also. And serving more families is what you are all about. And
that is what MTW does.
I think it is a really good Program. The witnesses today
have supported my belief in it. It is not about cutting people
off. It is about helping people, showing them that they can do
many things on their own if they are just given a little
direction, a little encouragement.
But Ms. Warren, Ms. Boldon, Mr. Russ, and Mr. Woods,
perhaps you would want to give some examples of successful
Programs on helping residents become economically independent
and how, basically, you were able to do this through MTW. Give
me some examples that you would not have been able to do if you
wouldn't have been in MTW.
Mr. Russ. Yes, I would like to give a very specific one,
and I would like to make two other observations. One, in
Cambridge, the retained provisions that Congresswoman Waters
mentioned, we do operate with most of those. We have not
abandoned those protections for many of those items.
And, second, I think that the comment that Mr. Fischer made
on Philadelphia is off the mark, in the sense that we are
actually speaking here about individual issues, and it is yet
to be determined if there is--
Mr. Miller of California. And I would like to make one
comment because I don't like just to read letters from public
housing authority directors--
Mr. Russ. Sure.
Mr. Miller of California. --so we went and asked your
people, I said, how many sites did you visit? They said, we
didn't. How many residents did you interview? We didn't
interview any. Were you able to visit Atlanta or Georgia sites,
particularly? They said, no. How do you respond to the academic
findings regarding residents' employment and income
improvements? They couldn't.
So I wasn't willing just to accept the letter; we have gone
and asked your people. And all those questions I just asked
you, those were the answers we got back.
Go ahead and--
Mr. Russ. And, Congressman, I would like to give one
example. We have a Program, it is an after-school program
called the Work Force Program. It starts with kids in 8th grade
and works through 12th grade, and it follows them for the
entire time. We have funded that Program through a variety of
sources in the past. Some of them are no longer available. We
now fund that Program using our Moving to Work flexibility.
That Program graduates out of high school on an annual
basis 95 percent of its participants. Another 93 percent of
those kids go on to a secondary education. And the last time we
surveyed, 6 years after graduation about two-thirds of those
kids no longer lived in public housing.
So that is just one example of a small Program in Cambridge
that we are using our MTW flexibility for.
Mr. Miller of California. That is good.
Ms. Warren, let's give you a chance, too. Give me some
ideas of what you have done.
Thank you, sir. I didn't mean to cut you off. I am almost
out of time.
Mr. Russ. Thank you.
Ms. Warren. So, I have a multitude of Programs.
Mr. Miller of California. Give me one.
Ms. Warren. I think one that is quite innovative that we
use our MTW flexibility on is called Learn & Earn. And it is
geared toward specifically youth from ages 13 to 15, because
those youths tend to be left out of all the other Programs that
are targeted to youth under 18.
And so what we do is we work with them and actually pay
them to go to school in the summertime for half a day, and they
receive an academic--usually math or science, and learn for
half the day. And the second half of the day is about job
training and job placement and job growth.
So for an entire summer they earn a stipend, they learn,
and they get educated on the job, as well.
Mr. Miller of California. That is great.
Ms. Boldon, do you have something quick?
Ms. Boldon. Yes. In Atlanta, we started a preemployment
workshop, and we did this in conjunction, of course, with the
Atlanta Housing Authority. And what we have been able to do is
we have placed over 2,000 people in jobs. And we track them,
and they have been employed over 6 months.
Mr. Miller of California. My time is up. I want to thank
you all for what you do. God bless you. And keep up the good
work.
And, those who don't want to do it, have fun with what you
are doing. But, those who want to move people to work, I just
wish you all the best in the future. God bless you, and thank
you for what you do.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Miller.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Stivers, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate you
holding the hearing on these issues and your leadership on
Section 8 reform.
I got a letter from my metropolitan housing agency. I live
in Columbus, Ohio, and the Columbus Metropolitan Housing Agency
is not part of the Moving to Work Program. They would like to
be. So, much like Mr. Woods, the Columbus Metropolitan Housing
Authority is anxious to get engaged and involved in this
Program. And I just wanted to read something that they said to
me, and then I have a question for Mr. Woods first.
They believe that, under MTW, they will have a better
opportunity to get people to work and stabilize their resident
pool and increase the incomes in their community. And I assume
that is--you talked about some of those same things, Mr. Woods,
and your interest in getting in the Program and what you guys
have done.
I guess my question is for Mr. Woods, Ms. Boldon, and Mr.
Russ. Have any of you experienced the ability to stabilize your
rent pool as part of the Moving to Work, and has it increased
incomes in your neighborhoods?
Ms. Boldon. I run an agency that partners with the housing
authority--
Mr. Stivers. Right, you partner with--sorry, sorry.
Ms. Boldon. --so I am going to leave some of those answers
for the housing authority folks.
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Ms. Boldon. But I would like to say that our employment
levels over the 10 years went from 18.5 percent to 78 percent
at its peak, and it is now back at 56 percent because of the
slowdown in the economy.
Mr. Stivers. But that is still a pretty impressive
improvement.
Ms. Boldon. We are very proud of it. We call ourselves
``pragmatic idealists.''
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
We can just go down. And I know Mr. Woods wants the same
thing that our Columbus folks want.
Mr. Woods. Yes. I just want to say very quickly, Winston-
Salem is in a very unique position. In our City, we actually
have a medical research park that is being built, and 27,000 to
30,000 new jobs are being predicted.
Mr. Stivers. Wow.
Mr. Woods. It is a culmination of Wake Baptist Hospital and
several universities. If you don't know, Winston-Salem Medical
Park has some leading industries that are coming in. They are
able to actually grow body parts, and it is moving.
This park is right next to my low-income community. Moving
to Work will give us the opportunity to train residents to at
least apply for the entry-level positions. That is why we are
very, very concerned about being an MTW agency.
Mr. Stivers. And that is what I think the Columbus
Metropolitan Housing Authority wants to do, too. So, in the
interest of time, I will move on, and I know that you all have
some great points to make.
Mr. Russ talked earlier about project-based vouchers. And
one of the other things that the Columbus Metropolitan Housing
Agency has done a great job of is being a leader in project-
based vouchers. There is a 20 percent cap on project-based
vouchers, and they are starting to bump up against that. It is
going to hurt their ability to serve specialized populations,
including veterans, homeless folks, and also seniors. And they
are really worried about that.
Since you are the only one that I heard mention project-
based vouchers in your testimony, Mr. Russ, I didn't know if
you wanted to talk about your experience quickly with project-
based vouchers and how they can leverage private money and
really be successful.
Mr. Russ. There are two things I would like to say.
We redid the way--we abandoned the current regulatory
framework, so we no longer have the cap in place. And we did
that partly in response to the needs of some of the other
nonprofits in the community, and our own needs, to be fair. So
we do not have the cap that Columbus is bumping up against.
And it has worked extremely well, in terms of helping us
preserve probably close to 500 units in the City of Cambridge.
And much of that housing is not our housing; it is the housing
of the nonprofits who are at work in the community.
Mr. Stivers. And you got that exemption through HUD, right?
Mr. Russ. That was part of the Moving to Work agreement.
And the other thing--
Mr. Stivers. Which is the other reason Columbus wants to be
in Moving to Work.
Mr. Russ. Right. And I think one of the things about Moving
to Work is it has really excellent unanticipated consequences.
And the example I want to give is that, recently, we also
assisted a nonprofit in our community who was purchasing an
expiring-use property--
Mr. Stivers. And I am running out of time, but--
Mr. Russ. Okay.
Mr. Stivers. --I appreciate that.
And I do want to ask Mr. Fischer one last question, because
you brought up the Philadelphia Metropolitan Housing Authority
and the mismanagement and potential corruption that has been
alleged at that metropolitan housing authority is not limited
to Moving to Work, is it?
Mr. Fischer. Well--
Mr. Stivers. It is a yes-or-no question. Is it limited to
Moving to Work?
Mr. Fischer. I think it results from Moving to Work at
Philadelphia.
Mr. Stivers. You believe it is limited--
Mr. Fischer. It is not the only agency that has problems. I
think--
Mr. Stivers. So you believe it is limited to Moving to
Work?
Mr. Fischer. I think it stems from Moving to Work.
Mr. Stivers. But, from what I have seen, it is widespread.
And, unfortunately, there are good and bad actors in every
industry. And Philadelphia Metropolitan Housing Authority might
not be one we--
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you.
Chairwoman Biggert. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Dold,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, if I can, I would like to, first of all, thank you all
for coming again and thank you for your time.
Ms. Warren, I am going to start with you. Because probably
half of the questioners up here are from Illinois, we are going
to focus more of our questions on Chicago, not to their
detriment, but that is just the way it works.
Mr. Russ. She is up to the task.
Mr. Dold. You highlighted that the CHA's Plan for
Transformation involves breaking the generational cycle of
poverty for the population served. And I certainly know that
many here believe that this goal is paramount if we are going
to succeed in our goal to approve assisted housing Programs in
America.
So what is Chicago doing specifically to address this
daunting challenge, and what have been the results as of late?
Ms. Warren. That is a good question, and that is a tough
question, but it is one we are addressing.
We are addressing it in a couple of ways. One is, as I have
already mentioned, our FamilyWorks Programs and those case
managers and the clinical services.
And we are approaching it from a two-generational approach.
We have families who have been in our housing since before the
Plan for Transformation who have children. And so the only way
to really break that generational cycle is with the elder of
the household or the mother or the father and the child at the
same time. And there is a multitude of issues, generally, that
come with that, so we try and address all those issues
parallel. So we do what we can to help the family prosper but
the child to grow from an educational and job training
standpoint. So we--
Mr. Dold. Can you give me some sort of an idea? I recognize
it is a daunting task, and I think we even mentioned that. But
how has the success been thus far? Is it something that you can
measure?
Ms. Warren. I think we cannot measure it yet. I think we
are on our way to measuring it, because this is one of those
Programs that has evolved with our FamilyWorks providers.
We actually started with a different type of service
Program. We have been through two different types of service
Programs and found they didn't work as well. We are now on this
model, which we implemented a few years ago, and have found it
works quite well because of the holistic wraparound services.
So, with that and through numerous studies, more studies
than I have ever seen of any housing authority, on research
projects that have helped us to identify key issues with some
of our populations, we have been able to tailor Programs
specific to those needs to start beginning to break that
generational cycle.
And, as Crystal mentioned earlier, the clinical services is
a key component to what we do. Because, a lot of times, we get
in and do basic services, but we can't seem to get to the heart
of the issue, and it turns out it is more of a clinical need
and assessment that we have to put forth.
Mr. Dold. I am going to move on, if I can.
Ms. Warren. Sure.
Mr. Dold. Crystal, thank you so much for being here, as
well. I know it is taking your time to be here. We appreciate
it.
Mr. Woods, I want to just go to you for a second, if I may,
and your comments when you said to empower you. Certainly, we
appreciate that and the fact that you stood up and said to hold
you accountable. Certainly, that is something that we are
looking to try to do, in terms of having more accountability in
general with regard to housing.
You state that there shouldn't be a standard one-size-fits-
all for the Moving to Work contract for every qualifying public
housing authority. How should HUD and Congress establish
parameters to balance this flexibility with the need to hold
the housing authorities accountable in a results-driven
process?
Mr. Woods. Thank you for the question.
We have kind of wrestled with that issue. We think one
basic standard should be whether or not you are a high
performer. And during your annual plan, when you submit it into
HUD, there just should be a box that says whether or not you
are interested in becoming a Moving to Work or you are not.
There can be other criteria, but it should not be
competitive. That is what I think drives me crazy. When I first
started in Winston-Salem, we applied, and we were told we were
too small. We didn't change any number of our units, we didn't
add any units, we didn't lose any units. The following year, we
were too big. And so--
Mr. Dold. Welcome to the government.
Mr. Woods. So it is like a moving target.
And when I tell folks that you are not giving us any more
money, what you are giving us is the flexibility and the
responsibility for tailoring needs based upon my locality's
demand, I don't think that is too much to ask for.
Mr. Dold. Certainly, I would agree.
In the short period of time I have left, obviously, given
the climate here, the budget restraints that we have here in
Washington, D.C., and for Fiscal Year 2012, will the Moving to
Work Program or flexibility allow the housing authorities to do
more with less, in terms of Federal funds?
Anyone?
Mr. Russ. Yes, I think that the thing that the Moving to
Work gives us is it allows us to look across all the Programs.
The money is fungible. You can balance as best you can. No one
likes to deal with less money, I have to say that, but you can
balance the impact of that inside your organization.
Mr. Dold. Okay. I know my time has expired. Thank you so
much. And, again, I appreciate you taking your time and energy
to come and testify today. So I thank the entire panel.
Chairwoman Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Dold.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you for
allowing me to be a part of the subcommittee.
Ms. Boldon, you seem to have a holistic approach. How are
you funded?
Ms. Boldon. We run our contracts through a competitive
response to an RFP put out by the Atlanta Housing Authority
back in 2002. Before that, we were part of the development
contract for Hope VI--Hope VI development. And so, we created
the Program and defined it and implemented it using the Hope VI
framework and those funds.
Mr. Green. So you have worked with the Atlanta Housing
Authority, is this what I am to understand?
Ms. Boldon. Yes.
Mr. Green. Okay.
Now, let's assume, dear friends, that we have something
that we will call a standard housing Program. This is one that
is not a Moving to Work Program. And let's assume that we move
to this Moving to Work Program.
Would the cost for the standard program, which we will call
``X''--would the cost to do the kind of Moving to Work Program
that Ms. Boldon has called to our attention be ``X-plus?'' Is
that a fair statement, that to move from a standard program to
one with wraparound opportunities, resources, facilities, would
it be ``X-plus?'' Or would you do this program, perform this
program, in a stellar fashion with ``X,'' which is what you
have for your standard program?
And it looks like, Ms. Warren, you are leaning forward to
answer. I read body language well. So I am going to call on
you.
Ms. Warren. I was just going to say that I think without
MTW flexibility, these programs couldn't exist.
Mr. Green. I understand. But what I need to know now is, if
the standard Program costs ``X'' and you move from what I am
calling a standard Program to the Moving to Work Program, will
the cost be ``X-plus?'' Or can you do it with ``X,'' and do it
to the extent that we have had the successes called to our
attention?
Mr. Russ. Can I comment on this?
Mr. Green. Let--Ms. Warren, you are with the Chicago
Housing Authority. You have a Moving to Work Program, right?
Ms. Warren. Yes. I am sorry, I didn't realize you were
asking me.
I would say that the Program shouldn't increase because of
the MTW name, if you will. But, again, most agencies--
Mr. Green. Not the name--if I may?
Ms. Warren. Okay.
Mr. Green. Let me be clear now. We have a standard Program,
whatever this is--
Ms. Warren. Okay.
Mr. Green. --and it costs ``X'' dollars to implement it.
Just as Mr. Woods wants to move to Moving to Work, will it cost
now ``X-plus'' to do the kinds of things that Ms. Boldon has
called to our attention?
Ms. Warren. The way I would look at it is that--
Mr. Green. You know what? I appreciate you, Ms. Warren. I
don't mean to--maybe I am not clear enough for you.
Let's go to someone else who operates a housing authority.
Let's see--maybe I will have to go to Ms. Boldon.
Ms. Boldon, what are your thoughts?
Ms. Boldon. Actually, I think that because we become so
focused on finding partners who are, themselves, already
funded, it probably after time ends up costing less.
Mr. Green. Okay. But I want to know, with the funds that
are available, will it cost more for--let's just talk about the
Program rather than the source of funding. Will it cost ``X''
or ``X-plus?'' What I need to know is, does it cost more to
move from the standard Program to the Moving to Work Program
with the resources that you have called to our attention? Does
this cost more money?
Ms. Boldon. It costs ``X'' and then, in time, perhaps ``X-
minus.''
Mr. Green. So it does not cost any more to go to a Moving
to Work Program?
Ms. Boldon. No.
Mr. Green. Okay. That is your position.
Let's go now to Mr. Fischer.
Mr. Fischer. I think when you look at the budget data, it
is important to recognize that MTW Programs aren't free, that
when you hear about the things that MTW agencies are doing,
that these do cost money. And it has been funded in different
ways. Some of it is because MTW agencies receive, on average,
much more generous funding formulas and also because they shift
funds away from voucher assistance to other purposes. But those
are the sources that have funded these things--
Mr. Green. So your position is that it would cost ``X-
plus?''
Mr. Fischer. ``X-plus.''
Mr. Green. Okay.
Now, Ms. Warren, we are back to you again now. I am not
trying to pick on you. I genuinely want to know the answer. Is
it going to be ``X,'' some amount of money, plus some
additional money to do this wraparound that you talked about?
Will it cost more money to implement? Regardless of the source,
does it cost more?
Ms. Warren. It costs money. And what I--so I am really
struggling with your question because we receive a set amount
of money, and we set our priorities based on that money, and we
have prioritized our money to have wraparound services. And I
have worked at a housing authority that is not an MTW agency,
and without being an MTW agency, we couldn't afford to do what
we do.
Chairwoman Biggert. Okay.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Biggert. I am sorry. Your time has expired.
And I would like to ask unanimous consent to insert the
following material into the record: an October 3, 2011, letter
from the Columbus Metropolitan Housing Authority; an October
11, 2011, letter from HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan; an October
12, 2011, letter from the Public Housing Authorities Directors
Association; a second October 12, 2011, letter from the Public
Housing Authorities Directors Association; an October 13, 2011,
letter from the National Affordable Housing Management
Association; an October 13, 2011, letter from the Council of
Large Public Housing Authorities; a second October 13, 2011,
letter from the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities; an
October 13, 2011, letter from the Coalition of Housing
Industries; an October 13, 2011, letter from the National Multi
Housing Council and the National Apartment Association; and the
August 2010 report to Congress on the Moving to Work Program by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
We are required to conclude this hearing at 4 p.m., which
is why I was rushing through that, due to the joint session of
Congress that begins at 4 o'clock.
So I really would like to thank all of the witnesses for
being here. I know we could go on with more questions.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
And I would like to thank all of you so much. This has been
a really good panel. We really thank you so much for being
here. And it gives us a lot of information that we really need
to go forward with this bill. Thank you so much.
And, with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:00 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 13, 2011


