- FDIC OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING AND EVALUATING THE ROLE OF THE REGULATOR DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND TODAY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FDIC OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING
AND EVALUATING THE ROLE OF
THE REGULATOR DURING THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS AND TODAY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 26, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-34

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-872                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 26, 2011.................................................     1
Appendix:
May 26, 2011.................................................    45

WITNESSES
Thursday, May 26, 2011

Bair, Hon. Sheila C., Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC).............................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bair, Hon. Sheila C..........................................    46

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Written responses to questions submitted to Hon. Sheila C.
Bair.......................................................   107
Westmoreland, Hon. Lynn:
Written statement of Jeff Betsill............................   111
Written statement of Richard R. Harp.........................   114
Written statement of Tom Reese...............................   116

FDIC OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING
AND EVALUATING THE ROLE OF
THE REGULATOR DURING THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS AND TODAY

----------

Thursday, May 26, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:38 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Royce,
Manzullo, McHenry, Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy,
Canseco, Grimm, Fincher; Maloney, Baca, Scott, Velazquez, and
Carney.
Chairwoman Capito. First of all, I want to apologize for
the delay. We are having a little organizational issue here.
So this hearing will come to order. And I would like to
thank the members of the subcommittee and our witness, the
chairman of the FDIC, for coming today.
It sounds like we are going to have our first series of
votes around noon or 12:30, so we will hopefully have this
concluded by then, because we are going to be in a lengthy
series of votes. That is the plan for this hearing.
Today we are joined, as we know, by FDIC Chairman Sheila
Bair, who will be leaving her position in July of this year.
First of all, I would like to thank the chairman for her
dedicated service. I think one thing you could say is that it
hasn't been a dull 5 years for you. You have had a lot of
activity. And I thank you for your service to our country.
It is my hope that this will provide a forum for our
members to gain a better understanding of the role of the FDIC
in the financial crisis, the Corporation's new role in the
regulatory regime presented by the Dodd-Frank Act, and the
current state of FDIC-insured banks in general.
The recent passage of Dodd-Frank further enhances the role
of the FDIC in our Nation's regulatory structure, as they will
be charged with unwinding failed large financial institutions
as provided in the Orderly Liquidation Authority, or OLA.
I am interested to hear from Chairman Bair about the FDIC's
ability to balance these new powers with the traditional role
of a prudential regulator.
Insuring deposits is the FDIC's duty with which most people
are familiar. An unfortunate effect of the financial crisis has
been an increase in bank failures across the country. The rate
of bank failures has increased dramatically over the last 2
years, with 140 failing in 2009, and 157 in 2010.
These failures have significantly depleted the Deposit
Insurance Fund, known as the DIF, and the FDIC has been forced
to utilize emergency assessments on banks to replenish the
fund, as well as requiring banks to pre-pay premiums for the
years 2010 through 2012.
Despite these efforts, the Deposit Insurance Fund still has
significant challenges. I look forward to hearing from Chairman
Bair on this and the status of the Deposit Insurance Fund.
Although I fully understand the need to replenish the Fund,
I am concerned about the future needs for pre-payments of
premiums. This could have an unintended consequence, I believe,
of reducing the amount of funds available for lending.
The one common thing I hear from the community banks across
my district is that they feel hamstrung by the regulators in
their ability to lend. So we need to find a balance here to
ensure we have a safe and sound Deposit Fund, while not
encumbering lending by our institutions.
Regulatory burden is not limited to the assessments placed
on banks. I am very interested to learn what measures Federal
financial regulators are taking to ensure new regulations are
not duplicative with other agencies or existing regulations.
We need to ensure that new regulations provide enough
flexibility for small institutions to meet the needs of their
customers and not be encumbered by a one-size-fits-all
regulation geared to the largest institutions in our Nation. A
diverse financial institution is good for all market
participants.
I am very interested to hear from Chairman Bair how she
envisions the FDIC working with the newly created Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau on enforcement of consumer
protection regulation.
Finally, I would like to touch on the Orderly Liquidation
Authority that was granted to the FDIC by the Dodd-Frank Act. I
know that Chairman Bair sincerely believes that these new
powers effectively end too-big-to-fail. And I sincerely hope
that she is correct.
I still have reservations about this resolution authority
and would prefer to see a different form--and we have talked
about this several times--of resolution where there is
absolutely no taxpayer exposure.
Let us work together to ensure that the message is clear to
market participants: There will be no more government bailouts.
I would now, if she is ready, like to introduce the ranking
minority member, the gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney,
for the purpose of making an opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. I just want to join you, Madam Chairwoman, in
welcoming our distinguished and outstanding Chairman Bair. I
know that this is her last appearance before our committee.
And I wanted to express my deep appreciation for your
service, especially during the most recent financial crisis and
your attention to communities, to details, to Members of
Congress. I truly believe you have done an incredibly
outstanding job.
Thank you.
The FDIC was forced to take significant measures during the
crisis, and continues to act in the wake of the crisis to
ensure the health of our banking system.
Your involvement and leadership was critical during this
difficult time. We can now say that we are recovering from a
crisis, not a depression. And I think you played a meaningful
and significant role in our being able to say that.
This hearing is very timely because it is happening during
your last few weeks in your tenure at the FDIC, but also
because it is happening during a period of recovery, when we
have the benefit of hindsight.
During this most recent crisis, we saw 8.5 million jobs
lost and over $15 trillion in household wealth lost in America.
And although we are trending up in terms of job creation, it is
slower than any of us would like.
This crisis highlighted how important it is to have a sound
financial system in terms of the functioning of our overall
economy. We know of the fear that can set in on Main Street
when institutions on Wall Street are challenged and in some
cases failing.
And we know that overleveraged, overcapitalized financial
institutions contribute to the problem. Structured finance
products that were unregulated, opaque, and highly risky ran
rampant. And you, the regulators, did not have the tools you
needed to rein them in.
Congress changed that with the enactment of Dodd-Frank last
year. The law now gives the regulators the authority to wind
down failing institutions and more power to regulate the
institutions.
And we made significant changes that directly affect FDIC-
insured institutions. For example, we made the $250,000 deposit
insurance limit permanent to increase public confidence in
their financial institutions. And you played a meaningful role
in helping to make that happen.
We changed the formula for deposit insurance assessment, so
larger institutions that are engaged in riskier activities will
pay more than smaller institutions that pose less of a
potential threat to the FDIC.
And we increased the minimum level required in the DIF to
provide a better cushion in troubled economic times so that
smaller banks are protected from having to foot the bill if
there is a need to raise additional funds.
All of the actions we took in Dodd-Frank were meant to both
help prevent another economic crisis and to help soften the
blow when unanticipated things happen.
So I am looking forward to hearing from Chairman Bair,
because I know there are a number of new requirements on
regulators, how you believe the system has fared since the
crisis, what you see as challenges going forward, and to hear
any words of wisdom you have for us before you leave your
position.
I just want to underscore again how much I appreciate your
service. I am looking forward to the next chapter. I know you
will continue to make meaningful contributions to our great
country.
Thank you for your leadership and your service.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Royce for a minute-and-a-half
for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, Chairman Bair, I would just like to welcome you. Thank
you for your years of service. I have enjoyed our
conversations. As you know, I am still concerned that Dodd-
Frank hasn't ended too-big-to-fail, but has left us with a
number of massive institutions with a much lower cost of
capital, that are going to continue to expand at the expense of
their competitors because their borrowing costs are lower.
There is a 78-basis-point advantage, I think, according to
the studies that you have done.
And, at the end of the day, it is a system that enables the
use of government funds in resolving an institution, and relies
on the prudence of regulators during a crisis to avoid
overpayment to creditors and counterparties.
I think that the very fact that you have that lower cost of
capital just shows that it is human nature--that the way we set
this up; there is the presumption. We have created additional
moral hazard in the equation.
So while I hope that this committee works to eliminate the
Orderly Liquidation Authority in a move to a more objective
enhanced bankruptcy, I believe we can take steps in the near
term, in the meantime, to tighten up the resolution authority
and minimize some of the unintended, and frankly probably some
of the intended, consequences of this legislation.
I appreciate your efforts in this regard and certainly your
thoughts today, especially on this particular theme.
Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Luetkemeyer for a minute-and-
a-half for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Years ago in another life, when I was a bank examiner, our
mission was to work in cooperation with institutions to ensure
that they understood the regulations to which they are
subjected. There now seems to be a shift in the attitude of the
regulators. Instead of a partnership, I hear time and time
again that relationships between financial institutions and the
regulators are more like a game of ``gotcha.''
Like many of my colleagues, I have heard stories of
overzealous examiners who practice little or no regulatory
forbearance. One bank in my district has been profitable and
sound for many years but was put on the problem list at a
recent examination.
And it was noted to me that the examiner had been scolded
the previous day for having not done a good enough job in
predicting another bank that he had recently been in be put on
the list. That bank, by the way, since then has had no problems
since it was put on the problem list, similar to what it was
prior to that.
The bottom line is we need regulators to do their job. We
need the FDIC and other agencies to promote sound financial
practices and ensure consumer protections. No more, no less.
What we do not need are overzealous examiners who have no
regard for any sort of forbearance or upper management to stick
its head in the sand and refuse to recognize what is going on
in the field or in our economy.
I urge the FDIC to take a look at your practices,
communicate with your examiners, and work with institutions so
that together we can work to get our economy moving again.
I look forward to the discussion. I yield back.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Canseco, for 1 minute, for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for holding this
hearing on the oversight of a very important Federal agency.
My hope is that today's hearing addresses a simple yet very
important question: Did the Dodd-Frank Act institutionalize
too-big-to-fail or did it really level the playing field and
disallow further taxpayer bailout, as some politicians and
regulators have argued?
I am concerned that recent developments, including market
data showing borrowing costs are currently much lower at big
banks than small ones, and the continuing questions surrounding
the FDIC's new authority lead us to believe that too-big-to-
fail is still very much alive, and the taxpayers could yet
again be asked to pick up the bailout tab in the future.
I look forward to hearing from Chairman Bair today on this
important and ongoing issue.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize our newest member of the
subcommittee, and welcome him to the subcommittee, Mr. Fincher
from Tennessee, for 1 minute for the purpose of an opening
statement.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you, Chairman Bair, for coming today and taking
time for us.
It is a privilege to be here this morning to discuss the
issues and concerns regarding the FDIC and its role during the
financial crisis of 2008.
As the newest member of the Financial Services Committee, I
am pleased to have the opportunity to deal with, hopefully,
what are going to be things that are going to fix the problems
in the future.
I was not in Congress in 2008 when the financial crisis
roared across the communities of our district. However, as a
small business owner, I felt its effects firsthand as the
bottom dropped out of our economy.
One major principle that I did take away from those
terrible days was that access to credit is vital in helping our
small businesses function. Until our financial institutions, in
my opinion, are allowed to responsibly do their jobs again and
loan money to qualified borrowers, we are not going to see
businesses creating new jobs.
But too many times, Washington is not the answer. It is the
problem. We need to make sure that we do what is right.
Again, thank you for your service. And I look forward to
hearing what you have to say today.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Westmoreland, from Georgia,
for 2 minutes for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for calling
this hearing. I think this is a very important hearing.
I would like to throw out some numbers for Chairman Bair:
63, that is the number of banks that have failed in Georgia
since 2008; 12, that is the number of bank failures in Georgia
in just 2011; and 10, that is the number of banks headquartered
in my district that have failed since 2008, including on this
past Friday.
This number is much larger if you factor the banks that
have failed that only have branches in the district.
Chairman Bair, these numbers are unacceptable. Therefore,
today I will be introducing a bill directing the FDIC Inspector
General to study FDIC's loss share agreements, banks failing
due to paper losses, the lack of an ability to modify or work
out an application of the FDIC policies by examiners in the
field.
This study is not only vital for surviving banks. It is so
the FDIC and this committee can learn from the problems that
have faced Georgia over the last 3 years.
It is my hope that the FDIC and my colleagues will support
this bill so we can have an honest assessment of the FDIC's
handling of this bank crisis. Georgia is in a vicious cycle
right now, going the wrong way. Failures begot more write downs
and more failures.
I have borrowed a lot of money from banks in my business
career, and I know there will be more failures in Georgia this
year.
But I am here to say that when a Georgia bank fails, my
office will be here asking why, searching for answers, and
holding the appropriate regulators accountable.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our opening statements.
I would like to now introduce Ms. Sheila Bair, Chairman of
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
And, again, thank you for coming today.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SHEILA C. BAIR, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL
DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Ms. Bair. Chairman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on the state of the banking industry and the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and on future challenges
to our economic and financial stability.
Much has been written and said about the events associated
with the recent financial crisis and the factors that led up to
it. My written testimony summarizes four factors that I
consider the most important: excessive reliance on debt
financing; misaligned incentives in finance; regulatory
arbitrage; and an inadequate resolutions framework that allows
some financial companies to become too-big-to-fail.
The FDIC was created in 1933 in response to the most
serious financial crisis in American history to that time. Our
mission then, as now, is to promote financial stability and
public confidence in banking through bank supervision, deposit
insurance, and the orderly resolution of failed banking
institutions.
Working with our regulatory counterparts, the FDIC has
played an instrumental role in addressing the recent crisis.
Our actions have helped restore financial stability and pave
the way for economic recovery. My written testimony includes a
comprehensive account of those actions.
I am proud of all that the FDIC has accomplished during the
past 5 years. My greatest satisfaction lies in the knowledge
that through 368 failures, including the largest failures in
FDIC history, we kept pace with the depositors we were
established to protect.
We have maintained the FDIC's 78-year record of no losses
to any insured depositor. And we did it without borrowing a
penny from taxpayers.
But we still have important work to do. Our first task must
be to follow through on the Dodd-Frank Act reforms that will
end too-big-to-fail. At the height of the crisis, we lacked the
necessary tools to resolve large, complex financial companies
in an orderly manner and were forced to authorize government
bailouts that further insulated these companies from the market
discipline that applies to smaller banks and practically every
other private company.
Too-big-to-fail really represents state capitalism. Unless
reversed, the result is likely to be more concentration and
complexity in the financial system, more risk-taking at the
expense of the public, and in due time, another financial
crisis.
The Dodd-Frank Act provides the tools to restore market
discipline and put an end to the cycle of government bailouts
under too-big-to-fail. These tools will be effective and the
large systemically important institutions, or SIFIs, will be
resolvable in the next crisis only if regulators show the
courage today to fully exercise their authorities under the
law.
The success of this new resolution framework critically
depends on the ability to collect information about potential
SIFIs to determine whether they are, in fact, resolvable under
bankruptcy. It will also require the willingness of the FDIC
and the Federal Reserve Board to actively use their authority
to require structural changes at SIFIs that better align
business lines, legal entities, and funding well before a
crisis occurs.
Unless organizations are rationalized and simplified in
advance, there is a real danger that their complexity could
make a SIFI resolution far more costly and more difficult than
it needs to be.
These authorities are being shaped now in the interagency
rulemaking process. If properly implemented, they can make our
financial system more stable by restoring market discipline to
systemically important institutions.
But if we fail to follow through on these measures now,
when market conditions are relatively calm, we will have no
hope of preventing bailouts in the next crisis.
My testimony describes the role played by excessive
leverage among both banks and non-bank financial companies in
bringing the crisis about. Strong capital standards are of
fundamental importance in maintaining a safe and sound banking
system that supports economic growth.
Supervisory processes will always lag innovation and risk-
taking to some extent. And restrictions on activities can be
difficult to define and enforce. Hard and fast objective
capital standards, on the other hand, are easier for
supervisors to enforce and provide an additional cushion to
absorb losses when mistakes are inevitably made.
Skeptics argue that requiring banks to hold more capital
will raise the cost of credit and impair economic performance.
But the experience of the crisis shows that the social costs of
debt financing are extremely high in such a downturn, and that
the lack of an adequate capital cushion makes lending highly
procyclical.
While there will always be business cycles, the massive
deleveraging which occurred during the financial crisis led to
the most severe downturn since the Great Depression.
Loans and leases held by FDIC-insured institutions alone
have declined by nearly $750 billion from peak levels, while
unused loan commitments have declined by $2.5 trillion.
Trillions more in capital flows were lost with the collapse of
the securitization market and other shadow providers of credit.
I would also like to highlight the urgent need for Congress
and the Administration to address the rapid growth in U.S.
Government debt, which has doubled in just the past 7 years.
Financial stability critically depends on public investor
confidence, which can never be taken for granted.
There is no greater threat to our future economic security
and financial stability than an inability to control the size
of U.S. Government debt.
But as strongly as I feel about this issue, I feel just as
strongly that a technical default on U.S. Government
obligations would prove to be calamitous.
Any signal that policymakers might fail to make good on
these obligations risks permanently destroying the inviolable
trust that investors have placed in our Nation for more than 2
centuries.
I urge Congress to reaffirm this trust by committing to a
responsible increase in the debt ceiling.
As I conclude, I would like to share with you one of the
central lessons I have drawn from my experience as FDIC
chairman. It is that the most important attribute of effective
regulation is the courage to stand firm against weak practices
and excessive risk-taking in the good times.
It is during a period of prosperity that the seeds of
crisis are sown. It is then that overwhelming pressure is
placed on regulators to relax capital standards, to permit
riskier loan products, and to allow higher concentrations of
risk both on and off balance sheets.
The history of the crisis shows many examples when
regulators acted too late or with too little conviction, when
they failed to use authorities they already had or failed to
ask for the authorities they needed to fulfill their mission.
As the crisis developed, many in the regulatory community were
too slow to acknowledge the danger and remained behind the
curve in addressing it.
The fact is that regulators are never going to be popular
or glamorous, whether they act in a timely manner to forestall
a crisis or fail to act and allow it to take place. The best
they can hope to achieve is the knowledge that they exercised
the statutory authority entrusted to them in good faith and to
its fullest effect in the interests of financial stability and
the broader economy.
Thank you very much. I would be happy to answer your
questions now.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Bair can be found on
page 46 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Chairman Bair.
We will now begin the questioning portion of the hearing.
And I will begin my 5 minutes of questioning.
We have had ongoing discussions with you and your staff
concerning the relationship of the FDIC and the CFPB for
consumer protection. It is my understanding that the FDIC just
recently announced a new consumer division within the
Corporation.
I am interested in how that is going to work in relation to
CFPB. If the CFPB comes down with regulations understanding
that smaller institutions are exempted out in theory, do you
envision a consumer protection within the FDIC that then takes
the regulations that come from the CFPB and modifies them for
the other institutions?
There has to be some coordination here. Are we creating a
two-tiered system here?
Ms. Bair. Under the statute, for institutions with assets
less than $10 billion, the supervision and enforcement remains
with the primary banking regulators.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Ms. Bair. And we have most of the smaller banks. So the
lion's share of our institutions stay with us in terms of
examination and enforcement of rules.
We have never had the authority to write consumer rules.
That authority has been with the Federal Reserve. And now most
of that is being transferred to the CFPB. So this coordination
issue for us is not new. We have never had the ability to write
the rules. The Fed has written the rules.
We have coordinated with them. We provide input to them and
comment, and obviously, examine and enforce the rules that they
promulgate.
The CFPB Director, when that person is installed, will be
on the FDIC board. And I think that will help assure
coordination, appropriately so.
I am hoping that this will help also increase the
understanding of the CFBP's Director about broader banking
regulatory issues on the safety and soundness side, some of the
concerns of the FDIC, and our perspective on the various issues
that we have to deal with on a day-to-day basis.
In terms of creating the new division, I do want to
emphasize that we did not create new examination staff.
Actually, the examination staff reporting structures in the
regions stay the same.
This is an organizational change. There were a very few
additional administrative staff to support the organizational
separation of consumer and depositor protection from risk
management. It was really more to make sure that the FDIC had
an appropriate policy focus on consumer protection.
And I would say the focus is for more effective consumer
regulation.
I am sensitive to the concerns of community banks that have
been expressed, that perhaps sometimes under consumer
compliance, as well as risk management, there has been more of
a focus than there should be on the kind of ``gotcha''
violations that other members expressed concern about, such as
reporting violations or what have you.
We have tried to refocus the examination force on those
areas where there is actually consumer harm. And I think that
has been a good outcome of this new policy-level focus of the
FDIC on consumers.
This will be a way for us to have a better focus on
consumer protection, making consumer protection supervision
more effective as applied to banks, and enabling better
coordination with the new consumer agency, which, again, I
think will have somewhat of an advantage because the Director
of the CFPB eventually will be on our board.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay. I want to go to another question
quickly. But it sounds like the structure that is being enacted
while these institutions under $10 billion are exempted--it
sounds as though they really aren't going to be exempted, which
is their fear, because--or not their fear, their fear of the
unknown more than anything else--because it will be coordinated
through your institution.
Ms. Bair. That is right. The exemption is just with regard
to examination and enforcement. It is not really an exemption.
It preserves what we have always done. The primary banking
regulator will be the entity that examines and enforces for
compliance with consumer rules.
The consumer agency now has rule-writing for all
institutions. So whatever rules they write, those will apply to
all institutions.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Ms. Bair. They can, on their own, exempt small banks. I
have spoken in favor of a two-tiered regulatory structure. I
think in certain areas it is appropriate. We will have an
ability to engage and have input with the new consumer agency
because eventually that person will be on our board as well.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay. Over the last several years, there
has been increasing consolidation of the banking industry.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Chairwoman Capito. Some of the opening statements talked
about the advantages that the larger institutions have. The
smaller banks, the smaller institutions and community banks are
concerned about being able to staff the regulatory issues, the
legal issues that they now see in front of them because of
Dodd-Frank.
How do you see this playing out, the consolidation? Is this
a concern for you? And I think it is a concern for, really,
Main Street America.
Ms. Bair. Right, right. It is a concern. We have a
Community Banking Advisory Committee. And we have talked with
them a lot about this.
I think on the process side, the Dodd-Frank Act did have
some important reforms for community banks. Certainly, raising
the deposit insurance limit to $250,000 had been long advocated
by community banks and will help them address funding
disparities by having a higher deposit insurance limit.
Also, the change in our assessment base is going to
probably save them about $4 billion in assessments over a
period of time in assessment fees. So there were some process
improvements in the Dodd-Frank Act that will benefit community
banks..
However, there are some concerns with the Durbin amendment.
And I commend you on your leadership on that issue.
We are trying very hard to make sure that the law is
implemented as Congress intended, which was to insulate
community banks from the lion's share of the reforms that
really were targeted at larger institutions. And we will
continue that focus.
We are obviously very concerned about the differentials in
funding costs as well. That existed pre-crisis. It has existed
for far too long.
The rules need implementation. We will talk more about that
later. Title II can help get these funding costs up for large
banks, as will higher capital requirements.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for holding this hearing and
giving us this opportunity to be with Sheila Bair one last
time.
I would like to ask you to respond to what critics have
claimed, that the new Orderly Liquidation Authority promotes
bailouts because it allows the FDIC to pay creditors 100 cents
on the dollar.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mrs. Maloney. And isn't it true that this is erroneous in
light of the fact that the law requires the FDIC to ensure that
creditors bear losses?
Ms. Bair. That is right.
Mrs. Maloney. And secondly, the FDIC's authority to pay
creditors more than they would have received in a liquidation
bankruptcy is very limited and is subject to the requirement
that creditors bear losses.
So your comments, please, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Bair. Thank you.
I think it is important and we clearly have a job ahead of
us in terms of educating folks about our process and assuring
them that it is every bit as harsh as bankruptcy. It is
basically the same creditor priority that you see in
bankruptcy.
The statute limits our ability very narrowly to
differentiate among creditors in a way that is consistent with
our traditional receivership powers.
And basically, that is two situations. First, to continue
with essential operations--things like paying the IT folks to
keep IT services going; paying your security people; and paying
the employees. That is also recognized in bankruptcy.
The second situation relates to maximizing value, and is
simply a mathematical determination. We see this in bank
resolutions. Frequently when we bid out a bank, the potential
acquirers will pay us a premium to cover all insured and
uninsured deposits, because it impairs franchise value to
impose losses on their larger uninsured depositors.
So it actually maximizes our recoveries to cover the
uninsured deposits and sell all the deposits to the acquirer,
as opposed to imposing a loss on those uninsured depositors,
because we are making more money with the premium that the
acquirer pays.
That is an example where you would maximize value by
differentiating. And again, that is pretty much a mathematical
formula. To emphasize it more, we have said in an interim final
rulemaking that we don't think there would ever be any
situation where a longer-term creditor--that is one longer than
a year--would either maximize value or be necessary for
essential operations.
And for unsecured creditors with shorter terms, they are
probably going to take losses as well. But again, they would
have to meet these narrow tests.
We have tried very hard to assure people that the losses
imposed on creditors will be every bit as harsh as it is in
bankruptcy. The 97 cents on the dollar issue, I think that
comes from an analysis that our staff did on the Lehman
bankruptcy and how it might have been resolved under Title II.
So the 97 cents was simply a reflection of what we think
the recoveries would be for the senior debt holders based on
the capital cushions and subordinated debt cushions that
existed in Lehman at the time of its failure, and our
prediction of what the losses would have been on their bad
assets.
The recovery in Lehman, as it would be with any other Title
II resolution, will be driven by the extent of losses and the
amount of equity and subordinated debt under their senior debt
holders.
But I would say, as a matter of market discipline, if
senior debt holders want to protect themselves, they should
look at the equity capitalization levels and the sub-debt below
them.
Mrs. Maloney. To put it in a framework that is helpful to
us, could you explain the extent to which having the Orderly
Liquidation Authority during the financial crisis could have
prevented bailouts and mitigated systemic effects?
Ms. Bair. It would have. We have the ability, if you have
time, and there was a lot of time with Lehman. There were
months of alarm signals before the institution finally failed.
Firstly, under the Dodd-Frank Act, all systemic entities,
including all bank holding companies above $50 billion, are
required to have resolution plans on file with us. So we we
will have a blueprint on resolvability well before any time
that they would get into trouble.
The bankruptcy trustee and others who have analyzed the
Lehman bankruptcy have all spoken to the need for advanced
planning to resolve these larger complex financial
institutions. So there would have been a game plan in place.
We would have been in the institution months in advance. We
anticipate having an ongoing presence in these large SIFIs,
just as we do with larger bank holding companies now.
I think just the fact that there was a resolution process
that would have imposed losses on shareholders and creditors,
would have replaced the board, and would have replaced
management, that, in and of itself, would have been a strong
incentive for the leadership of Lehman to right their own ship
and go out and sell themselves at a reasonable price, which
they were unwilling to do.
We see this all the time with banks. Banks know that if
they fail and they go into our process, their shareholders are
wiped out; their unsecured creditors are wiped out; their
boards are gone; and their executives lose their jobs.
It is a powerful incentive to take care of yourself. About
25 percent of banks that are on our projected failure list end
up not failing because they go out and they recapitalize. They
are very motivated. And I think that would be an important
factor that we didn't have during the crisis.
It also, frankly, provides us a defense against blackmail,
right? During the crisis, a lot of institutions were coming in
and saying, ``You know, if we go down, you are going to have
all these problems.'' And there was no orderly process to put
them into.
Now, we have a process. Even if it is an emergency
situation, we can put them into a bridge and provide temporary
liquidity support, but their shareholders and unsecured
creditors are all exposed to loss and their boards are gone.
And actually under the Dodd-Frank Act, there is a claw-back of
up to 2 years of compensation for management if you have a
failed entity.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Sorry.
Ms. Bair. There are just a lot of tools that we would have
in the future that we didn't have going into the crisis.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Renacci?
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you, Chairman Bair, for being here.
I want to focus today on the composition of your board of
directors, and under Dodd-Frank the new composition, which
includes the Director of the CFPB being one of the members on
your board.
Coming from the private sector and the business sector and
sitting on many boards, I was always concerned. And I think the
setup of all boards, there was always concern about apparent,
perceived, direct, indirect conflict of interest.
Knowing that you are going to have to work on a regular
basis with one of the individuals who would be the Director of
the CFPB, I am a little concerned that there is a conflict of
interest, especially when it comes to your seat on the FSOC,
basically.
Because as we know right now, FSOC can review, stay, and
block a CFPB rule, but it takes two-thirds to do that.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. I know my colleague, Mr. Duffy, introduced
some legislation last week or the week before to try and talk a
little bit about this.
But when you have to work with somebody on your board on a
regular basis, and then you go over to FSOC and you have a
vote, and it takes today 7 out of 10 to block a rule by the
Director who sits on your board--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. --and that person also has a vote out of the
10, and you would have a vote out of the 10, you start to limit
down the ability to really have oversight by using the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. So my concern is, when you have that kind of
conflict of interest, is it good policy? Is it good procedure?
I have actually drafted a bill that I am going to introduce
next week which would simply replace the Director of the CFPB
with the Chairman of the Fed.
And the reason I am doing that is because I believe we need
to focus on safety and soundness, and get any perceived
conflict of interest out of the way.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. I just want to hear your thoughts on that
potential conflict of interest.
Ms. Bair. I think it is a good question. I think a lot of
people had suggestions during the consideration of Dodd-Frank
about who should replace the OTS on the FDIC's Board, and the
Fed was one option. I was supportive of that. I said I would
like some reciprocity. I think that would be helpful.
The advantage and the argument for putting the consumer
bureau head on the FDIC Board is that perhaps it might help
sensitize that person to some of the safety and soundness
issues that are associated with deposit insurance and the
intersection with consumer protections.
Frankly, there is a close connection. They are really two
sides of the same coin. To the extent people were worried about
the consumer bureau head not being aware of the larger context
of bank regulation, it might help educate that person to have
them on the FDIC Board. That is the argument for it.
Again, we wouldn't mind some reciprocity. If you go to a
commission structure for the CFPB, that might be a nice thing
to have as well.
But, we are fine with it. Again, earlier iterations did
have the Fed on the Board. We were fine with that, too. We
would have liked some reciprocity if that was the structure.
But in terms of the conflict, I would also point out,
though, that FSOC actually has the ability to intercede with
pretty much all the regulators, if they think one of the
regulators is doing something that could create systemic risk
or is not appropriately addressing systemic risk.
So arguably, there could be a conflict for the OCC for
instance, as well. If the OCC wasn't doing as good a job as
they should in regulating large banks, and the FSOC was going
to intervene in that, I guess you could make the same argument
there.
So these are difficult questions. And I think we can
certainly live with what is in the law right now.
Mr. Renacci. It is interesting, as you mentioned, you would
bring on that Director so they can be briefing on the safety
and soundness aspect.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. And I read the CFPB's mission statement
yesterday, and out of the 764 words, there is no talk about
safety or soundness in their mission, which is--
Ms. Bair. A safe and sound bank--a bank that doesn't fail--
is the best bank for customers. As good a job as we do with
protecting depositors, it is always better to avoid a failure.
Similarly, consumer abuses eventually, as we saw with the
mortgages, can have profound safety and soundness
ramifications, too. So there really needs to be a lot of cross-
communication and collaboration on this. I couldn't agree more.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
In regard to the Orderly Liquidation Authority, there have
been a number of examples. And I have Continental Illinois
Bank, $400 billion in assets, 57 offices in 14 States. It took
7 years to resolve at a cost of $1 billion to the fund.
The Bank of Clark County, Washington, $440 million in
assets, 50 bank employees, a 3-day weekend to resolve.
Citigroup, $1.9 trillion in assets, the time, the energy,
the staff that you needed--and I know I am running out of time,
but maybe I can catch you on the second round.
I would like to find out how you believe that the manpower,
time, and strain on the fund will take to wind down simple
institutions, and how you will be able to be able to exercise
authority over much larger institutions.
So I will yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. We will give you lots of time to think
about that.
Mr. Baca, from California, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baca. Thank you, Ms. Blair, for being here.
I understand that the FDIC has issued an internal financial
final report and proposed rule to implement an Orderly
Liquidation Authority.
Could you briefly discuss these rules, particularly to the
extent to which they would align an orderly liquidization
process without a bankruptcy or a failed bank resolution, and
ensure that creditors bear losses and the institution itself
does not survive?
Ms. Bair. The statute is very clear: It bans bailouts. And
the claims priority that we follow is pretty much the same
claims priority that is followed in bankruptcy.
To the extent the government would need to provide
liquidity support to keep the institution operational as it is
broken up and sold off, those are administrative expenses that
are paid off the top back to the government before any other
expenses are paid.
So it really is a process that is every bit as harsh as
bankruptcy. It resembles bankruptcy in the claims priority. And
I think we need to reassure folks on that.
The purpose of this was to end too-big-to-fail, not to
reinforce it. We have engaged with the rating agencies on this.
Some have decided to continue or have sought comment on whether
they should continue to have a bump up for large institutions.
And we say to them: read the statute. The statute prohibits
bailouts. They actually think the Congress is going to do it.
They just can't imagine that the Congress, even if the
regulators can't, that the Congress would not step in.
So I know you don't want to do that. I know you don't want
to face the Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve coming up and asking for $700 billion to do a
lot of things that none of us like to do.
The tools are there to require credible resolution plans.
The tools are there to require structural changes as well as
downsizing if they cannot come up with a plan that shows that
they can be resolved in an orderly way.
Mr. Baca. But do you think they will downsize?
Ms. Bair. I think some of them may need to. I think some of
them are already.
Mr. Baca. And who will enforce that?
Ms. Bair. It is jointly with the Fed and the FDIC. And the
FSOC as a group can also, with a supermajority vote, require a
divestiture if that is necessary.
Mr. Baca. It seems that many people overlook or
underestimate the importance of the rapid resolution or living
will requirement, which the Feds and the FDIC jointly are in
process of implementing.
Could you please discuss the importance of a living will,
both as an ongoing regulatory tool that will help ensure
appropriate risk management and that mitigate against failure
of large complex financial institutions as a planning took that
will make disorderly resolutions less likely and hopefully a
rare event at large and financial failures.
Ms. Bair. It is a statutory requirement jointly of the Fed
and the FDIC. It requires that the institutions have plans in
place that can show the orderly resolution through a bankruptcy
process. It is a very high standard.
For several institutions, this is going to require some
structural changes. I think they have thousands of legal
entities that have been accumulated over the years, through
acquisition activity or what have you, that they just never
bothered to rationalize.
And so getting their business operations aligned with their
legal structure--so that if they start to fail, there is a
strategy to be able to break them up and market them in
marketable-size pieces--is going to be a key part of this.
I think for those with international operations, there may
be some level of subsidiarization that is required. That is
that they need to separate themselves as a separate legal
entity in certain foreign jurisdictions, perhaps where they
have significant business activities.
There are several banks, though, in particular Santander
and HSBC, that already operate with a subsidiarization model,
and they do so quite profitably.
So it may not be required for all of them, but I think it
is the kind of thing that we need to look at and may be
required for some if they can't otherwise show that they could
be resolved on an orderly way even in an international context.
Mr. Baca. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairman Bair, recently the FDIC completed a pilot program
on small dollar loans and had a couple of different programs,
one for under $1,000, and another one for under $2,500. Can you
just recap some of your findings on that?
Ms. Bair. Our small dollar loan pilot program?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes, on your pilot program.
Ms. Bair. We were very pleased. It was very successful. The
delinquency rates were a little bit higher than they are for
other forms of lending. But the default rates and losses were
very much in line.
The banks that participated in the pilot were very pleased
and gave us the information, which we have, in turn, made more
broadly available to banks in general.
There is a particular need for small dollar credit right
now. The options for a lot of consumers are not good. They can
be very high cost.
Having proven models to provide reasonably priced small
dollar lending was important to us. We were very pleased, as
well as the banks, with their success.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. What interest rate did you see on
the small dollar loans actually worked?
Ms. Bair. What industry?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes, what interest rate?
Ms. Bair. These were consumer loans. Oh, interest rate. I
am sorry.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Interest rate, yes. What interest rate
did--
Ms. Bair. They were all below 36 percent, which is pretty
high. We have guidance out that says that we will actually give
CRA credit for those who can offer this--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Did they think they could make any money
at that?
Ms. Bair. Sorry?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Did they think that they could make any
money at that?
Ms. Bair. They did make money. Most of them were
significantly lower than 36 percent, usually around 18, 16, 12
percent. And they did make money, because they all--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. My information says that after 2 years,
the FDIC, according to your report, found that the interest
rate cap was not profitable for the participating bank.
Ms. Bair. Was not what? I am sorry.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I said that after 2 years, the FDIC
program--my information says that after 2 years, your pilot
program showed that the interest rate cap was not profitable
for participating banks.
Ms. Bair. There was no interest rate cap. There is guidance
that says for the pilot, we wanted them to stay below 36
percent. But that is a voluntary program.
And, I am sorry, Congressman. If we could take a look at
the document you are looking at, because those were profitable.
And they were significantly below 36 percent.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. We will work out the differences on
that later. Thank you.
Ms. Bair. Sure.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. With regards to the insurance fund, how
solid are we right now?
Ms. Bair. We are still in negative territory, but we should
be in positive territory by June 30th, by the end of the second
quarter.
The fund at the end of the first quarter was a negative $1
billion. That is up from a trough of negative $20.9 billion in
2009.
So it is improving. That represents our equity position,
not our cash position. Our cash position is a positive $45
billion.
But the fund's equity position should be in positive
territory by the end of the second quarter.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you anticipate any future assessments--
Ms. Bair. No.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. --to make up the difference in that--
Ms. Bair. No. No. As a matter of fact, we had a scheduled 3
basis point increase that we did not impose because the
industry is recovering and our projected losses are going down.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. With regards to interchange fees,
the other day we had Chairman Bernanke in front of us and asked
him a question, whenever your regulators go in and you take a
look at a bank, and they have to chalk off 13 percent of their
income, are you going to forget about that lost income? Or are
you going to require them to make that up somewhere?
And he really had no answer to that.
Ms. Bair. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. He said, well, it is up to the bank to
decide how they want to do that, but we certainly want to see
them to continue to be capitalized.
Yes, that is true. But his regulation is going to have--
when he comes up with his interchange fee regulation, it is
going to have a dramatic impact on the bottom line for a lot of
the institutions.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What are your thoughts on that?
Ms. Bair. We are concerned about it. In fairness to the
Fed, they are implementing a provision that was in the Dodd-
Frank Act.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right.
Ms. Bair. --and doing it as they see is consistent with the
statute.
We are very concerned about it, especially for the
community bank impact. The statute specifically says, community
banks under $10 billion in assets are supposed to not be
subject to this cap.
As a practical matter, can you really protect them,
particularly if network providers are not required to take the
higher fees they could continue to charge.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right.
Ms. Bair. We also think the 12 cents is too low. We filed a
comment letter which I am happy to share with you. We think
they should take anti-fraud measures into account. And that can
be a significant expense.
We also think they should do more to take in the
incremental costs of small banks that provide for debit card
usage. I think the cost structure they considered was mainly
for the large institutions. Obviously, their incremental costs
are less than the smaller banks.
I don't know how they are going to come out with it. I
think Congress may or may not still take some more time with
this. If they don't, I am hoping that if this goes final, that
12 cent-limit is raised, and that they can find a legal
justification for requiring that networks accept two-tier
pricing to protect the smaller banks.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. And just a comment: I
appreciate your comment on the capital requirements.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think that is important, even during
good times, to retain adequate level of capital--
Ms. Bair. That is right.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. My dad told me that a long time ago. He
lived through the Depression. And he lived to be able to
explain why it was a good thing and show here with this last
crisis why it actually worked.
Thank you very much for your comment.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott, from Georgia?
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Chairman Bair, I just want to first of all start off by
thanking you for the excellent service you have done as the
Chairman of the FDIC, and especially for responding to me. Each
time I call your office, you get right on the phone and talk
with me and help us to handle things.
As you know, my State of Georgia has had just a plethora of
very serious problems. Unfortunately, we have led the Nation in
bank closures.
But I want to ask you this first question: A number of
banks, community banks especially, in my State of Georgia, are
under regulatory orders from the FDIC. And I understand these
orders are driven primarily by the performance of their loan
portfolios and capital levels.
These regulatory orders often require a bank to reduce
their concentration in real estate loans to some artificial
level. And that is forcing them to not renew even performing
loans for some borrowers. That seems to hurt everyone,
especially in States like Georgia that are so centered on real
estate.
The borrower has to find a new bank, which we know is
difficult in these economic times, while the bank loses a
performing loan.
Surely there is a better way to enforce FDIC rules and
regulations so that they don't hurt the very consumers that
they are designed to protect and the banks that they are
designed to oversee.
What might you say would be a better way?
Ms. Bair. Congressman, thank you for asking that question,
because I think our policies are not consistent with what you
are being told.
And, again, I will say this to all members here: If there
are specific examples where you feel that our policies are not
being applied by our examiners, I personally want to know about
it.
I do stay engaged with the examiners. I do conference
calls. I visit the regions. I cannot tell you how focused I
personally have been on this.
And the rule is quite simply this: if the loan is
performing, if you have a creditworthy borrower with cash flow
to keep making payments on that loan, it doesn't matter what
the collateral is. If the loan is a good loan, it doesn't need
to be written down, no additional reserves, nothing, it is a
fine loan.
If you are just refinancing the unpaid principal, and you
have a creditworthy borrower who can continue to make payments,
you don't have to write down that loan, even if the collateral
has declined in value.
If you are extending new credit, new money, yes, the bank
needs to go make an appraisal of the collateral, because you
are expending new money. That is just a basic tenet of banking.
But regarding existing loans or refinancing of existing
loans, if the borrower is creditworthy and can make the
payments, you do not have to do an appraisal and you do not
have to do a write-down.
That is the rule. I went through this again yesterday as
part of my hearing prep because I hear this a lot. And it is
very frustrating to me.
And, again, if you have specific examples, I do want to
know about it.
Mr. Scott. Okay, let me just ask you specifically then,
what should my banks in Georgia do? You are saying that is not
the way it should be. They are saying it is the way it is. So
what should they do?
Ms. Bair. They could call me directly. Or, we have an
Ombudsman that is set up as a confidential process. So, they
can do it on a confidential basis.
Also, they can call Sandra Thompson, the head of our
Division of Risk Management.
Mr. Scott. Who was that again, please?
Ms. Bair. Her name is Sandra Thompson. She is the head of
our Division of Risk Management.
There are any number of avenues to bring this to our
attention. We do want to know about it.
I have found a couple of cases where policies were
misapplied, and we corrected it very quickly.
I will tell you, though, other times when we drilled down,
what we found was that the borrower really did have some
problems. There may be a different perception about what a
creditworthy borrower is, and sometimes that can be a judgment
call.
We individually review every single allegation. I promise
you that.
Mr. Scott. Right. Thank you very much.
Just last week, two more banks failed in my home State of
Georgia: First Choice Community Bank; and Park Avenue Bank. And
this brings the number of banks that have closed this year to
10, which is by far the most of any other State.
And unfortunately this is not unusual news, as banks in
Georgia continue to struggle.
Can you tell me what, in your opinion, makes small banks
especially vulnerable to closure?
Ms. Bair. Early on, we had a lot of failures of banks that
had grown too fast. They had taken deposits and grown their
balance sheets very quickly, had not adhered to good
underwriting, and had clearly made a lot of out-of-area
lending, which is something that generally is not good, unless
you very carefully manage that exposure.
Later, as we progressed into economically troubled times,
more problems arose from weaknesses in risk management. But,
they were succumbing to economic conditions as well.
If the losses are mounting and the capital is insufficient
to curb those losses and if they can't raise additional
capital, there is not a lot we can do about it. Under the
statute, we have a prompt corrective action process that we
follow. It is fairly rigid about when the banks--
Mr. Scott. Very quickly, are there any specific things you
could say right now that the FDIC can do to assist them?
Ms. Bair. I think we do try to work with them. I know we
have a different role than they do. But it is not a
confrontational role, and we don't want that.
We tell our examiners they need to understand what is going
on in the bank. They need to talk to management. They need to
listen to management.
They must exercise their own independent judgment about the
health and safety of that bank. But that should be informed by
robust conversations with the bank management and the board.
And we do that.
Certainly, anything that we can do with an appropriate
balance to help them recapitalize is in our interest. We don't
want these banks to fail. It costs us money every time it
happens.
But, nonetheless, if they can't raise their capital and the
losses are mounting, if you delay the closing of the bank for a
long time, the losses will go even higher. That was the lesson
learned during the S&L crisis, and which is why we have prompt
corrective action now, and why we follow it.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Bair.
And thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for your generosity of
time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Westmoreland, from Georgia, 5 minutes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Bair, in a meeting I had 2 weeks ago with your staff,
they informed me that it is unlikely that the FDIC will wind
down the use of loss share agreements in Georgia.
Setting aside my strenuous objection to this, I have
serious concerns about the loss-share agreements that will
begin to mature in 2 years. As the stop-date of a loss-share
agreement approaches, I have serious concerns that the banks
with these agreements will begin to rapidly sell off assets to
take advantage of the agreement.
This could lead to yet another downturn in real estate and
make it harder for people to obtain loans.
What is the FDIC's plan for these maturities of loss-share
agreements?
Ms. Bair. I am not sure where you got this 2-year figure.
In practice, the terms of the loss-share agreements generally
coincide with the tenure of the loans.
But there is no cut-off point in 2 years where there is no
longer any loss-share and it is going to get dumped on the
market. That is not how it works.
Actually, we think that the loss-share prevented a lot of
property going onto the market, because it facilitated our
ability to sell the whole bank, with the deposits and the
assets, to another insured depository institution. If we had
not provided loss-share, the bank probably wouldn't have taken
the assets.
We would have had to sell it on the open market at an
extreme liquidation discount, or held it ourselves and managed
it, which is inefficient and costly and difficult.
So actually, I think the loss-share has helped keep a lot
of assets in the hands of other, better-capitalized, stronger
depository institutions. It has kept the property off the
market. Also, I want to emphasize that we have very stringent
rules in loss-share agreements about loss mitigation.
If a loan restructuring will have greater value than a
foreclosure, we want the loan restructured. We have very
specific rules about that. And we audit that. If they don't do
that, they can lose their loss-share payment.
Mr. Westmoreland. You all might want to send some folks out
with your regulators who actually go out and do the work in the
field, and see where the disconnect is. There is certainly--
Ms. Bair. I would. I do hear this. And again, if you have
some specific examples, we would love to hear them--
Mr. Westmoreland. The problem with giving examples is these
banks are afraid to death of retaliation.
Ms. Bair. Yes.
Mr. Westmoreland. And so we would be glad to give you
examples, but trying to get some of these guys to come
forward--I have been trying to do it for a long time now, and
they are--I am being serious. They are desperately afraid of
retaliation.
And if you all think loss-share agreements are helping--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Westmoreland. --then that could be the problem, because
they are not.
But let me ask before--and I don't want to cut you off, but
I do want to ask you one other question.
Despite the occasional lip service that some of these
regulators give for talking about they want these community
banks to continue to be able to provide service to small
business and local customers, the examiners continue to second-
guess bank management policies and downgrade loans based not on
the current status of the loan. In other words, some of these
loans are performing loans.
But based on a scenario where there is no economic
recovery, and virtually every examination ends with significant
downgrades not supported by professional outside loan review or
by independent accountants, if the FDIC is serious about
allowing banks to serve their customers, why are the banks
being second-guessed on even the best-documented loans?
And I don't understand how a bank can get all ``A's'' on a
report card, and 6 months later get all ``F's'' and do
everything but call the board members crooks.
Ms. Bair. Again, it is hard to respond without knowing what
the facts would be in the individual case. I would say that if
the loan is performing, if the borrower has success, and the
loan continues to perform, it is a good loan, even if the
collateral has gone down in value. Even if it needs to be
refinanced, it is a good loan.
Again, if you have examples, I do want to know about them.
I will personally assure the banker that there will not be any
retribution by bringing this to our attention.
So I really don't know what else I can say. I think
examiners do need to exercise independence of judgment. They
need to listen to bank management, and understand their
reasoning. But bank managers are not always right. There have
been some big mistakes.
I think we are, hopefully, for the most part, through this.
But early in this crisis, we did have a lot of very dramatic
downgrades from banks that had very good supervisory ratings to
ones that went to troubled status. And for that reason, we are
putting more of an emphasis on what we call ``forward-looking
CAMELS'' and asking banks to stress their portfolios and stress
conditions.
But that is just from a risk-management perspective. That
doesn't mean if the economy tanks unexpectedly that they have
to start holding more capital now. No, we just want them to be
prepared and think through all the scenarios.
Mr. Westmoreland. And listen, I appreciate those comments.
But I really hope that some of your senior management, or
whatever, can go into some of these banks. And as my colleague
from Georgia mentioned, we have a tremendous amount of them
that are either under consent orders, cease-and-desist, on the
problem bank list, that is still to come.
And this is sucking wealth out of these communities.
And the loss-share agreement and the immediate write-down
is doing a reverse situation on our local economies. It is
killing us. We need some help.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for your generosity.
Ms. Bair. If I could just indulge the Chair, I am actually
going to be in Atlanta soon. I will go you one further. I am
happy to go to your district and meet with a group of bankers
personally if that would be helpful to you.
Mr. Westmoreland. I may take you up on that.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Carney, from Delaware, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you for being here today, Chairman Bair.
I would just like to add my voice to those who have
expressed concern about banks being told that they had to do
away with performing loans and creditworthy borrowers not
getting access to that. So I would like to take you up on your
offer to entertain those kinds of referrals and that
discussion.
I have heard it a number of times from the borrowers and
from the banks themselves.
I would just like to touch on and follow up on a couple of
questions. And the first one is you addressed the issue of
bailouts of banks and what the tools are that you have today
that you didn't have under Dodd-Frank.
And the question really is, are you better positioned
today? Are the regulators better positioned today to prevent
government bailouts of those troubled financial institutions
then they were before?
And you did it a minute ago, but if you could just
highlight some of those things, how the incentives have
changed, how your tools have been strengthened, and so on.
Ms. Bair. Yes, they have. We now have the authority to
resolve the entire financial institution, whereas before, our
receivership authority only went to the insured bank. And so
now, at least for large bank holding companies, there is a
whole list of authorities to put them into receivership, into
our process, if that would avoid systemic consequences.
And as I said before, the process is very rigorous, every
bit as harsh as bankruptcy. Any temporary liquidity support
that might be provided is paid off the top. There is no
guarantee of liabilities. All unsecured creditors are exposed
to loss.
On the remote chance that there could be some remaining
loss for the government--that has to be assessed against the
industry. There is no way that taxpayers would pay--there are
bells and whistles on this thing, and belts and suspenders. We
pushed for that.
We actually wanted a pre-funded reserve. We wanted an
assessment to actually provide a pool of liquidity in advance,
so we wouldn't even have to borrow from the U.S. Treasury for
even that temporary liquidity support. We didn't get that.
But nonetheless, even if there is temporary borrowing that
is necessary, that gets paid off the top. In the unlikely event
there would be losses after being paid off the top, that would
be assessed against the industry.
Mr. Carney. You mentioned some things that management--some
incentives management has to resolve it themselves.
Ms. Bair. Yes, the boards are gone. The executive
management is gone.
Mr. Carney. These are really strong, you know--
Ms. Bair. It is quite harsh. Yes it is. And, there is the
2-year claw-back--a potential for a 2-year claw-back of
compensation, too, for senior executives. So, yes. Which is
why, again, I think a lot of the benefit is prophylactic as
well. Managers, knowing what this process is now, don't have
the option of going to a bailout. The fact that this process is
there and will be the scenario if they fail is going to give
them a strong incentive to go out, raise capital, and sell
themselves if necessary.
Mr. Carney. The second question is really to follow up on
my friend, Mr. Renacci's, question about the conflict between
the CFPB, potentially, and the safety and soundness regulators.
What is your view on that? And as it relates as well to the
governing bodies that you discussed with my colleague from the
other side?
Ms. Bair. Right. I think there is a close intersection. And
it will require a lot of collaboration with the new consumer
head. There is a statutory requirement that the consumer agency
consult with the bank regulators in writing rules.
Again, I think the fact that the consumer head would be on
our board will help further that sensitivity and knowledge and
awareness of the intersection of safety and soundness with
consumer protection.
So I think it can work. Again, it is all about--
Mr. Carney. Do you have some reservations? You seem to
express some.
Ms. Bair. Not really, no. Early on when the Congress was
considering this, we were sympathetic to a board approach. We
have a board. I like boards. Even though it is more difficult
for me, I am not a dictator. I have to go get my five votes.
The chairman of a committee has to do that. But I think it
is a good process. Either way, though--you have the OCC with a
single head--so you have both models in the financial
regulatory sphere.
So, no, I wouldn't say I have reservations. I think there
are arguments pro and con for either approach. But the statute
provides an approach that we support and one we think we can
work with.
Mr. Carney. So the kinds of things that the CFPB might be
doing around consumer protections, do you see a big conflict
with safety and soundness issues?
Ms. Bair. No. There actually can be some safety and
soundness advantages, particularly with regard to the ability
of the consumer bureau to now examine and enforce consumer
protection rules for non-banks. One of the things that put
pressure and led to a lot of bad lending by insured banks was
competitive pressure from the non-bank sector.
You had a lot of non-bank mortgage originators who really
had no regulation whatsoever. They were selling these loans to
the securitization trusts. They weren't retaining any of the
risks of these loans which was really driving down lending
standards.
Having a more robust enforcement mechanism for the non-
banks I think will actually help level the competitive playing
field and make sure we don't have competitive pressure on banks
to lower their standards.
Mr. Carney. Thank you. I see my time has expired. Thank you
for your service. I appreciate it.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Canseco, from Texas, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
Lehman Brothers, the FDIC's report on the possible orderly
liquidation; the FDIC said that had the resolution authority
granted to them under Dodd-Frank been in place in September of
2008, the estimated losses to Lehman's creditors would have
only been 3 cents on every dollar.
However, officials at the Federal Reserve, including
Chairman Bernanke, have stated that one of the primary reasons
that the Fed did not step in to save Lehman was because the
estimated losses were so large and Lehman did not have
sufficient collateral to post to the Fed.
Chairman Bernanke stated in his testimony to the Financial
Crisis Inquiry Commission, ``There was not nearly enough
collateral to provide enough liquidity to meet the run on
Lehman. The company would fail anyway. And the Federal Reserve
would be left holding the very illiquid collateral, a very
large amount of it.''
So my question to you is, the FDIC seems to think that
there was significant value in Lehman while the Federal Reserve
thought that the risk was too large to lend to it.
How could the FDIC and the Federal Reserve come to such
different conclusions?
Ms. Bair. I think a couple of things. First of all, the 97
cents on the dollar as the senior debt holder, that assumes
that the sub-debt and equity is wiped out. So it is not all
Lehman creditors. As you do with bankruptcy, you work your way
up the capital stack with equity at the bottom, and sub-debt
later.
Because of the significant equity and sub-debt cushions, we
think that the senior bond holders would have taken very small
haircuts. That is based on very aggressive assumptions about
what the loss rates would have been on their bad assets.
I think there is a difference between what collateral was
available to the Fed to lend, as well as the Fed's legal
constraints against lending into a failing institution. That
really drove Chairman Bernanke's comments.
But the value of available unencumbered assets shouldn't be
confused with the broader franchise value of the institution
and the ability of significant sub-debt and equity to absorb
losses, which the Fed could not rely on because there was no
resolution process, which we have now.
Mr. Canseco. Was this difference of conclusions between the
two agencies discussed when the Federal Reserve and the FDIC
issued the proposed rule for living wills?
Ms. Bair. Congressman, I don't think there really is a
difference. I think Chairman Bernanke was talking about the
availability of quality collateral--they have very high
standards for collateral when they lend. And they actually lent
well over $100 billion into the broker-dealer.
Because of the bankruptcy process, the derivative
counterparties had the ability to pull all their collateral
out--the Fed lent a lot already for liquidity needs and it was
still a very disruptive process.
I don't think we are inconsistent in what we are saying.
But we certainly, to your question about living wills, have
closely collaborated on the living will rule. It is a joint
proposal.
Mr. Canseco. Going back to the Lehman bankruptcy, the FDIC
called its past experience with orderly wind downs of financial
institutions ``instructive.'' The paper argues that the FDIC is
readily equipped to handle the authority given it under Dodd-
Frank because from 1995 through 2007, the agency was
responsible for the orderly wind-down of 56 financial
institutions.
But a closer examination begs questions as to just how
ready the FDIC is to handle its new responsibilities. According
to data from the FDIC's Web site, the total asset of those 56
financial institutions wound down from 1995 to 2007 was about
$12.23 billion, or an average of $218 million per bank. Most of
the banks were much smaller than that.
So Lehman Brothers had $639 billion in assets when it
failed. This was the largest bankruptcy in American history.
And Lehman's assets were 50 times greater than all the combined
assets of the banks the FDIC shut down over a 12-year period.
What makes the FDIC think it has the resources available to
wind down such a large institution?
Ms. Bair. More recent history may better attest to our
capabilities. We have moved about $650 billion in failed bank
assets over the past 2\1/2\ years, since the beginning of 2008.
WaMu, obviously, was over $300 billion and was resolved over a
weekend in a process that would have been very similar to the
process we would have used for Lehman.
We insure these banks. We understand them. And,
Congressman, I get this question sometimes--people try to paint
us as understanding only little banks. But, we insure these big
banks. We, regrettably, participated in some of the bailouts of
these very large banks. Nobody questioned our expertise or
authority to do that.
So, I think we are quite prepared. I will match the
expertise of my staff on capital markets, on derivatives, on
complex financial structures against anybody at the Fed or the
OCC or the Treasury. We have very smart people who do this for
a living.
We really are the only agency in the world that has the
long experience in resolving large and small financial
institutions.
And others look to us. We are doing training in Europe and
China. Others look to us for expertise as they are setting up
their own resolution regimes.
Mr. Canseco. I notice that my time is up. But I sure hope
that the FDIC has changed its own personnel and operating
structure for the benefit of our financial system.
Ms. Bair. Congressman, I am very sensitive to this. We are
designed to expand and contract very quickly. We also have
reservoirs of contractor help, because our work is cyclical.
And we are used to it.
We are not perfect. This is a challenge for us. But, I
think certainly compared to the expertise shown in the
bankruptcy process--you saw what happened with Lehman--this is
a good approach. And I want to prove to you that it can work.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlewoman from New York, Ms.
Velazquez, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Honorable Sheila Bair.
Last Congress, this committee held a hearing to examine
community bankers' concern that regulators were being overly
restrictive. How has the FDIC addressed these concerns to work
with banks that want to increase small business lending?
And I am concerned, as the ranking member of the House
Small Business Committee, we held a joint hearing with this
committee to address the lack of access to affordable capital
for small businesses. So I would like for you to comment on
this.
Ms. Bair. I think this has been a major impediment in the
broader economic recovery. And, certainly, given your expertise
with the small business sector, you know that much better than
I do.
I think there are a variety of reasons. Risk aversion,
perhaps, is part of it. But I think borrower demand is part of
it, as well. Borrower demand is driven by a couple of different
factors. One is, I think, uncertainty about how robust the
economic recovery is. If they borrow money and commit capital
to expand, or if we are in another downturn a year from now, I
think this is the problem that is dampening borrower demand.
I also think because so much small business lending is
collateralized by real estate, and real estate values have
dropped so substantially, they don't have the collateral
anymore to borrow against as they did pre-crisis.
We encourage lending. We focus on it. I was very
disappointed when small business loan balances were down in the
first quarter and even though C&I lending was up, small
business lending was down. Commercial and industrial lending,
the broader category, was up.
We are trying to strike a very strong balance. We want our
banks to lend. We especially want them to lend to small
businesses. But, I think they obviously need to find
creditworthy borrowers to do that, and a lot of the
creditworthy borrowers are still standing on the sidelines.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay.
The FDIC recently implemented the Dodd-Frank mandate to
expand the deposit insurance assessment fee, which will result
in community banks paying 30 percent less in premiums while
large banks pay more. What effect on small business lending
will the new assessment systems will have?
Ms. Bair. I think if you are doing this for small banks,
this is small business. I think it will help them. It will ease
their assessment burden in a way that is quite consistent with
our loss exposure based on the funding structures that larger
institutions employ.
So I think it will certainly help them. To the extent the
small banks do about 40 percent of the small business lending
done by insured depository institutions, it should free up
resources to help them in that regard.
Ms. Velazquez. Under the proposed rules for qualified
residential mortgages, home buyers will have to put down 20
percent of the purchase price. As a Member who represents New
York, we are very much concerned about this because it will
have a significant potential impact in high-cost areas like New
York City.
Should QRM requirements be based on local market conditions
instead of an across-the-board increase?
Ms. Bair. No. The QRMs are meant to be an exception to the
general rule that if you are issuing a securitization, you need
to retain 5 percent of the risk.
And I think that 5 percent risk retention is important. The
fact that securitizers did not have skin in the game with these
loans, by and large, or meaningful skin in the game, led to a
lot of the lax underwriting and abuses that we saw in the
mortgage market.
So the 5 percent risk retention, in my view, should be the
rule. The QRM is the exception. As such, it is meant to be a
narrow niche part of the market, not what the more broadly
available standards will be.
If you retain 5 percent of the risk or if you retain all of
it with a portfolio loan, you have broad flexibility to
underwrite the loan within prudential standards. So it only
applies to what I think is going to be a small slice of the
market.
Ms. Velazquez. Have you looked at any other alternatives to
a 20 percent downpayment that could reduce the number of
defaults in the future?
Ms. Bair. The staff of all the agencies looked at this very
carefully. Loan to value ratios are a significant driver of
whether a loan defaults and what the losses are when the loan
does default. And so no, we are out for comment on exactly that
question, among others. And I anticipate this is a huge issue.
We will get a lot of comments on it.
But, the analytical work that the staff did indicates that
a 20 percent downpayment is a really strong indicator of credit
quality.
Ms. Velazquez. But you understand my point that it is not
fair--
Ms. Bair. I do understand your point.
Ms. Velazquez. --for places like Massachusetts--
Ms. Bair. I think for low- and moderate-income families,
this is a huge issue. And I think, what is a meaningful
downpayment for a lower-income person can be very different
from what a meaningful downpayment is for those with other
means.
The question is, how do we meet those needs?
And I think, again, my view is that with the 5 percent risk
retention, you will have a robust market that will have prudent
but more flexible underwriting standards to meet that swath.
And, of course, we have the continuation of FHA programs.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Royce, from California, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairman Bair, let me first say that I think a lot of my
colleagues here have been pretty impressed over time with the
straightforward way that you respond to questions. It is not
always the rule around here.
Second, let me just say that I have laid out for you the
arguments that I think are made by the studies that there is
this 88 basis point advantage, this presumption that is out
there--
Ms. Bair. There is.
Mr. Royce. --in terms of the systemically significant
firms.
And I think that the studies of the FDIC show the same
relative--
Ms. Bair. They do, absolutely.
Mr. Royce. --magnitude.
So to go back to the markup or the conference committee, I
put forward several amendments to try to overcome this
tendency. One in particular required the FDIC to estimate at
the outset of the resolution process what creditors would have
received in bankruptcy and limit payment to bankruptcy less a
haircut of 20 percent, which would act as sort of an insurance
mechanism against future write-downs.
If following the resolution process under that scheme there
were additional funds, then the FDIC would have the authority
to pay back all or part of that 20 percent premium. But I
thought that might solve out in the market this presumption.
Let me go through the two arguments I made during the
conference committee. We didn't carry this argument, but I
think it still holds true.
First, there is this strong presumption that the regulators
are going to err on the side of bailouts, especially for the
most interconnected and largest firms that will likely get
preferential treatment through the resolution process.
With this understanding, creditors--and we are talking
especially here about short-term creditors. Those creditors, by
the way, are going to be considered essential under the FDIC's
proposed rule, right?
So they are going to know that lending to these large
complex financial firms, subject to the resolution authority,
is basically risk-free or it is very close to that, because if
these firms fail, creditors are going to be made immediately
whole or very close to whole.
And as a result, these firms are going to be able to borrow
more cheaply. They are going to grow even larger. They are
going to become more significant, systemically significant. And
that is going to compound the too-big-to-fail problem.
Now, there is a second problem also that arises. And that,
to go back to it again, is the claw-back provision. Once that
money is out the door to creditors, it is going to be very
difficult to recover. And I think that is, again, why you see
this basis point difference, bankruptcy over here for these
firms versus resolution authority for the large one.
It is not hard to foresee a situation where a recently
bailed-out creditor strongly argues that handing over these
sums may jeopardize their unstable firm. And this is an
argument that regulators, having just bailed out these same
creditors in the name of preserving financial stability, may
find very difficult to resist.
Additionally, there is no guarantee that a given creditor
will be able to pay back the difference between the advances
and what they would have received in bankruptcy under the
Bankruptcy Code and under this mandate.
So, I am just going to go to the Dallas Fed President,
Richard Fisher, who recently said this about these arguments
that I have made in the past: ``A credible big bank resolution
process that imposes creditor losses will be difficult to
enforce, especially when regulators are explicitly directed to
mitigate disruptions to the financial system, as they are in
the reform bill.''
So I understand that you believe regulators need broad
authority to handle a crisis, but I think that the unintended
consequences here have to be considered. And if we were to look
to tightening the language while working with the resolution
authority mechanism, are there steps we can take to minimize
the potential for abuse down the road? And the argument, the
amendment I made earlier, does that hold water with you? Is
there a way to get at that?
Ms. Bair. So, a couple of things.
We are all for tightening as much as we can. We do not want
bailouts. We want market discipline back.
As deposit insurer, there is obviously moral hazard
associated with providing deposit insurance for these entities
that have insured banks. So we need market discipline to
complement the regulatory process as a weapon against excessive
risk-taking.
So whatever we can do to tamp this down, believe me, we
will work with you.
We are trying to do a lot of this through regulation. We
put a rule out that basically said that if you hold debt with a
term over a year, forget it, there will never be any
differentiation. Please do not interpret that to mean that if
you hold debt with a term less than a year, you are going to
get it, because you are not. Short-term creditors are very much
subject to loss absorption.
I think one of the advantages of the government being able
to provide liquidity is, for instance, if you had unsecured
commercial paper, you could haircut that. Even though you would
lose the funding, you replace it with government funding, and
those creditors absorb the losses.
The presumption for the short-term creditors should be that
they are taking losses, too. Again, the only time I can see
that wouldn't happen is if the acquirer wanted to maintain
those customer relations.
And you might then find that, for instance, with a
derivatives book. If they want to buy the failed institution's
derivatives book, maybe we don't need to impose losses--even if
there are some counterparties that are unsecured or
undercollateralized. We find that now with uninsured deposits.
But that is going to be a mathematical determination.
Whatever is going to maximize recoveries, that is what we will
do.
So I do think we want it narrow. The statute does have some
significant limitations. We are trying to tighten those even
more with regulation. I am happy to look at language and talk
with you about this further.
Believe me, there is no entity more so than the FDIC that
wants to end too-big-to-fail.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Chairman Bair.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. McHenry, from North Carolina, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the Chair.
And, Chairman Bair, thank you so much for being here. I
echo Mr. Royce's comments. I appreciate your forthrightness. I
know you have testified many times during your government
service. And we thank you for your service.
I wanted to ask you, based on something you had in your
written statement, the Dodd-Frank Act, you said, ``if properly
implemented, will not only reduce the likelihood of future
crises, but will provide effective tools to address large
company failures when they do occur without resorting to
taxpayer-supported bailouts or damaging the financial system.''
I think we would like to believe that we won't have future
taxpayer bailouts. Many of us have concerns that, as
constructed, it still leaves that door open. And I think that
is Mr. Royce's point.
But we look at the breakneck pace of rulemaking, and you
see regulators in many respects overwhelmed with the volume and
the pace.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. McHenry. Do you have concerns about the pace and the
quality of the rulemaking?
Ms. Bair. I think from the FDIC's perspective, we are
comfortable with it. We did not have the huge number of
rulemakings that the SEC and the CFTC did. So I think we feel
like we are proceeding at a reasonable pace. And for anything
major, we are giving 60-day comment periods.
And so I think, at least from the FDIC's perspective, we
are comfortable with implementation so far.
I do understand, especially in the derivatives area, some
of the market regulation issues. There is a lot being done
there at once. Frankly, there were a lot of problems,
especially with the derivatives oversight.
So I think the rulemaking needs to continue. Whether
perhaps some sequencing could be done, that might have some
merit. But, on the other hand, it is important to continue to
proceed. And I do think the market needs to understand that at
some point these rules will be in place.
And I think, frankly, they need that to adapt as well.
Markets can be very resilient. Once they know what the rules
are, our financial sector is pretty good at complying with them
and figuring out how to do it.
But, some sequencing might well have some merit.
Mr. McHenry. What about harmonization?
Ms. Bair. I think we are doing a pretty good job there,
even on the international front. I know you hear different
things from some. The FSOC is still getting its sea legs, but I
think it is forcing all of us to get together and talk
regularly and have our staffs talk regularly.
And so I think there has been a good deal of harmonization,
including on the international front. I think we have made a
lot of progress in harmonizing international capital standards.
In addition to resolution authority, I can't overemphasize the
need for strong capital buffers.
So I think there has been some good work on harmonization,
and we should continue to focus on that. But I know there is
concern about treatment of commercial end users in the
derivatives rules. And we are talking with each other about
that.
I do think, though, it may be that at some times you want
some differentiation among end users. For instance, you are
probably going to want more risk aversion with an insured bank
than you are with an entity that is completely outside the
safety net.
So there may be some reasons for differentiation. But I
think we are working hard at harmonization.
Mr. McHenry. You mentioned two things that are of interest,
this international harmonization--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. McHenry. --Basel III, ensuring sort of an international
level playing field.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. McHenry. You also mentioned capital standards. I hear a
lot from my community banks about their concern about--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. McHenry. --raising capital standards. And I understand
there is a balance here. We want to make sure that we have
safety and soundness. But we also want to ensure lending and
economic recovery.
Are you wrestling with that? Do you believe that is--
Ms. Bair. I--
Mr. McHenry. Do you weigh that when you are going through
this process?
Ms. Bair. You do need to weigh it. But I think the primary
focus has been with large institutions' capital requirement--
getting that sector to deleverage.
And I think, back to the earlier point Congressman Royce
was making about funding differentials, if you have higher
capital standards, since capital is more expensive than debt,
that will not only provide a better buffer for loss absorption,
but it will help differentiate funding costs, or reduce the
differentiation in funding costs.
So I think the capital discussions have been targeted
primarily at the larger institutions. There have been a few
issues with smaller institutions' holding companies, regarding
the quality of capital.
A lot of the holding companies--not the banks; it is not
allowed for banks--use something called trust preferred
securities that ended up to not have loss-absorbing capacity in
the crisis. And I know there have been some concerns there.
That is really the only capital issue relating to small
institutions.
Mr. McHenry. My time is short, but I want to ask you about
the QRM. I think that private mortgage insurance should be a
part of this to ensure a lower downpayment and an insured
product that should be a part of the QRM. Can you comment on
that?
Ms. Bair. Again, that is out for comment. My only caution
on that--I started worrying when the government was relying on
credit rating agencies, for instance.
And so then we say, we will have better standards, review
standards, if there is a private sector mortgage insurer. We
need to know, who are the mortgage insurers? How well are they
regulated? How good are their resources if we get into a down
cycle?
I think those are the things really to think about. And
mortgage insurance can be a good product, but do we want demand
for it driven by markets or driven by regulations, giving them
an extra penny, frankly, for having a lower downpayment.
I know you care about the markets the way I do. I think
that may be the trade-off that we should think hard about.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Good morning, Chairman Bair.
Was it you who said that you thought that consumer
protection and safety and soundness were two issues on the same
side of the coin?
Ms. Bair. Right. Yes, it was me.
Mr. Duffy. Why is that?
Ms. Bair. I think because consumer abuses generally will
end up costing banks money. Mortgages are the prime example for
any financial institution, not just banks. Mortgages are a
prime example.
Banks and other entities were making loans that the
consumers couldn't afford--and more of it was done outside of
the banks. Eventually, the loans defaulted and a lot of losses
occurred. So it didn't help the consumer. It didn't help the
financial institution either.
Mr. Duffy. And so when we see these two going together, and
we want to make sure our consumers are protected and treated
fairly, and they are engaging in transactions that are
transparent. And we also want banks to be profitable, and make
sure that they are not going under.
Do you have a concern when we separate consumer protection
from safety and soundness? I think it was Mr. Renacci who
commented that in the mission statement of the CFPB, there is
no reference to safety and soundness.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. Does that give you some pause or some concern?
Or are you okay with the oversight that comes from FSOC? It has
been a political issue.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. And I don't mean--I don't want to--
Ms. Bair. No, I know. Yes, we support the consumer agency.
There were different iterations of its structure early on in
the process, but we support the final outcome.
We think it is a positive thing, actually, that the
consumer bureau will be on our board, because that will provide
additional interaction to make sure that safety and soundness
and consumer protection are considered together.
That will work both ways, too, I think.
Mr. Duffy. But it is not on the CFPB.
Ms. Bair. I am sorry?
Mr. Duffy. The CFPB doesn't have that consideration for
safety and soundness--
Ms. Bair. Right. We are all for reciprocity.
But, given that, we are fine with how the Dodd-Frank Act
came out. And I do think it is important to understand, for the
rule-writing piece of this, that has always been separate from
the examination and enforcement process.
Mr. Duffy. But if you look at the--I know you have talked
about reciprocity. And you really don't have reciprocity, but
for your FSOC, right, to review the rules that are coming from
the CFPB.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. And one of my concerns is that the standard is
so high. You need 7 out of 10 votes--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. --to overturn a rule from the CFPB. And the
Director is one of the voting members. So it is really seven
out of nine.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. It is incredibly high. And the risk there, it
has to be systemic risk. We are talking about playing Russian
roulette with our economy.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. I introduced a bill that would reduce the
requirement to just a simple majority, and take the director
off, a 5-4 majority of some pretty significant folks who sit on
FSOC.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. And we talked about reducing the standard that
if the rule was inconsistent with the safe and sound operation
of United States financial institutions, it could be
overturned.
Do you think that is reasonable that we have a little
different standard in how we can coordinate consumer protection
with safety and soundness?
Ms. Bair. There are a lot of things about the Dodd-Frank
Act that all of us would have written differently. At the end
of the day, it was a compromise product.
But we can support the final product. I think it can work.
Mr. Duffy. But can we improve upon it?
Ms. Bair. Sorry?
Mr. Duffy. Can we improve upon it?
Ms. Bair. I fear you are going to draw me into a situation
where--
Mr. Duffy. I will be gentle with you.
Quickly, I am from a more rural district, with all
community banks and credit unions. We don't have big Wall
Street banks in my district.
And I hear this nonstop from my local bankers. They are
talking about how they are crushed by so many rules and so many
regulations, and the impact that it has on them, as they say,
``Listen, we don't have the ability to diversify this cost over
a large base. And you make me hire a lawyer or a compliance
officer--''
Ms. Bair. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. --``and our costs go up. It makes it more
difficult for us to compete with bigger banks.'' Or sometimes
they will go on, ``We can't even stay in the market anymore.''
And that is the lifeblood of our economy.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. And this is nonstop coming from them. I don't
know if you are hearing the same thing or trying to figure out
how can we still be safe--
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Duffy. --but still have rules that allow our local
bankers, who didn't have anything to do with the financial
crisis, to do business.
Ms. Bair. I think they have a point. I think every time you
have a new rule or a new compliance requirement for safety and
soundness or a consumer requirement, the incremental costs of
doing that are going to be significantly higher than they are
for a large institution.
We can and should do a better job of taking that into
account.
I have said this, and I will say it again; all the problems
we have had with servicing, and we have had a lot of them, but
as near as we can tell, these are problems of scale that affect
the very large servicers. So, we should have two tiers of
regulation.
If there are going to be a lot of new rules for servicing,
we don't see a basis for layering all of that on the smaller
banks as well. From a diversification standpoint, smaller banks
have really been relegated to specialty commercial real estate
lenders.
We would love to see them diversify their balance sheets,
start doing more mortgages again or car loans or whatever.
But the regulatory barriers to getting back into those
lines of business may be an impediment.
And servicing is one example. I would love to see community
banks start making more mortgages again. I think they do a
better job with the customer.
So I am very sensitive to this. And I think we should look
at more structured, two-tiered regulation, because the issues
are completely different
Mr. Duffy. So that is something you are looking at?
Ms. Bair. Absolutely. And we have an advisory committee on
community banking. They have given us a number of good ideas
for making regulations more effective and streamlined when it
comes to smaller banks.
When we do a FIL, we already, at the very top, say whether
this even applies to community banks or not. I require the
staff to do an analysis of community bank impact and why we
need this to apply to community banks.
We are looking at more automation, too, in the forms banks
have to fill out, putting those all on a system we have called
FDICconnect. So instead of doing a new form every year, they
can go in and update the old one.
So we are trying on a number of fronts to deal with this.
Mr. Duffy. And I appreciate that, because, again, we hear
that from the community banks and the credit unions.
Ms. Bair. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. To get them to agree on some issues, it is
pretty impressive. That interchange are two things that they
will talk about. And I appreciate you looking at that. Thank
you.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The Chairman has consented to go to a second round of
questioning, if that is--you were consented upon.
And we are still going to be called for votes here in the
next probably 15 to 20 minutes.
So I will go ahead and start the second round, and I
appreciate you spending the time with us.
We had a recent hearing and we also had a discussion in the
markup for the bill for the CFPB on the differences or the
interchangeability or not of safety and soundness and
profitability for banks.
One witness said that safety and soundness is used as a
code word by the institutions as profitability. And so by
trying to reshape or reform maybe in the CFPB or something and
using safety and soundness, we were being accused of protecting
the profits of an institution.
And while a safe and sound bank may realize a profit, and I
think that is a good thing, a profitable bank is not
necessarily safe or sound.
Could you comment on this assertion in the
interchangeability of that and how you see those two different
phrases differently?
Ms. Bair. I do think they are--and I have said this
throughout my career--two sides of the same coin. I think if a
product does not serve consumers or your customers long-term
benefit, this is going to be a product that eventually loses
money for you and could result in significant litigation
exposure as well.
We certainly saw that with all the lax funding on
mortgages. We are seeing a lot of additional litigation on
overdraft protection. So I think having some sensitivity of
good business practices for the consumer side is important.
Products that don't serve consumer needs are eventually going
to lose money.
They will probably default, or the customers will start
abusing them, or they could result in litigation exposure.
On the other hand, since these are insured banks, you need
to have a full analysis of changes, whether it is safety and
soundness or consumer protection, of how that is going to
impact the financial health of the institution, I would say,
not the profitability.
And so I think both factors need to be weighed. But again,
I think with the consumer bureau needing to consult with the
bank regulators and also serving on our board, I think there
are ways now built into Dodd-Frank to facilitate that kind of
communication and consideration of those factors.
Chairwoman Capito. So, safe and sound consumer products
will in the long run, in your opinion, and I agree with this,
bring about a profitability for the institution?
Ms. Bair. Sustainable profitability.
Chairwoman Capito. Yes. And I think that while there is a
distinction between safety and soundness and profitability, I
think that, as you said, the unsafe product or the non-well
research product or the one that takes it too far is eventually
going to be a nonprofitable instrument for the institution.
My final question, we have talked a little bit about a
commission--and I don't want to draw you into a big political
argument on that. But in looking at your own commission or
corporation, you serve as the chair. The vice chair--you have a
vice chair. You have an OCC, who is acting. We have no
appointment there.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Chairwoman Capito. We have the OCS, which is going to be
grandfathered out, or however, in July, no longer exist on July
21st.
We have the CPFB chair, but we don't have one. And I think
I wouldn't be stretching the imagination to say it is going to
have to be--it can't be a Senate-confirmed--it would be highly
unlikely that it would be Senate-confirmed because of the
timing.
And then we have your independent director who has also is
on an expired term.
This really concerns me. We are losing your expertise and
longevity and history. And I know you are not really going far,
but in all fairness to you and to the Corporation, this needs
to live on.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Chairwoman Capito. What are we going to do about it? I
guess for me, it is a political statement. I say to the
President, get these appointments out. Get them Senate-
confirmed. Let us have some stability here. Or we are going to
end up in--not a la la land kind of situation, but an ever-
changing transitional situation where it causes me concern.
Do you have concerns about that?
Ms. Bair. I have profound concerns. I am frustrated that
there is not greater urgency and prioritization of this issue
on the part of the Administration, as well as on the part of
the Senate.
And I am very worried about my agency. We could go down to
three or two board members after I leave.
There are some nominations in process. But the names are
not up yet. There are still some vacancies where, as far as I
know, no candidates have been vetted.
And so thank you for flagging that, because I think that
this is very urgent, when the financial system is healing, but
it is not out of the woods yet. There are a lot of unknown
factors out there. We need strong people in these jobs. And
there are still reforms to be implemented in a commonsense,
effective way.
And you are right, having a two-member or three-member
board making these kinds of decisions is not a good thing.
Chairwoman Capito. Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
And I thank you for raising your concern on having a
Director of the CFPB in place on July 21st. This is a grave
concern to me also.
The difficulty is that 44 Senators have signed a letter
saying that they will not confirm anyone unless bills that they
want, that passed out of this committee, and other policy
positions that they want such as moving the funding of the CFPB
to the political appropriations process, which if we look at
what happened to the SEC and the CFTC, they were basically cut,
making it more difficult for them to do their job.
So in other words, politicizing the funding of it. They
said that they would not confirm anyone. I believe this is a
tremendous abuse of the confirmation process, basically holding
the entire Congress hostage, that you have to write legislation
like we want.
In this case, not what I am saying, but roughly five or six
major editorial boards from the United States have said in
their editorials, and good government groups and others have
said, to remove it from politics or the Democratic and
Republican perspective, that these bills would gut, dismantle,
disrupt, and destroy the CFPB, the Consumer Financial
Protection Agency.
So this is a huge problem. They basically have given the
President no choice but to make an interim appointment because
they are saying they will have to gut the entire agency and
make it basically a non-performing, toothless situation.
So I believe the CFPB has a role to play in protecting
consumers. Too often, consumers' concerns were a second
thought, a third thought, or not thought about at all. And we
maybe would have been able to prevent the subprime crisis. I
can't imagine any consumer agency approving products that the
degree of probability that they would end up on the street or
hurting the family and the overall finances of our country were
greater than the mortgage working them.
The joke in New York during this time was if you can't
afford your rent, go out and buy a house. It was so easy to get
a mortgage, a faulty mortgage, that became clogged in the
system and helped bring down the financial crisis that we had.
So we have a disagreement, a basic choice. It is a basic
disagreement between the Republican Party and the Democratic
Party. The Democratic Party supports the CFPB. The Republican
Party has come forward with a series of bills that would
dismantle, destroy, and gut the CFPB.
And you have Republican Senators saying, ``We will not
confirm anyone unless you do exactly what we want,'' using it,
taking hostage the entire legislative process to get what they
want.
They have forced the President, really with no other
choice, since he supports the CFPB. And I would say the
overwhelming majority of the American people do. The American
people would like someone looking at their loans, at their
credit cards, at their student loans, and making sure that they
are fair; not giving anyone an advantage, but making sure that
there is a fair playing field that consumers can understand
what the terms are; that they are in plain print out there for
everyone to understand.
So we have a basic disagreement between the Republican and
Democratic Parties.
But I do want to address my questions to our distinguished
guest today in the area in which she has played such a
fundamental role. I would like to go back to the too-big-to-
fail, which is a huge issue. And I understand it is the next
focus of the hearings we will be having on this committee.
Some have argued repeatedly that the financial reform law,
particularly the Orderly Liquidation Authority, perpetuates,
rather than eliminates, too-big-to-fail. So I would like to ask
you, what is your assessment of the allegation that the
Authority perpetuates too-big-to-fail?
Ms. Bair. I do not believe it in any way perpetuates too-
big-to-fail. Too-big-to-fail was with us pre-crisis. It was
reinforced by the bailouts. And we need to end too-big-to-fail
now.
And the Dodd-Frank Act gives us the tools to end it. It
quite specifically bans the bailouts in language that we
supported and wanted in.
So I think it is there. The tools are there. The clear
legislative intent is there. And I think, as I indicated in my
testimony, implemented effectively, it will end too-big-to-
fail.
Mrs. Maloney. My final question, and my time is running
out, is which parts of the financial reform law do you think
are the most critical to ending too-big-to-fail?
Ms. Bair. I think Title I and Title II, which gives us the
Orderly Liquidation Authority powers for systemic non-banks. We
already have it for banks. Title I is important, which requires
the Fed to impose higher prudential standards and particular
capital requirements on larger entities, as well as requires,
jointly with the FDIC, living wills or resolution plans where
they must demonstrate that they are resolvable.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank you for your testimony today. I thank
you for your distinguished service to our country.
And I thank you for your really nonpartisan response to
questions and policies. I think you have done a magnificent job
for our country.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci, from Ohio?
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, again.
And Chairman Bair, I do want to thank you again for being
here, and your testimony, and your service to our country also.
The one question I asked before, several people have
already asked you, and I heard your answer. So I am going to
move to another topic. And it regards the Orderly Liquidation
Authority. I know several times in your testimony today, you
have talked about how you believe--or at least the impression I
got was that you believe the FDIC's authority over liquidation
is better than bankruptcy.
Ms. Bair. Yes.
Mr. Renacci. There are a number of--
Ms. Bair. --for financial institutions.
Mr. Renacci. --for financial institutions.
There are a number of people in the bankruptcy community
who believe that if the bankruptcy laws were changed, that
bankruptcy would be better.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Renacci. And I know a lot of it deals with derivatives
and making sure there is some timing on derivatives.
Can you give me some ideas or thoughts where you might
believe that bankruptcy would be better? Because one of the
issues of bankruptcies, of course, is that we are looking out
for the creditors as we wind things down. So I would like to
hear your thoughts on some things that could be changed in the
Bankruptcy Code that would actually make bankruptcy better.
Ms. Bair. I think you are right. How derivatives are
treated is really very important. First of all, we would love
to work with this committee and the Judiciary Committee on
this. We deal a lot with bankruptcy courts because banks that
we resolve are frequently part of holding company structures
that go into bankruptcy. So we are quite familiar with some of
the strengths and weaknesses of the process.
I think how bankruptcy treats derivatives is a big problem.
And having the ability to require counterparties to continue to
perform on their derivatives contracts is important. Now they
have the ability to terminate their contract and claim their
collateral, which can be quite disruptive and was a major
factor in the disruptions that surfaced with Lehman.
So we would love to work with the Congress to make
bankruptcy work better. For most of these financials
companies--for instance CIT, we were opposed to any kind of
bailout assistance for CIT. We didn't think they were systemic.
They weren't. They went into a bankruptcy process.
It was just fine. It was financial. They relied on a lot of
short-term funding through commercial paper, but they were the
size where their bankruptcy was not systemic. And bankruptcy
worked just fine. And I think there are ways to make bankruptcy
work even better.
For the larger entities, though, I think there will be a
couple of things that we can do that bankruptcy courts will
never be able to do. First, we will be able to have a
continuing on-site presence with these entities. We will be
able to plan.
We will have ongoing access to information about their
counterparty exposures and the concentration of their overseas
operations. The bankruptcy court is just never going to be able
to do that.
Similarly, we will be able to pre-plan and work with the
international regulatory community, as an institution becomes
more troubled, to find and identify any potential obstacles to
resolving our domestic entity if they have foreign operations.
We do that now. We resolved banks with international
operations.
We had a West Coast bank that owned branches through a
subsidiary in China and Hong Kong. Several months in advance,
we contacted the regulatory authorities there. We identified
what we needed to do to make sure there was a smooth sale in
our receivership process.
And we did. We were able to keep the branches and
subsidiary in Asia open. We got the regulatory approvals for
the new buyer to take the failed bank.
So it is hard to see how the bankruptcy court could ever
engage in that kind of bilateral international coordination in
the event of a failure, or be involved in pre-planning.
Finally, we can provide immediate liquidity support, which
can be very important to maintaining franchise value. They have
debtor-in-possession financing mechanisms in bankruptcy, but
generally those cannot be done immediately the way liquidity
support can be provided by the FDIC.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. I am going to take the liberty and ask a
question before I go to Mr. Carney, real quick, to piggyback on
his question.
When you say you can provide immediate liquidity support,
is that through the ability to go to the Treasury?
Ms. Bair. That is. Under the bill, yes. For banks, we have
the Deposit Insurance Fund that we use. But yes, for non-banks,
it would be through the credit with Treasury. Yes.
Chairwoman Capito. And I think that is where the rub is,
really, in terms of the perception. Because if you--
Ms. Bair. I think that is right.
Chairwoman Capito. --if you can go to the Treasury, you are
going to the taxpayer.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Chairwoman Capito. And can you help with that distinction?
Ms. Bair. Again, we wanted a pre-funded reserve, and that
passed the House, but didn't pass the Senate. But I do think it
is very important to emphasize that any funds that are provided
through that Treasury line are paid back and have priority over
everything else. As assets are sold, they are paid off the top.
I can't believe there would ever be any losses on that
because you are not guaranteeing any liabilities for the non-
bank institutions. So whatever assets are sold, those
recoveries go to Treasury first.
And if in the unlikely event there would be losses, there
would be an assessment on the industry, just the way we assess
now for deposit insurance.
So I really think there are a lot of safeguards against
taxpayers ever taking exposure on this. And I would say in
turn, the fact that the industry would have to pay for any
losses if that would occur, in and of itself will create
industry pressure against any creditor differentiation, because
they will know that if the receiver--we would never do this
anyway--but if the receiver started trying to show favoritism,
those losses would be assessed against the industry. And there
will be a lot of industry pressure not to do that.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Carney, from Delaware.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am happy to
yield any time you might need.
Chairman Bair, thank you again. I have been really enjoying
the hearing this morning. And I want to reiterate the comments
that my colleagues have made on both sides of the aisle about
your candor and straightforward answers. We don't always get
that.
And I think it has a positive effect on the Members and the
questions they ask, by the way, as well.
You said a minute ago that you thought the financial system
was healing, but not out of the woods yet. Could you expand a
little bit on that?
Ms. Bair. Yes. I think they are still working some troubles
out.
Loan volume is down. And, again, I think there may too much
risk aversion with some banks, but I think there is also a lack
of borrower demand. And banks need to make loans to make money.
That is what they are supposed to be doing with their
funds, and that is what they need to do to make money.
I think, longer term, as I have said in testimony and as I
said in an op-ed last November, I think we are worried about
the fiscal situation. We are in a very low-interest-rate
environment and have been for some period of time.
That means there are more low-interest assets on banks'
balance sheets. And even though the maturities have been
shortening, obviously banks are heavily exposed to interest-
rate volatility because, particularly, their liabilities are
shorter than their assets.
So I think anything that would undermine confidence in the
fiscal strength of the United States Government could have an
adverse, potentially volatile impact on interest rates.
And so we are very much worried about that and hope very
much that these discussions can produce a long-term deficit
reduction plan.
Also, as I mentioned in my testimony, we are not out of the
woods with the housing market yet, either.
Mr. Carney. Yes, that was my next, kind of, line of
questioning. You said that we need to get mortgages--mortgage
lending going on. What are the barriers there?
I hear, as I said a minute ago, from my bankers and from
borrowers that the regulators are tightening down, not allowing
them to make those loans.
Ms. Bair. Actually, I think I would put more of a priority
on business lending and small business lending. I think
certainly mortgages and housing is an important part of our
economy, but I think we need to accept, going forward, it will
be a smaller part of our economy--
Mr. Carney. Right.
Ms. Bair. --and probably needs to be. It got bloated and
overheated. But I do think ultimately, there needs to be a GSE
exit strategy. We know that model didn't work. And I think--
Mr. Carney. Do you have a view on what model might work?
Ms. Bair. I think what we have said is that it is really
outside my portfolio to--
Mr. Carney. That is okay. There are just a few of us here
now.
Ms. Bair. I will say this. I think it could go one way or
the other. Regarding this hybrid model where you had a private
for-profit shareholder-return-driven entity with an implied
government backstop--providing this government support was
absolutely the wrong model. What you got was the privatization
of gains and the socialization of losses.
So going forward, I would say if you are going to continue
to have government support, make it explicit; charge for it up
front, the way we do at the FDIC. Make sure it is actuarially
sound, in terms of what is being charged for the credit
support. And make that explicit.
These implicit backstops--
Mr. Carney. Explicit and narrower?
Ms. Bair. Explicit the way the FDIC charges insurance
premiums for deposit insurance. If you are going to be
guaranteeing mortgages, have the government determine the
amount and charge a guarantee fee that accurately reflects
risk. Yes. Or get out, one way or the other.
Mr. Carney. And so, what about--there was some back-and-
forth about lending standards.
Ms. Bair. Right.
Mr. Carney. What is your view of that? Twenty percent is a
huge--
Ms. Bair. Again, Congressman--
Mr. Carney. I don't see how that works.
Ms. Bair. That is supposed to be the exception, not the
rule.
There are mortgages out there with 20 percent downpayments,
but that is meant to be a niche exception to the general rule
that if you are going to securitize mortgages, you need to
retain 5 percent of the risk.
So the QRM standard is a way to get around the 5 percent
risk retention. If you retain 5 percent risk, you have a lot of
flexibility on the underwriting side.
Mr. Carney. Okay.
What sounds reasonable to you, in terms of the downpayment
or--
Ms. Bair. I think it is a combination of factors. Clearly,
with a borrower with a strong credit history, with a low debt-
to-income, there may be other flexibilities that you can
provide. And we provide that with banks now, with portfolio
lending.
I think you need to have some downpayment. I don't want
to--
Mr. Carney. Let me squeeze one more question in. I only
have a short amount of time.
Ms. Bair. Sure.
Mr. Carney. It is about credit agencies. You mentioned
credit agencies. Do you have a view of what we should be doing
there?
Ms. Bair. I think that one thing we are doing is getting
rid of all references to credit rating agency ratings in our
regulation. That is required by the Dodd-Frank Act. Pre-Dodd-
Frank, we had already started telling banks that they needed to
do their own independent analysis of the creditworthiness of
the securities they invest in. They can't rely just on the
ratings.
We used to use ratings for our deposit insurance
assessments. We have gotten rid of that. So I think that has
been in process for some time.
If you are not using credit ratings, what are you going to
replace them with?
And so, that is really the hard question. And I don't think
we have figured that out yet.
Mr. Carney. Thanks very much.
Ms. Bair. Sure.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. This concludes our hearing.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional questions
for this witness which they may wish to submit in writing.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 30
days for members to submit written questions to this witness
and to place her responses in the record.
Again, thank you so much--
Ms. Bair. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. --for, I think, a very productive
hearing today. Good luck to you. And we appreciate, again, your
great service to our country.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 26, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6872.092


