- THE FUTURE OF MONEY: WHERE DO MOBILE PAYMENTS FIT IN THE CURRENT REGULATORY STRUCTURE?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF MONEY: WHERE DO
MOBILE PAYMENTS FIT IN THE
CURRENT REGULATORY STRUCTURE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 29, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-142

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-113 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 29, 2012................................................     1
Appendix:
June 29, 2012................................................    17

WITNESSES
Friday, June 29, 2012

Freis, James H., Jr., Director, the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN), U.S. Department of the Treasury..............     4
Martin, Stephanie, Associate General Counsel, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System..................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Freis, James H., Jr..........................................    18
Martin, Stephanie............................................    32

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of The Clearing House Association L.L.C....    39
Written statement of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB).....................................................    45

THE FUTURE OF MONEY: WHERE DO
MOBILE PAYMENTS FIT IN THE
CURRENT REGULATORY STRUCTURE?

----------

Friday, June 29, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Pearce,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Canseco; Maloney, Baca, and Scott.
Also present: Representative Green.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order. Ranking
Member Maloney is on her way, and she said to go ahead and
start, so I will start with my opening statement.
First, I want to welcome the witnesses. This morning's
hearing marks the final installment in a series of hearings
that this subcommittee has had on the future of money. In
March, we held a hearing that served as a primer for Members on
the current landscape of mobile payments.
Earlier this week, the ranking member and I had a dinner,
bipartisan dinner that afforded Members and staff the
opportunity to learn more about the different technological
developments in mobile payments. And I for one can say it is an
exciting future and I wish I had the brain depth to be able to
invent some of these things myself.
This morning, we will learn about the current regulatory
structure for the payment system and how new developments in
mobile payments can fit into this regulatory structure.
The past decade has seen tremendous growth and innovation
to technology that will no doubt influence the payment system
in this Nation and abroad. We can't really imagine what the
technology may be 6 years from now. For that reason, it is
important for this committee to understand the rules of the
road for mobile payments. Does today's regulatory structure
provide seamless protection for consumers, easy dispute
resolution, and protect against money laundering and the
financing of terrorism, or do we need to make changes and, if
so, what changes should be made, minor or major?
This morning, we have two very important voices to talk
about today's regulatory structure. The Federal Reserve has
been the expert on the payment system for a long time and the
Boston and Atlanta Feds combined to do much of the best early
examination of the promise and potential pitfalls of mobile
payments.
While their consumer protection duties were transferred to
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) 2 years ago,
the Fed will continue to be an important player. As witnesses
at our first mobile payment hearing warned, some of the forms
of payment available, including those tied to phone bill
billings, may not fall under current payment law as we
understand it.
Meanwhile, the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network, or FinCEN, prescribes the regulations that help our
law enforcement agencies fight money laundering and the
financing of terrorism and is in the best position to tell us
if any parts of the newer forms of payment might fall outside
of our current requirements for financial institutions to
report suspicious activities. We need to make certain we get
this latter part right. A senior economist at the World Bank
has warned explicitly that it would be much harder to follow
the future of money and to establish the sender and receiver of
money as the transactions move towards anonymity.
We also have, and I will ask for unanimous consent to
insert into the record, a statement from the CFPB. Also, I want
to thank both of our witnesses for their work that they have
done in preparing for today's hearing and for their years of
steady government service. In particular, the committee would
like to thank Director Freis for his more than 5-year service
as head of FinCEN. That is the longest tenure of anyone in what
we know is a very difficult job. We are aware that you are
transitioning to another job and could have declined this
invitation to testify, so we especially want to thank you for
coming today.
Mrs. Maloney. Good morning.
Chairwoman Capito. There she is. I thought I heard her
coming in.
Mrs. Maloney. I apologize, but we had a Democratic Caucus
meeting on health care.
Chairwoman Capito. I recognize the ranking member.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank so much the chairwoman, and
welcome the Federal Reserve and FinCEN. This is our third look
at the issue of mobile payments, and I have to commend the
chairwoman and the committee for holding this series of
hearings on this new technology, and literally, we have
cohosted a dinner to look at it and expose the new technology
to Members of Congress. We saw this earlier in the week and I
am pleased that we are trying to get out ahead of the issues
rather than finding ourselves reacting but not being proactive.
I really think that I would like to put my opening
statement in the record. Believe me, it is very interesting,
but I would like to hear the testimony today and have the
opportunity to ask questions, particularly in the area of
identity and security and maintaining the security of consumers
with these new products.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. I now recognize Mr. Canseco for 2
minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. The growth of the
mobile payment industry represents a tremendous opportunity for
everyone, from consumers and merchants to financial
institutions and other providers. Mobile payments have already
proven to be the most significant development in consumer
payment methods since the move away from checks to debit cards.
This should bring a great number of benefits, particularly in
the form of competition and lower costs for consumers.
Yet, it is essential that policymakers and regulators
structure a regulatory framework that helps protect the private
information of mobile users, but also encourages investment and
innovation within the industry.
It is very relevant to mention that the last significant
policy initiative in this area, which was price fixing in the
debit card market, was the exact opposite of what Congress and
regulators should be doing, and I hope we have learned from
that very significant mistake.
And so, Madam Chairwoman, my hope is that today's hearing
helps Congress and regulators embrace these new innovations and
that it leads to a properly constructed regulatory framework
that works for everybody involved.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Scott for 3 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. Let me
commend you and the ranking member for putting this very
important and timely hearing together. Certainly, nothing could
be more timely than the rapid advancement of technology. No
area is that more profound than the mobile phones we use. We
basically have become pleasantly captive to the cell phone. And
we need to make sure that the American people are adequately
protected from abuses from invasions of identification theft.
Many people may not know this, but 92 percent all the
American people now use mobile phones. The pay phone has gone
by the way. And with that comes all other types of services
that are connected with it. Many times people have their bank
accounts, their bank statements on their mobile phones. They
have medical information, pharmaceutical information, and
prescription drug information all on their phones. It has
become an integral part of our physical beings.
And so, we really have to make sure that adequate
protections are there, and half of these phones are what we
call Smartphones, which are capable of processing mobile
payments, credit card payments. So when you look at the entire
scope of the significant amount of impact that mobile phones
have on our entire existence, particularly very vital and
pertinent information regarding our financial accounts, our
health care, all very important issues, it is very important
that we make sure that proper regulations are in place to
protect the American people, and I look forward to hearing the
panel.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Scott. With that, I
believe opening statements are completed, and I would like to
turn to the panel. Our first presenter is Mr. James H. Freis,
Jr., Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN) at the Department of the Treasury. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF JAMES H. FREIS, JR., DIRECTOR, THE FINANCIAL
CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FINCEN), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
TREASURY

Mr. Freis. Thank you, and good morning, Chairwoman Capito
and Ranking Member Maloney.
I am Jim Freis, Director of FinCEN, and I am pleased to be
here today to discuss FinCEN's efforts to establish a
meaningful regulatory framework for mobile payments and other
emerging payments methods. My testimony today will focus on
some of the most important regulatory and analytical work being
done to prevent criminal abuse of the financial system as
technological advances create innovative ways to move money.
At the outset, I would like to make a distinction between
mobile banking and mobile payments. Mobile banking involves
communication and direction from an account holder about their
account at a depository institution. Mobile payments
essentially involve the direction of funds outside of a bank
account to effect payments or other transfers. Let me emphasize
that both types of activity are subject to relevant FinCEN
regulations for anti-money laundering and counterterrorist
financing purposes, either as part of the requirements on banks
or as part of the requirements on money transmitters.
Recognizing that payment systems evolve rapidly, FinCEN
took a comprehensive approach in this area, revising its
regulations 1 year ago specifically to cover mobile payments
and other innovations. The rule was developed to be
technologically neutral and hopefully cover new developments
for years to come. Specifically, the rule focuses more on the
underlying activity as opposed to the particular electronic
communication vehicle. If a mobile phone allows person-to-
person payments or payments that cross borders in or out of the
country, then the provider must identify the customer, keep
records of transactions, and have procedures in place to report
to FinCEN possible money laundering or other suspicious
activity.
In furtherance of that, FinCEN's regulations make it clear
that the acceptance of funds from one person and then the
transmission of those funds to another person or location by
any means constitutes money transmission and that any person
doing business in whole or in part in the United States who
engages in money transmission, regardless of other business
lines such as telecommunication services, would likely be a
money services business subject to FinCEN's regulations, and as
such must register and comply with all requirements applicable
to a money transmitter.
Shortly after publication last year of the final prepaid
access regulation, and as part of FinCEN's commitment to engage
in dialogue with the industries we regulate, FinCEN held a
series of town hall meetings with representatives from the
prepaid access industry. FinCEN has already released a number
of pieces of guidance with respect to the prepaid access
regulation, and we anticipate that additional guidance will be
forthcoming related to some of the issues raised by industry
attendees during those town halls, as well as ongoing requests
for clarification and guidance on the new regulatory framework.
I would like now to briefly mention some of FinCEN's
analytical work in the mobile payment space. As part of our
ongoing support to law enforcement, FinCEN regularly provides
reference manuals to help better understand the workings of
various payment mechanisms and to provide steps to utilize its
understanding in specific criminal investigations. One recent
such manual focused on mobile payments. In preparing the
manual, and in subsequent law enforcement outreach, we have
seen an interesting trend in the mobile payments industry where
different telecommunication systems and financial mechanisms
merge and become interwoven in the same overall mobile payments
transaction.
For example, a customer might choose to initiate a
remittance to a physical money service business location, with
the transaction then being processed through the MSB's internal
system, the payment of the funds then going to a recipients
mobile account. Upon completion of the transaction, the
recipient typically receives a text message notification on
their mobile phone that indicates the funds have been credited
to their mobile account.
This transactional overlap results in multiple
informational chokepoints that may assist law enforcement's
efforts to follow the money trails and identify other accounts
and transactions associated with a given subject. Fortunately,
FinCEN's prepaid access regulation was specifically designed to
be flexible and to accommodate new technologies as they emerge,
but also to capture innovative payment methods currently being
used by U.S. institutions such as aspects of the scenario I
just described.
In the area of new payments methods, the Administration has
made appropriate oversight of prepaid access products a
priority, and FinCEN is very encouraged by the progress we have
made thus far. Moving forward, we are dedicated to continuing
to build on these accomplishments as we encourage legitimate
consumer and commercial activity to flourish, but also help
financial services providers to focus on serving their
customers, not criminals.
Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Director Freis can be found on
page 18 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Director Freis.
We will now hear from Ms. Stephanie Martin, who is
Associate General Counsel for the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE MARTIN, ASSOCIATE GENERAL COUNSEL, BOARD
OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Ms. Martin. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to appear before you today to talk about the
regulation of mobile payments.
The evolution of technologies that enable consumers to
conduct financial transactions using mobile devices has the
potential to affect their financial lives in important and new
ways, including by expanding access to mainstream financial
services to segments of the population who are currently
unbanked or underbanked. But with any payment system, including
a mobile payment system, regulators have two key concerns: one,
whether consumers are protected if something goes wrong such as
an unauthorized transaction; and two, whether the system
provides appropriate security and confidentiality for the
transmission and the storage of payment instructions and the
personal financial information of consumers.
In many mobile payments, at least some parts of the
transaction are settled through existing payment systems, such
as card networks, and are subject to the statutes, rules or
procedures that are already in place. The evolving aspects of
mobile payments typically are related to new consumer
interfaces and new payments or settlement arrangements which
can involve service providers that have not traditionally been
in the payments business, for example, a telephone company.
Making payments through nontraditional arrangements may
change the legal protections related to the purchase, depending
on the details of the arrangement and the applicable statutes
and rules.
There is a legal framework to address the payment
activities of banks, and Federal bank regulators have the tools
to ensure that banks offer mobile payment services in
compliance with the consumer protection provisions of any
applicable laws or rules, such as the Electronic Fund Transfer
Act (EFTA). The application of most Federal consumer laws to
mobile payment transactions is subject to the rulemaking and
interpretive authority of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau.
As part of the supervisory process, the banking agencies
review bank security protections for new payment interfaces, as
well as for compliance with rules on information security,
identity theft prevention, and anti-money laundering.
Many of the questions that have arisen with respect to
mobile payments, however, relate to the involvement of
nonbanks. Nonbanks can have a variety of roles in a
transaction, such as an agent of a bank, a manager of a prepaid
value program, a money transmitter or a company that bills
customers for payment transactions. The applicability of
existing consumer protection laws or security requirements to
nonbanks generally depends on the nonbank's role in the mobile
payment and the specific provisions of a particular statute.
In conclusion, it is difficult to make broad
generalizations about the applicability of existing statutes
and rules to mobile payments. This is due to the different
types of service providers, bank and nonbank, the wide variety
of payment arrangements and the potential applicability of both
banking and nonbanking laws to any given arrangement. Given
recent technological developments in mobile payments, further
analysis of the adequacy of existing laws may be appropriate in
order to ensure that consumers are adequately protected.
At the same time, given the fast-paced nature of changes in
this area and the potential for significant improvements in
consumer financial services through mobile payments, further
fact-finding would aid that analysis and would be helpful to
ensure that any legislative or regulatory proposals would not
stifle the very innovations that would benefit consumers
overall.
Thank you again for inviting me to appear today. I am happy
to answer any of the committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of Associate General Counsel Martin
can be found on page 32 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. I want to thank you both and I will
begin with my 5 minutes of questioning. I would like to make a
comment on something, Ms. Martin, you said at the end of your
statement, because of the dinner that we had last night, I
think we had five presenters who had a whole range of forward-
thinking mobile payments, some that are currently in the
system, some that are innovating into the system. And one of
the concerns that they have and I think we share the concern
and you did through your comments is that we don't get ahead of
the curve here regulatorily, with regulation, and stifle the
innovation and cut off what could be an ease of payment,
bringing in people who are not in the bank or underbanked. And
so, the point of this hearing is to really see where are we and
where do we need to be, not so much where do we as lawmakers
need to come in and clamp down. I don't think that is an issue,
but I think it is something to keep our eye on.
I would like to ask a general question. Are there in
existence now informal or formal agreements between banks on
the mobile payments issues? Is this a structure that banks have
formally recognized through specific agreement along the lines
of mobile payment and conflicted consumer protections that are
contained within or does it fall within just a general--
Ms. Martin. I would say for particular new arrangements
that are using new technologies, usually you see a partnership.
Often, you see a partnership between a bank and a nonbank
service provider, sometimes the telephone company would be
involved. So in a particular mobile payment arrangement, they
would have contracts and agreements in place as to how that
will work. But many of these arrangements ultimately get
funding (into a mobile wallet, for example), using existing, I
will call them, ``payment rails.'' So a consumer with a virtual
wallet who wants to put in that wallet a credit card or debit
card would be funding those credit or debit card transactions
through the normal card networks.
Chairwoman Capito. Existing.
Ms. Martin. Those arrangements and agreements and rules are
already in place. Is that responsive to your--
Chairwoman Capito. Yes. I don't know if you have a comment
on that, if you are aware, and certainly at FinCEN, you are
looking internationally, too. Are there specialized agreements
for mobile payments that you are aware of or do they just fall
within the normal bank-to-bank relationship agreements that are
already existing?
Mr. Freis. I would concur with Ms. Martin that if you are
trying to transfer between different financial institutions,
then it is largely today reliant on existing bank centric
networks such as those involving what we commonly know as your
MasterCard or Visa card for which you need a bank to be an
issuer of that card relationship. Otherwise, you are talking
about proprietary systems, so I am going to a specific money
transmitter and I must be a member of that network.
Chairwoman Capito. Let me ask you this, too, in your
statement you were talking about nonbank participants in mobile
payment, and one of the innovators that we saw was talking
about being able to have a card that you could swap between
paying with your Visa debit, for example, or maybe your rewards
points. That would be something that really wouldn't be
covered, because that would really be a vendor. Let's say you
would be using your USAir frequent flier miles or something of
that nature. Is that something that you all have taken into
consideration or are looking at? Do you understand what I am
asking?
Ms. Martin. I understand that you could have a mobile
wallet arrangement where you can choose different ways of
paying for whatever you are purchasing.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Ms. Martin. And today you have a credit card with flight
miles on it that is usually redeemable at a specific merchant.
So I can use my US Air flight miles at USAir. That is typically
within a very proprietary system. But if I were to use my debit
card, then I would have to go get the money from my bank
account, so that would move over payment card network rails. I
think it is going to depend on what card you pull out of your
virtual wallet as to what rails that transaction will follow.
Chairwoman Capito. Right. I think the important thing on
that is the consumer protection jurisdictions and are they
covering all sorts of different transactions that may be coming
over the same virtual wallet.
Ms. Martin. Right. I think one of the issues is to look at
the consumer protection laws such as the EFTA and TILA. If is
there a credit card involved, it is the CFPB that is going to
have the rule-writing authority under those laws. But it is not
clear that those laws do apply in each case where a nonbank is
involved.
Chairwoman Capito. Right. I think that is the point you
were making.
Ms. Martin. Yes. In some cases, those laws were really
written with a bank-type relationship in mind. And those
concepts may or may not apply, depending upon what the
nonbank's role is and how the system is structured.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Ms. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, I want to thank both of the
panelists today for your testimony, and I agree with the
chairwoman that we certainly do not want to stifle innovation,
which was part of your testimony, Ms. Martin, as we move
forward to make sure that consumers are protected and that
money laundering is prevented and that other things are in
place.
As you look at this evolving new technology, I must say in
terms of privacy and consumer protection, some of the
technology really identified the person by their voice, by a
photograph, very detailed ID that would be hard for someone to
steal your identity, which is regrettably a growing crime in
America among many of our constituents. I would like to get a
sense from you because this is not necessarily a bank, it is
not necessarily--it is like new. Who do you think would be the
primary regulator? Someone has to be in charge. Which agency
should take the prime role over mobile payments which are not
necessarily bank products? And to what extent should the
banking regulators be involved and coordinate? And who do you
see as taking the form of the primary regulator, the FCC, the
FTC, the CFPB, the Federal Reserve, Treasury?
Your comments first, Mr. Freis, and then Ms. Martin. How do
you see this being regulated? We have to have someone to call
if there is a problem.
Mr. Freis. Yes. Thank you for your question. From my
perspective at FinCEN, we have a great deal of experience in
working with a range of different financial service providers
and a range of different agencies to ensure appropriate
regulation. So for the anti-money laundering counterterrorist
financing purposes, the principle is any way that you can move
money, any way that you can intermediate value can be abused by
a criminal actor. So that is the reason why FinCEN looks at
this aspect centrally. In the example that I have given whether
a money transmission is made through a bank, whether it is made
through a traditional money services business or through new
providers such as in the mobile payment space we have a common
interest in making sure that we have done as much as possible
to mitigate the risk of criminal abuse.
In so doing, we rely on the Federal banking agencies or
State regulators and money transmission space, and we found
that is an important working model just as we do in other areas
such as insurance, working with the States or with the SEC
working in the securities industry. Each of them will have a
primary responsibility with respect to whether it is safety and
soundness, consumer protection, but our ability to work with
them is on our single mission of the anti-money laundering
requirements, I think it is central to avoiding the regulatory
gaps and the balances they must take that criminals frankly
would abuse. So I think the model we have, at least for my
purposes, is working.
Mrs. Maloney. And Ms. Martin?
Ms. Martin. I agree basically with what Jim said. I think
it is an interesting strategic question to think about what
agency should take ownership of this area. It is such a broad
area and it covers so many different types of entities, it is
really hard to point to one agency with the right experience
and expertise that can cover the gamut. So at least as a first
step, it certainly seems to me that there should be
coordination and consultation among all of the agencies you
named, as well as FinCEN and State regulators, to figure out
who has what, who is covering what bases, and what gaps there
are that need to be addressed. And I think you can achieve
consistent results in that way through interagency discussion
and coordination.
Mrs. Maloney. That is true, but finally someone has to be
in charge. Otherwise, everyone is pointing fingers at each
other, but building on your question or the statement that you
had, they were testifying to us or telling us at this dinner we
had exploring the new technologies that they are out there now,
tens of thousands of people are already using these products.
And so, I wanted to know what protections have States or
actions have States put in place to protect consumers from
unauthorized transactions and disputed charges to prepaid phone
deposits or wireless phone bills? I am wondering what actions
States have taken, if any, in this area?
Ms. Martin. States do have money transmitter laws, where if
the entity meets the definition of money transmitter, many
States have registration requirements and some bonding and
investment limitations. To that extent, I know States do have
some laws.
When you talk about bringing phone companies into the
equation, perhaps that is something we might want the FCC to
weigh in on. I am not sure what kinds of protections exist in
telecommunications law for consumers who are billed for
particular line items on their bill which might represent a
payment. I think that is worth some further investigation.
Mrs. Maloney. My time is up. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco?
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Martin, we
often talk about the unbanked in our country. It is noted that
10 percent of mobile payment users don't have a bank account
and that roughly 30 million Americans are either unbanked or
underbanked. So how do you feel the growth of mobile payments
will affect this group and would they be more or less likely to
enter the banking system?
Ms. Martin. It is hard to predict the second question that
you asked. I think mobile payments present a good opportunity
for the banked and unbanked to obtain payments services perhaps
that are more efficient and perhaps even cheaper than what
their alternatives are today, which may be going to a check
casher or a money transmitter and paying pretty hefty fees. It
is also very convenient. As you stated or somebody stated, over
90 percent of people do have a mobile phone, so it is a very
ready device for them to enter into the financial system.
To the extent that banks can offer products that are
available through that mechanism, that might be a way to get
people into a bank relationship through a mobile phone that is
a replacement for a check casher or buying a money order.
Mr. Canseco. One concern, Ms. Martin, that I have is that
we adopt a regulatory framework that makes it more costly and
more prohibitive for market participants to innovate within the
space. What specific steps should regulators be taking to
encourage innovation and investment in the mobile payments
space while also ensuring that data security and enforcement of
anti-money laundering laws are working?
Ms. Martin. Yes, the walk on the fine line between
regulation and not stifling innovation is always a tricky one.
I think it is important for regulators to set some priorities
and some key concerns that you would like to see addressed in
these mobile payment arrangements regardless of how they are
structured. I mentioned a couple in my testimony; one basic
consumer protection is security. You might add anti-money
laundering to that list. So if we can look across all of these
arrangements and make sure that those key concerns are met,
then maybe you don't want to drill down into more detailed
requirements until you see where the market is going to come
out. So allow people to experiment, innovate with pilot
programs until some industry best practices are established.
And then, that might be a time where you see particular
patterns emerging that you think you should address with more
regulation. That might be the time to do that.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you. This next question goes both to
you, Mr. Freis, and Ms. Martin. Do you believe that
international standards should apply to mobile payments? And if
so, what type of coordination is going on between regulators in
the United States and other countries?
Mr. Freis. I am happy to address that first. With respect
to our anti-money laundering counterterrorist financing
efforts, we have developed international principles in terms of
expectations as to what the risks are and efforts are to
mitigate them. We do that at a broad level in terms of
different products area, including money transmission, not
things that are specific to the device of mobile payments as
opposed to other mechanisms for entering the system, and I
believe that is the right approach, especially based on the
concern that you just expressed about rapidly evolving
technology. It is better for us to define the risk and
expectations of how to mitigate them and not to prescribe one
specific area.
By the time we had agreed on any international basis, it
would already be obsolete in terms of technological advances.
That is being done on an international basis in particular
through the Financial Action Task Force. The United States has
been very active in guiding those developments and pushing
other countries to work in that area. I can tell you in my own
work in the development of these prepaid access regulations,
specifically including mobile phones as I have described in my
testimony, I very actively engaged with my counterparts, both
the regulatory side and the law enforcement support side,
throughout the entirety of this process, sending them copies of
the documents when we put them out for public notice and
comment, seeking from them examples of specific cases where
they might have seen law enforcement abuse to make sure we were
addressing those specific concerns.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, sir. Ms. Martin?
Ms. Martin. I would agree with that and also add that it
seems to me that this type of service is so new and rapidly
evolving that it is a bit early at this point to start thinking
about international regulatory standards. Generally, those
kinds of discussions come when systems are more mature and
principles and best practices have been established, and that
really hasn't happened yet.
Mr. Canseco. But we need to start thinking about this.
Ms. Martin. Oh, yes, I do agree with that.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you very much. I see that my time has
expired.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to ask for
unanimous consent to insert 2 statements into the record: one
from the CFPB; and one from The Clearing House Association.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
I now recognize Mr. Baca for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Baca. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking Member
Maloney for calling this meeting, and I thank the witnesses for
being here this morning.
One of the basic goals in reviewing this topic is ensuring
that the consumers understand the product. I think it is very
important that they understand the product they are using and
the risk involved. With the advancement of technology, we have
seen security threats grow as well. When it comes to electronic
payments specifically in identification, theft is a real
concern to a lot of us. What recourse do consumers have when
they encounter problems with unauthorized charges or the amount
they are charged is inaccurate? That is a common problem that
we have, especially people who take advantage of a lot of our
seniors, and seniors are the ones most vulnerable for this kind
of problem, even though they get involved in this technology.
I open it up for either one of you to respond.
Ms. Martin. To the extent a mobile payment results in a
debit through a checking account or a charge to a credit line
that is covered by the EFTA or TILA, both have error resolution
procedures which would kick in for consumers.
Mr. Baca. How would they be informed, because they may be
covered but they want to recoup their money and that is part of
the problem. What is the time in delay between the time
something occurs and the time that their account is reimbursed,
because that means money lost, and a lot of them are on a fixed
income?
Ms. Martin. Right. Under EFTA, the existing timeframes are
set forth in the statute and should be disclosed to consumers
in the bank disclosures as well. I believe an investigation has
to take place within 10 days. If the investigation is not
concluded by that time, the consumer has to be reimbursed while
the investigation continues. But in many cases, it gets
concluded before 10 days are up.
Mr. Baca. Would the consumer be informed of the process of
what is going on within that period of time?
Ms. Martin. I can get back to you on that.
Mr. Baca. If they don't know, they don't know you are doing
anything--
Ms. Martin. The consumer initiates the process, and then
they should be advised of what the process is.
Mr. Baca. ``Should be'' and ``doing it'' are two different
things.
Ms. Martin. The other point that I wanted to make is that
it is not clear that those laws apply in all cases where a
nonbank is involved. I do know that some nonbank payment
providers have incorporated Reg E, EFTA-like, error resolution
procedures into their rules and their user agreements. It is
not quite the same thing as having those error resolution
procedures applied to them by rule, but they are trying to use
those procedures within their own arrangements.
Mr. Baca. Okay. Let me ask another question, along these
same lines. Consumers sometimes find miscellaneous or added
charges tacked onto their monthly bills. We used to see this a
lot with credit cards. Obviously, this has caused a lot of
consumers to dispute charges. How consistent are the mobile
payments dispute resolutions policies of the various wireless
providers? And should Federal regulators pursue a minimal
national standard?
Ms. Martin. The wireless provider consumer dispute
resolution process would be something I think that the FCC
would weigh in on. That is really outside my area of expertise
or knowledge. That would have to do with if you get billed on
your phone bill for a payment that is wrong, what are your
rights? And I think that merits some further investigation and
fact-finding.
Mr. Baca. And then consumers have expressed concern with
practice--oh, my time has expired. I am sorry.
Chairwoman Capito. You actually have 58 seconds left, but
we have just been called for a vote, so I am going to go to Mr.
Luetkemeyer because he is the next questioner. And then when he
completes his call, we will decide what the will of the
committee is if we want to come back. We have two votes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you
for the briefing the other night on mobile payment systems. It
was quite instructional, and after the meeting I told my staff
that I am going to have to get rid of my rotary phone and get
in the 21st Century here.
So thank you for being here this morning and I have just a
quick couple of follow-up questions relating to what my
colleague, Mr. Canseco here, asked with regard to international
standards. Ms. Martin, you made the comment that you are going
to wait until the market is mature before you actually get into
the middle of a regulatory promulgation here and that is kind
of after the horse is out the door if you are going to take
that approach. I would think you would want to work with those
entities that are producing these new innovations and find ways
to curtail abuses of those right off the bat. I was surprised
at that comment.
Ms. Martin. My remark there was directed specifically
towards international standards.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. International standards are what I am
concerned about.
Ms. Martin. Generally when we work on international
standards in other contexts, this occurs when we have some
rules and thoughts in place about how that market is regulated
here. All I am saying is that I think we need to do further
investigation domestically before we start talking
internationally.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Are you familiar with the CFPB's proposed
rule dealing with international wire transfer services?
Ms. Martin. I didn't hear the first part.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Are you familiar with CFPB's proposed rule
dealing with international wire transfer services?
Ms. Martin. The remittance rule?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes.
Ms. Martin. I am somewhat familiar with it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Are you for it, against it, think it
is going to work? How is it going to affect mobile payments, I
guess is the question?
Ms. Martin. That is a good question. I am not sure there
are any mobile payment arrangements at this time--and maybe,
Jim, you can jump in here--that are being used for
international remittances.
Mr. Freis. Actually, there are some services for which
mobile payments are a part of that international remittance
network, as I have mentioned in my written testimony, but that
are covered from our regulatory framework. And, Congressman,
responding to your question, I just wanted to reiterate that we
at FinCEN recognize the risks of cross-border payments, and it
is for that purpose that although some of our regulations are
subject to thresholds or some activity test, any ability to
transfer money in or out of the country from a zero dollar
threshold automatically brings that payment mechanism,
including that mobile phone network, into our regulatory
framework and subject to all of those controls.
And furthermore, one of the risks that we had concern with
is that if we impose an important regulatory framework on the
United States but do not do something with the ability of
entities from outside the country to access, that would pose a
vulnerability. So we specifically have also amended our
regulatory framework last year taking advantage of the full
authority that Congress gave to us to assert jurisdiction over
foreign-based money transmitter providers to the extent that
they are serving U.S. persons. So that also should avoid that
type of regulatory arbitrage, people from outside the United
States.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. There were a couple of studies that had
been done. The Atlanta Fed, Swift, and the World Bank have
acknowledged that these new services had a potential to
facilitate money laundering. And, the Swift study recommends
that regulators take a proportionate approach, limited amounts
that can be transferred, advanced financial inclusion and
ensure the soundness of financial services.
What are your thoughts on those recommendations or are you
aware of those?
Mr. Freis. Yes, I am, and it is exactly those type of
considerations that we took into account in the development and
promulgation of this final rule last year, and we will continue
to monitor. One thing I can say is that something I instituted
after joining the agency more than 5 years ago is a year after
we promulgate a new rule, we take a look at whether it is
achieving its intended effect and then reconsider whether
changes are made. That is something we will constantly look at
and will certainly be doing in this area in a very rapidly
evolving marketplace.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Our final questioner will be Mr. Scott,
and I think then we will dismiss the panel. We have about 10
minutes left until votes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Let me just ask you
this: What advice would you give the American people if one of
them were to lose their cell phone, their mobile phone? What
should they do, especially regarding how they protect their
vital information? What should they do if they lose their cell
phone?
Ms. Martin. I would say two things, and one is, before you
lose your cell phone, make sure you have a password on it.
Mr. Scott. I am sorry, you said, ``password?''
Ms. Martin. Password-protect your cell phone. Also, I think
it is very important for consumers to understand what is on
their phone and who to call if they lose their phone. So to
have that information somewhere other than on your phone would
be a very good step in helping you mitigate the problems that
could occur if you lose your cell phone.
Mr. Scott. Okay. But on your side of things, what steps
would you as regulators take to make sure consumers know how
and when and where to complain, to call, what do they do? It is
good that they put their cell phone, their ID and password and
all of that, but is there anything specifically they should do?
Should they just forget it? If for example, I lose my credit
card, I am going to call somebody and I am going to say, stop
payment on that. So there ought to be something or some
procedure we can communicate to the consumer as to what you do,
particularly if that consumer may not have the password on it
or they may have--some scam artists out there now are capable
of doing a lot of things with this advance in technology. So if
we don't have a procedure for what consumers should do, we
ought to get something out so consumers will know how, when,
where, and who to contact once they lose this precious
instrument.
Ms. Martin. I think who you call might depend on what kinds
of mobile payment applications you have on your phone. If I had
a mobile wallet with a credit card attached to it, I would do
exactly the same thing as if I lost my plastic; I would call
that credit card company. I think many of those procedures that
you would follow if you lost your real wallet would be the same
things you would do if you lost your phone.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Mr. Freis, do you have any comment on
that? What advice would you give consumers?
Mr. Freis. I think being aware of the risk is clear. One
thing that must be said is that part of the reason why these
payment products, these prepaid whether it is through a mobile
phone or a card have taken off because do you have recourse to
your funds. So unlike if you lost your wallet with cash in it,
if you have lost a card, you do have the ability to contact the
provider to shut down that old card and get your money back. It
is not lost for good. So it is exactly that, which has been of
benefit to consumers, and I agree with you that it is important
that they understand these steps to take to follow to get the
funds back such as Ms. Martin described.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. With us being on a vote, and
no further questions, the Chair notes that some Members may
have additional questions for this panel, which they may wish
to submit in writing. Without objection, the hearing record
will remain open for 30 days for Members to submit written
questions to these witnesses and to place their responses in
the record.
I appreciate the witnesses coming today, and I know we will
have many more discussions on this as the evolving technology
brings different challenges, but also different opportunities,
and I appreciate that. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:28 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 29, 2012

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


