- MORTGAGE SERVICING: AN EXAMINATION OF THE ROLE OF FEDERAL REGULATORS IN SETTLEMENT NEGOTIATIONS AND THE FUTURE OF MORTGAGE SERVICING STANDARDS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MORTGAGE SERVICING: AN EXAMINATION
OF THE ROLE OF FEDERAL REGULATORS
IN SETTLEMENT NEGOTIATIONS AND THE
FUTURE OF MORTGAGE SERVICING STANDARDS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL

INSTITUTIONS AND CONSUMER CREDIT

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 7, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-44

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-939                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania, Vice Chairman          Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          MAXINE WATERS, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JOE BACA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas   JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 7, 2011.................................................     1
Appendix:
July 7, 2011.................................................    71

WITNESSES
Thursday, July 7, 2011

Calhoun, Michael, President, Center for Responsible Lending (CRL)    54
Date, Raj, Associate Director for Research, Markets, and
Regulations, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, U.S.
Department of the Treasury.....................................    16
Pearce, Mark, Director, Division of Depositor and Consumer
Protection, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation..............    14
Stevens, David H., President and CEO, Mortgage Bankers
Association (MBA)..............................................    52
Strange, Hon. Luther, Alabama Attorney General...................    18
Williams, Julie L., First Senior Deputy Comptroller and Chief
Counsel, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.............    12

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Calhoun, Michael.............................................    72
Date, Raj....................................................    86
Pearce, Mark.................................................    95
Stevens, David H.............................................   106
Strange, Hon. Luther.........................................   123
Williams, Julie L............................................   128

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.............................................   146
Written statement of the National Association of REALTORS...   171
Neugebauer, Hon. Randy:
E-mail exchanges and charts..................................   176
Hinojosa, Hon. Ruben:
Supplemental Directive 11-06 dated July 6, 2011, ``Making
Home Affordable Program--Updates to Servicer Incentives''..   209
Calhoun, Michael:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Baca.......................................................   213
Date, Raj:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Baca.......................................................   214
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Luetkemeyer................................................   215
Williams, Julie L.:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Baca.......................................................   216

MORTGAGE SERVICING: AN EXAMINATION
OF THE ROLE OF FEDERAL REGULATORS
IN SETTLEMENT NEGOTIATIONS AND THE
FUTURE OF MORTGAGE SERVICING STANDARDS

----------

Thursday, July 7, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
and Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m.,
in room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the Financial Institutions and Consumer
Credit Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit: Representatives Capito,
Renacci, Royce, Manzullo, Hensarling, McHenry, Pearce,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Grimm, Canseco, Fincher; Maloney,
Ackerman, Hinojosa, Baca, Miller of North Carolina, Scott, and
Carney.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations: Representatives Neugebauer, Fitzpatrick, Posey,
Hayworth; Capuano, Waters, and Himes.
Ex officio present: Representatives Bachus and Frank.
Also present: Representatives Stivers, Schweikert, Garrett;
Perlmutter and Green.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order.
I would like to thank my ranking member, Mrs. Maloney, as
well as the chairman of the Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, Chairman Neugebauer--I am sure he will be here in
just a few minutes--and his ranking member, Mr. Capuano, for
their cooperation in organizing this joint hearing.
Many Members have expressed a great interest in having a
hearing on the topic of mortgage servicing. And it is my hope
that today's hearing will provide a forum for Members to cover
a multitude of subjects involving mortgage servicing.
We were all shocked to hear the news last fall of
allegations that major mortgage servicers had engaged in robo-
signing and falsifying documents in order to expedite
foreclosures.
Last November, the Housing and Community Opportunity
Subcommittee held a hearing on deficiencies in the foreclosure
process. In the months following, Federal regulators have
embarked upon an effort to assess the damage caused by these
irresponsible actions, determine the need for national
servicing standards, and if appropriate, establish penalties
for these institutions.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for Members to question
regulators that have been at the forefront of these
negotiations. As these regulators consider remedies for the
problems, it is important that we first identify who has been
harmed by the actions of the servicers.
A survey by the regulators of the 2,800 mortgage
foreclosure files demonstrated that there were, indeed,
weaknesses in the procedures, but failed to show evidence that
borrowers had been significantly harmed.
It is my hope that the consent orders agreed to by the
agencies and the servicers will provide further clarity about
the extent of the harm to borrowers, as well as improved
systems.
Some have raised questions about the role of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) in the ongoing negotiations
with servicers and the State attorneys general. Our witnesses
from these respective parties can add further clarity on the
role that each had played in these negotiations.
Recent news accounts indicate that a monetary settlement is
immanent between major servicers and the State attorneys
general. I am interested to hear from our witnesses if all
State attorneys general are active in these negotiations.
If the settlement is reached, there must be strict
oversight as to how the money is distributed and what
classifies as harm for borrowers. The proposed settlement
between these parties will have a direct impact on servicing
standards going forward.
Our second panel will provide information about steps that
servicers have already taken to address deficiencies in their
systems, as well as the need for national servicing standards.
The input of both industry and consumer representatives is
critical in this endeavor. A national servicing standard will
have an effect on the mortgage market and we must work together
to ensure that new servicing standards, coupled with the
proposed qualified residential mortgage standard and other
efforts, do not unintentionally impede the recovery of the
mortgage market.
I would like to recognize the ranking minority member of
the Financial Institutions Subcommittee, the gentlelady from
New York, Mrs. Maloney, for the purpose of giving an opening
statement.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito and Chairman
Neugebauer. And I welcome all of the witnesses today.
Last fall, reports emerged that mortgage servicers were
taking shortcuts in processing foreclosure notices and
violating the law. Specifically, it was reported that servicers
were using inadequate documentation to foreclose some
borrowers.
And it was revealed that many servicers were engaging in
large scale foreclosures without personal knowledge of the
condition of the loan or the borrower's independent financial
circumstances.
In addition, we now know that lenders forged signatures and
improperly notarized documents in the rush to foreclose on
homeowners. These allegations led to a 50-State investigation
into the matter of robo-signing and forged signatures.
And just in April, the Federal regulators entered into a
consent decree with the largest servicers requiring them to
submit their action plans for foreclosure mitigation. I
understand they are due tomorrow or this week.
This is a step in the right direction for the industry, and
most importantly for the consumers and our overall economy. But
rather than holding a hearing about the need for servicing
standards and about intervention on behalf of the Federal
regulators, many of my colleagues appear more interested in
defending the status quo, and suggesting that the States and
the Federal regulators stand down.
I thought that no one disputed that things need to change
in the servicing industry. Because from where I sit, it is
clear that left to their own devices, many servicers have
engaged in abusive and unfair behavior and have literally
violated the law. And they would have continued to do that if
there had not been exposure.
Yet, my colleagues are eliminating Federal programs such as
HAMP, which was very successful in helping people renegotiate
their loans. But I understand there is a movement that they may
extend the HAMP program for a period of time. I hope it is
true. And questioning Federal intervention in the industry, the
same industry that got us into the mess to begin with.
My friends on the other side of the aisle are essentially
criticizing the State AGs for investigating these matters, even
though they are investigating potential violations of State law
with respect to foreclosure processes and rules.
I had assumed the party of States' rights would support
their right to do this, not say their actions are
inappropriate. Are they really saying that the servicers
shouldn't be held accountable for violating laws of all 50
States and the District of Colombia?
States such as Illinois, California, Utah, and Connecticut
are engaging in independent investigations, separate and apart
from the settlement negotiations, because they too recognize
the need to intervene.
My colleagues are entitled to question things, but they are
certainly not entitled to their own facts. And the servicing
issue has certainly been a problem in the whole recovery.
For me, the hearing is not about the role of the CFPB
during settlement negotiation. It should be about allegations
of abuse in the mortgage servicing industry. These abuses are
yet one more reason why we need the CFPB and why it has
assembled a team that will work on servicing standards once it
opens its door on July 21st.
For me, this hearing is about making sure that this type of
abuse never happens again. My time has expired. I look forward
to your testimony.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the chairman of the Oversight
Subcommittee, Mr. Neugebauer, for the purpose of an opening
statement.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
We are holding this important hearing today to better
understand the appropriate role of regulators in addressing the
failings of some of the Nation's largest mortgage servicing
firms.
There is no doubt that documentation, internal controls,
and processing were seriously deficient at some of the Nation's
servicing firms, and that remedial steps to secure these
deficiencies are necessary. As a result, the OCC, the Fed, and
the OTS entered into a consent agreement with the servicers to
address many of these weaknesses in the mortgage foreclosure
process in April of this year.
While I will not comment directly on the regulatory
settlement, it is worth noting that prudential regulators led
investigations of the mortgage servicers and to remediate
deficiencies seems appropriate.
Unfortunately, the State attorneys general and political
appointees at the Department of the Treasury and the DOJ are
pursuing a separate, more far-reaching settlement.
Participation of political appointees, especially that of
Elizabeth Warren at the CFPB, an agency with no regulatory or
enforcement authority, raises serious concerns about the
settlement process.
When political appointees involve themselves in enforcement
matters, that may pressure regulatory agencies to advance a
particular agenda.
The breadth and the terms of the term sheets presented to
the mortgage servicers, which includes a potential $20 billion
settlement--we are hearing that could be a $60 billion
settlement--for a principal reduction fund, magnifies these
concerns that the Administration and some State AGs are
attempting to legislate through enforcement.
Speaking more directly, a review of the term sheet brings
some words to mind including ``coercion'' and ``extortion.''
Even yesterday, the New York Post reported that the
principal reduction fund, as I said, could be nearly $60
billion. The settlement proposal requires the resuscitation of
policies and programs that have not worked or that Congress has
explicitly rejected. For example, the proposed term sheet seeks
to revive HAMP, a failed Administration initiative that
requires principal write-downs, a policy rejected both in the
House and the Senate.
All of this would be funded by the mortgage servicers, with
the tab in the tens of billions of dollars.
While restitution for victims specifically harmed by
misconduct is completely appropriate, there is no evidence that
borrowers have been significantly harmed by the servicers'
actions. In fact, the interagency review conducted by the Fed
and the OCC found that in all of the 2,800 mortgage files that
were examined, the borrowers were seriously delinquent and the
servicer had the legal authority to foreclose.
It would be interesting to hear from some of the witnesses
as to why a large scale principal write-down fund would be
appropriate punishment, especially since there is no evidence
that servicer malfeasance caused financial hardship to victims.
Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for this hearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Frank, for 3 minutes.
Mr. Frank. First, let us be clear why we are so concerned
about this, because there are two reasons. The first is a
consideration of fairness for individuals. My colleague has
just said that there is no evidence that anyone was harmed by
the failure of the servicers to follow the law.
Usually, we hold people to a standard of following the law
without a burden of proof on us to show specific harm in
specific cases. In fact, the servicers as a group are quite
culpable here.
First, many of them were engaged in making loans that
shouldn't have been made. And then they compounded that by
being inadequately staffed to deal with the problems that
arose. I have seen few things done as incompetently as the role
of the mortgage servicers. And to exonerate them and say, ``no
harm, no foul,'' I think is inappropriate.
I also was surprised to hear my colleague be so critical of
political appointees. For Members who are elected to office and
run every 2 years to talk about ``political'' as if that was
something bad seems to me quite inconsistent with our mandate.
The notion that political appointees are somehow not to be
treated as serious policymakers is not only inaccurate; that is
called ``democracy.'' I would say, and this hearing will, of
course, make it clear, if people really believe that things
should be handled totally non-politically, they should not ask
that 535 politicians make the decisions, which is us.
I would also say I was surprised to hear this criticism of
the State attorneys general. I shouldn't say I was surprised,
because it has been a constant theme in this committee, where
there has unfortunately been a party difference on respect for
the role of the States. It is a kind of a total reversal.
Conservatives used to talk about States' rights, but there
has been a consistent move on the part of many on the other
side to diminish and minimize the role of the State. Finally,
let's be very clear again that we are doing this not just
because of individuals, but the mortgage problem, the
combination--and a lot of people were responsible. A lot of
people were guilty.
At this point, though, a failure to respond more
appropriately is causing great harm economically. And one of
the things we need to do to improve the rate of recovery--we
are in a recovery, but it is much too slow--is to deal with
this problem of the rate of foreclosures.
So I very much look forward to this testimony. But I would
reject the notion that somehow it is inappropriate for
policymakers, people who have elections and are appointed by
people who are elected, including the State attorneys general
and high ranking Federal officials, to be involved.
And finally, this continued effort to demonize Elizabeth
Warren because she has advised people--not ordered anybody, not
insisted--of what to do--is, I think, bizarre.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Bachus, for 2 minutes.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito. I have
listened to my colleagues on both sides. And there is actually
some agreement and some consensus, despite what you may have
heard. We all recognize that there have been shortcomings,
shortcuts, and shoddy paperwork by some of the mortgage
servicing companies.
In fact, Chairman Neugebauer mentioned that the OCC and the
Federal Reserve acted to correct these in April. And I think
all members of this committee supported that.
Our concern is not the concern that Ranking Member Frank
expressed. Our concerns have been the same for the last 2 or 3
years.
And one of those concerns is that the government's efforts
in the housing markets have actually--in many cases, they have
had mixed results. So let us just say that to be kind, they
have been expensive, but they have often been
counterproductive.
The HAMP program is a good example, where billions of
dollars have been spent to try to prevent foreclosures. The
target was 4 million foreclosures. And I think it has come in
at about a half a million. And of those, many of them have gone
back into foreclosure.
I do think on both sides of the aisle, we agree that we
need to work through this backlog of foreclosures. And that is
good for all of us. The housing market needs to see a proper
level.
In fact, here is what Chairman Bernanke said before our
committee about 6 months ago: ``I would like to see further
efforts to modify loans where appropriate, and where not
appropriate.'' And that is what we are talking about, ``where
not appropriate.'' Many times, it is not appropriate.
That is what we worry about with this settlement. People in
houses who aren't paying their mortgages, and yet the mortgage
companies are not only being stopped from foreclosing on it,
but these people continue to be in their homes and not pay
their mortgages.
And we don't think it is appropriate for people who are not
paying their mortgages or who can't pay their mortgages to
receive all the focus. We believe, and I think the American
people believe, that their neighbors who are paying their
mortgage--the vast amount of Americans who are paying their
mortgage or have not gotten into these mortgages.
And we have advocated fairness for these people. Let me
close by saying Chairman Bernanke, and I agree with him, he
says that, ``We need to speed the process of foreclosure and
the disposition of foreclosed homes in order to clear the
housing market and have a recovery.''
That is what we have advocated all along, fairness for
those Americans who are paying their mortgage and fairness for
those Americans who are attempting to make their mortgage
payments, not all the focus and all the money being spent on
those who aren't paying their mortgage payments.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The Minority is going to continue to reserve their time.
Mr. Frank. May I have 1 minute?
Chairwoman Capito. The ranking member is recognized for 1
minute.
Mr. Frank. First of all, we agree that some mortgages
should have to be paid. I have never been supportive of this in
every case.
But there are some very worthy cases, including those who
are unemployed. And I heard last night and it was mentioned
today in USA Today--I guess Secretary Donovan is now having a
hearing on it--the Administration is extending, for people who
are entitled to do this and are able to deal with it, the
foreclosure moratorium for the unemployed and for those in the
HAMP program to 12 months.
Some of us have been asking for an extension. There has
been a 3-month moratorium.
They are in the process of announcing right now that the
moratorium will be extended 12 months. And to take the point of
the chairman, that is not for everybody. That will be for some.
It would certainly not make sense if there was no chance of
people repaying, where you are talking about the unemployed.
But many of us have felt that the 3 months where other
criteria were met, where people were appropriately given that
kind of forbearance, was not nearly enough time. And I think
the 12-month extension will help very much.
Chairman Bachus. Madam Chairwoman, can I have 1 minute just
to respond? And I want to agree with the ranking member.
I do want to say this: there is some good news out there
for all of us. One in 20 American families wants to buy a home
today. And they have good credit. Our concern is that those
families who want to get into mortgages, we don't want the
government efforts to prevent them or drive up the cost for
them to buy a home.
We want those families who are looking for homes to be able
to get into those homes. And we believe that the focus ought to
be on them and not on those who can't make payments or do not
have proper credit.
I think we can all get there. And I want to commend the
regulators. We all acknowledge we were too loose in 2006 and
2007 with our underwriting standards.
But two wrongs don't make a right. And being too tight
today or responding inappropriately today with too tight
standards or settlements that really don't help those Americans
who want to buy a home is counterproductive.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to try to get back in my rhythm here, so I am
going to recognize Mr. Fitzpatrick, the vice chair of the
Oversight Subcommittee, for 1 minute.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
For my constituents in the eighth district of Pennsylvania,
few issues could be more relevant or important than those that
are dealing with the usual foreclosure. Our economic situation
is both a symptom and a result of our Nation's housing woes.
So as we work together to repair the damage, improve the
economy, and ensure that these failures won't happen again, we
cannot forget about those victims who have already been
affected.
Foreclosure puts a unique strain on a family. And the
damage can linger for years.
This committee and this body have a responsibility to make
sure that the mechanisms in place to avoid this catastrophic
event are functioning. Mortgage servicers are on the frontline
of this battle. Issues with our mortgage finance system aside,
servicers are the primary point of contact for most homeowners.
Our constituents' service staff works closely with
servicers in an attempt to avoid foreclosure. We count on the
servicers to be responsive to our efforts and the regulators to
be helpful toward that end.
So, Madam Chairwoman, I look forward to this hearing.
I am hopeful we are going to hear that progress has been
made in this area. But more importantly, I want to hear that
improvements are going to continue.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Ms. Waters from California for
1\1/2\ minutes to make an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Capito and
Chairman Neugebauer, for holding this hearing.
Mortgage servicing was a topic of intense focus for me when
I was chairwoman of the Housing and Community Opportunity
Subcommittee. And it is good to have a joint hearing on this
topic today.
I think it is a little late, but we really do have to deal
with this subject.
And while I am pleased to have the opportunity to question
our witnesses today, I am a bit perplexed as to why the
subcommittee has decided not to invite any servicers to
testify. After all, it is their corner-cutting and even fraud
that causes us to be in this hearing today. I would really like
to hear from them.
Every Member here today has undoubtedly heard from
constituents complaining about servicers not telling them the
truth on the phone, losing back paperwork, and incorrectly
assessing fees, among other improper practices.
So make no mistake, the servicers were allowed to have
these botched operations because regulators failed to rein them
in, despite continuous pleadings from the advocates.
As a result, this failure to act has now culminated in
regulators and State attorneys general trying to make up for
lost time by setting up the industry standards and compensating
borrowers who have been jerked around, often losing their life
savings in the meantime.
While some of my colleagues will no doubt characterize
these settlements as some sort of a shakedown, I see it as an
attempt to disgorge servicers of wrongful profits accrued
through years of running botched, deliberately understaffed
operations.
This is in addition to the untold damage done to the
securities market in this country by the failure of these banks
to properly establish the legal ownership of the mortgages they
packaged and sold.
So, thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I look forward to hearing from our regulators.
Chairwoman Capito. I thank the gentlewoman.
I would like to make a point of clarification. Both Mrs.
Maloney and I felt strongly about having servicers at this
hearing as well. They declined because of the pending legal
settlement and legal discussions going on, and that is why they
are not in attendance at this meeting today.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Royce for 1 minute.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
According to the New York Times, 2 weeks ago, they said in
New York State, it would take lenders 62 years at the current
pace to repossess the 213,000 houses now in severe default or
foreclosure. In New Jersey, they said it would take 49 years.
Economists often argue that a single clearly defined set of
rules would be part of the solution to effective regulation and
certainly to clearing the market. I think it is no wonder that
the housing market continues to sputter.
And I think we add to the problem, given the hodgepodge of
statutes and rules, none of which are the same, by the way.
But we have RESPA, TILA, Dodd-Frank, 50 State laws, local
ordinances, Federal regulations, State regulations, court
rulings, enforcement actions, FHA requirements, VA
requirements, and rural housing service requirements. You have
the Fannie Mae standards and the Freddie Mac standards.
So, at a minimum, the lack of a single clearly defined set
of rules has added to the confusion. It has delayed much of the
market from clearing. It has discouraged private capital from
coming back into this sector.
Economists are right about this. And we could be part of
the solution here if we assist it.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the ranking member for the
remaining time.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. I will use some time and yield some
time to the gentleman from Georgia.
I agree with Chairman Bachus that we need to work through
this backlog that is flowing in our economy. Economists say
housing is roughly 25 percent of our economy. As long as it is
there, we are going to have a problem with our economy.
But we need to do it in a fair way. And I don't think
anyone on this panel or this room agrees with the robo-
signature or moving to evict people from their homes without
meeting with them, telling them of a program for possibilities
that are there, working with them or even finding out if they
have the money in the bank to help move through the process.
So we need to move through it, but in a fair way. And,
again, I look forward to the rules and standards that will be
coming out tomorrow.
And I yield to the great man from Georgia.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
I think I have a few seconds here. But I do want to just
share with the committee that I have just come out of working
on a major home foreclosure prevention event. And we had
phenomenal success.
As many of you may know, Georgia now ranks fourth in the
number of home foreclosures in this Nation. In one of my
counties--Clayton County--1 out of every 70 homes is in some
form of foreclosure.
But we had a very, very effective event in Atlanta,
Georgia, about 2 weeks ago. And because we were able to get the
information there and get under one roof the loan servicers--
which is so important for them to have been here today, but I
understand they had some disagreement with their situation and
could not.
But let me just say, I take my hat off. We had some
outstanding loan servicers there from Bank of America, and
Wells Fargo, and Citizens, and Regions Bank, and SunTrust, all
major servicers.
We were able to save 2,107 homes in one shot over that
weekend, with Treasury's help and HUD's help. And the reason
for it was we were able to get the information processed
adequately.
This has been one of the major reasons why we have had such
a high rate of home foreclosure, because there have been
inadequate information on the parts of exchange from the loan
servicers.
This has not historically been an area of high profit
opportunity for the loan servicers. So they have high turnovers
within the people who are providing the service to the
homeowner.
A homeowner may call one day, come back, get an answer on
his phone, answer it, call back, and there is somebody else
handling their case. But when we can sit down with the loan
servicers and with the homeowners themselves and make sure that
proper information is processed, we can get this problem
licked.
I can't begin to tell you. We had line after lines of
thousands of people, people in wheelchairs, people on canes,
senior citizens, everyone coming at the convention center and
leaving with tears in their eyes, so happy that they were able
to get their problem addressed.
So there is hope out there. There is success out there.
But we have to get the right information and get the loan
servicers to be able to interact properly with the homeowners.
And I wanted to share that positive news. We have a ways to go.
And I look forward to this hearing.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. McHenry for 1 minute.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
There is no doubt the robo-signing debacle uncovered
problems in the mortgage settlement process used by the
Nation's largest servicers. But what is clear is that any
proceeds of a settlement need to recover losses for those who
are actually harmed, and make sure that the management of the
foreclosure process has improved.
Instead, it seems certain folks in the position of
influence to negotiate this deal are working out of the
mentality of ``never let a good crisis go to waste.''
Judicial Watch recently uncovered extensive involvement by
the CFPB, and specifically Ms. Warren, in her attempts to step
well outside of her position as an adviser to both the
President and the Treasury Secretary, providing a detailed
framework for the structure of a settlement and holding
``emergency meetings'' with State attorneys general.
This is troubling. I find this in-depth involvement very
troubling.
I look forward to the rest of the hearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Grimm, for 1 minute?
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito and Chairman
Neugebauer, for holding this hearing.
I appreciate the witnesses' time.
As everyone is aware, the real estate market in the United
States remains very, very weak. It makes it very difficult for
the economy to experience a strong and robust recovery.
And at the same time, the government is either directly or
indirectly underwriting over 90 percent of new home loans in
this country. That is a situation that obviously is
unsustainable.
So in order for the real estate to recover and to stabilize
over the long term, we must get private capital back into the
mortgage market. This is the reason the mortgage servicing
standard is so important to the future of housing finance.
Investors in new mortgage loans must have confidence that
their principal and interest statements will be received in a
timely manner and that their positions will be protected in the
event that a borrower defaults or of a foreclosure, if it
unfortunately occurs.
Without such assurances, I fear that private capital cannot
and will not and will continue to be reluctant to return to the
mortgage market.
Therefore, again, I thank the witnesses. And I look forward
to the rest of this hearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco, for 1 minute?
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Chairman
Neugebauer.
The ongoing foreclosure crisis in this country is one of
the largest challenges facing our economy. Since home prices
began their decline in 2006, millions of Americans have had
their homes foreclosed. And there doesn't seem to be an end in
sight for this cycle.
Last fall, some troubling revelations came out about the
servicers' industry, an industry which is dealing with an
unprecedented amount of workflow due to the crippling housing
market.
As with any other government action towards an industry,
we, as a Congress, must keep a close watch on the regulatory
response to ensure it is targeted and does not make the problem
worse.
I have great concern that potential rules prescribed by
Federal regulators, rules designed to apply to the largest
mortgage servicers, will ultimately impact the smaller
servicers who will find the rules too onerous to stay in the
servicing business.
I am also concerned that the purported State attorney
general settlement with the largest servicers could open the
door to perverse incentives that could make the foreclosure
problem worse.
With this in mind, I look forward to your testimony. Thank
you.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Fincher, for 1 minute?
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
When the mortgage crisis hit our economy a few years ago,
it left many homeowners questioning their American dream. Their
mortgages were now more than their homes were worth. Many
homeowners looked to their lenders, to State governments, and
to Washington to find the answers.
Our number one priority should be not to cripple our
financial institutions, but to find the happy medium to prevent
another mortgage crisis while ensuring that the approach taken
will not impede our economic recovery.
We don't want to fall into the trap, as Chairman Bachus
said a few minutes ago, of overreaching and unintended
consequences.
So I thank the witnesses for coming, and I look forward to
your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our opening statements. I would like to
introduce our first panel of witnesses for the purpose of
giving a 5-minute opening statement.
I would like to yield to the chairman of the full
committee. He would like to introduce his witness really
quickly and then--
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
It is my pleasure to introduce a good friend of mine,
Luther Strange, who is the new attorney general in Alabama.
General Strange was named one of the South's leading economic
development attorneys prior to being elected to his position as
attorney general.
I have read his testimony before this committee. And I
think he offers an awful lot.
He is committed to consumer protection. He is also
committed to a strong economy and to seeing that our Nation
recovers.
I think what he has laid out--and he has some strong
reservations about the settlement that he is being led into,
that it may have some unintended consequences.
Luther and Melissa, his wife, have two sons. And Luther is
normally the tallest guy in the room. He was the starting
center at Tulane University. But he is actually maybe the third
tallest person in the room today because I see Luke and Kane,
his two sons.
Luke works for Joe Bonner, one of our colleagues. And Kane
works for Senator Sessions. And they are the two guys who are
just as tall as Luther back there, sticking way up in the
audience.
So you have a cheering section, Luther. We welcome you. It
is really a pleasure to have you. And you are doing a fine job
as attorney general.
Your testimony is very insightful. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would first like to recognize Ms. Julie Williams, First
Senior Deputy Comptroller and Chief Counsel, Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF JULIE L. WILLIAMS, FIRST SENIOR DEPUTY COMPTROLLER
AND CHIEF COUNSEL, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY

Ms. Williams. Thank you. Chairwoman Capito, Chairman
Neugebauer, Ranking Member Maloney, Ranking Member Capuano, and
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
appear this morning on behalf of the OCC to discuss issues
related to mortgage servicing.
My testimony focuses on three areas. First, my written
statement describes the examinations by the OCC and the other
Federal banking agencies of defects in foreclosure processes at
the 14 largest federally-regulated mortgage servicers.
Although these examinations found that the loans in the
sample examined were seriously delinquent, the exams also found
serious deficiencies of different degrees at each of these
servicers in the areas of foreclosure governance, foreclosure
document preparation, and the oversight of third-party service
providers.
These deficiencies constitute unsafe and unsound banking
practices. To address them, the OCC and the other banking
agencies issued cease-and-desist orders.
The sample of foreclosures reviewed in the exams exposed
serious flaws in the banks' foreclosure processes. But as a
sample it could not, of course, quantify the individual
borrowers who might have suffered financial harm due to these
defects.
That is why the orders issued by the agencies require a
comprehensive and independent review of foreclosure actions
during a 2-year look-back period.
The independent review will seek to identify financially
harmed borrowers who had a pending or completed foreclosure in
2009 or 2010 through two distinct means: one, notice and
outreach to those borrowers of their right to file a complaint,
and to have that complaint reviewed by an independent
consultant; and two, targeted review of the loans of borrowers
who are in identifiable high-risk segments, which will provide
an additional opportunity to detect borrowers who suffered
financial harm.
The orders require that the servicers submit detailed
action plans to revamp major aspects of their mortgage
servicing and foreclosure operation. For example, action plans
are required to implement comprehensive revisions of mortgage
servicing, loan modification, and foreclosure processes.
The orders also address the elimination of dual tracking
and require the establishment of a single point of contact
system, to ensure that borrowers can contact a live person
throughout the process.
The second portion of my written statement discusses the
relationship between the implementation of our enforcement
orders and the separate negotiations that are being conducted
by other authorities. Most notably, the Department of Justice
is coordinating settlement discussions involving DOJ, a group
of other Federal agencies, and State attorneys general.
The scope of these discussions includes issues outside the
scope of our orders, but it also includes areas of mortgage
servicing and foreclosure procedures that overlap with the
scope of action plans that are required under our orders.
Other initiatives also are under way that will affect
mortgage servicing standards. In particular, the newly
announced GSE delinquency management and default prevention
standards will have a substantial effect on servicing
practices, since those standards, for the foreseeable future,
will govern an overwhelming portion of the mortgage market.
These different initiatives will subject servicers to more
rigorous standards and provide borrowers greater protection.
But they also raise the prospect of multiple and potentially
inconsistent standards.
We have strongly urged the value of achieving a common set
of standards, whereby servicers can satisfy not only the terms
of any settlement agreements but other applicable requirements
as well, such as the GSE standards.
In order to help achieve this result, in consultation with
DOJ, we have adjusted the deadline for servicers' submission of
various action plans that are required under our order to
facilitate synchronization with the DOJ-led settlement effort.
In the final portion of my testimony, I discussed the
current interagency effort to develop comprehensive and uniform
servicing standards. The goal here is to establish rigorous,
uniform standards for responsible servicer conduct that reach
beyond the servicers covered by the current enforcement action.
It will be critically important to ensure that any
standards that are adopted apply to and are implemented by all
firms engaged in mortgage servicing, not just the federally-
regulated depository institutions, and that there is strong
oversight of all servicers' compliance.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittees this morning to discuss these important topics.
And I look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Williams can be found on
page 128 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. Mark Pearce, Director, Division of
Depositor and Consumer Protection, FDIC.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARK PEARCE, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF DEPOSITOR AND
CONSUMER PROTECTION, FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION

Mr. Pearce. Great. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Chairman
Neugebauer, Ranking Members Maloney and Capuano, and members of
the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
the FDIC about the ongoing need to address and resolve
challenges in mortgage servicing.
The issues involved continue to impact our housing market,
borrowers, and communities across the Nation. As you know, the
FDIC is not the primary Federal regulator of the largest
financial institutions and mortgage servicers, where major
servicing and foreclosure deficiencies have been found.
Nevertheless, as the insurer of deposits of these
institutions, we remained concerned about the potential
ramification of these deficiencies, not only on these
institutions, but on the housing and mortgage markets overall.
Last fall, in the wake of allegations of robo-signing, the
primary Federal regulators invited the FDIC to participate in
interagency review of the foreclosure practices of 14 of the
largest mortgage servicers. These reviewers identified
significant deficiencies in the foreclosure processes of all 14
institutions.
These deficiencies included the filing of inaccurate
affidavit and other documentation in foreclosure proceedings,
inadequate oversight of attorneys and other third parties
involved in the process, inadequate staffing and training of
employees, and the failure to effectively coordinate the loan
modification and foreclosure process to ensure effective
communications with borrowers seeking to avoid foreclosures.
In April of this year, the primary Federal regulators took
an important first step in addressing the deficiencies by
issuing enforcement orders related to foreclosure practices by
these largest mortgage servicers.
The FDIC is hopeful these orders will put services on a
path to having the staffing, management and operational control
necessary to work effectively with homeowners to fairly and
efficiently resolve mortgage defaults. To do so, regulators
will need to closely monitor the servicers to ensure the orders
are implemented as they are intended to be.
In particular, the review of past foreclosures must be able
to convince the skeptical public that homeowners harmed by
servicer errors have been identified and compensated, as
promised by the primary Federal regulators.
Even if implemented fully, the consent orders are only a
partial resolution to mortgage servicing deficiencies. The
interagency review of foreclosure practices did not purport to
examine loan modification practices or other potential errors
in mortgage servicing.
As such, the FDIC supports the Federal-State collaboration
between the Department of Justice, other Federal agencies, and
the State attorneys general to address a broader range of
issues regarding the servicing process.
A comprehensive resolution for past servicing errors is
essential to the recovery of the housing market and the greater
economy. Past servicer errors had given rise to a multitude of
actual and potential claims from litigation, placing a cloud of
uncertainty over recent foreclosures and transfers of title.
Market anxiety regarding the ownership rights and the
obligation of borrowers and investors dampens expectations
regarding the housing market's recovery and discourages the
return of private capital to the mortgage market.
Accordingly, the FDIC has encouraged the Financial
Stability Oversight Council to continue its efforts in
examining the potential financial systemic risks surrounding
mortgage servicing and foreclosures.
Furthermore, until servicers improve their practices and
processes, some current homeowners will miss the opportunities
to avoid foreclosure, while others will be able to delay the
inevitable. Given the continuing fragility of the housing
market, effective servicing is as important as ever.
In conclusion, the mortgage servicing system over the past
few years has ill served all parties involved--borrowers,
neighborhoods, and investors--and has impaired the health and
the recovery of the housing and mortgage markets.
Market reforms are needed to align the incentives for
effective servicing.
In addition, the FDIC will continue to work with our
Federal colleagues to develop sensible and balanced servicing
standards, tempered by the knowledge that community banks have
not demonstrated the type of deficiencies and errors present in
the largest institutions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on these issues
before you today. I look forward to responding to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pearce can be found on page
95 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. Raj Date. He is the Associate
Director of Research, Markets, and Regulations at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF RAJ DATE, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR FOR RESEARCH,
MARKETS, AND REGULATIONS, CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. Date. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito, Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Members
Maloney and Capuano, thanks for inviting me to testify today
about mortgage servicing.
My name is Raj Date. I serve as the Associate Director for
Research, Markets, and Regulations at the CFPB.
Our mission at the CFPB is clear: to make consumer finance
markets work for the American people. That means ensuring that
consumers have the information they need to make financial
decisions that are right for them.
It means promoting fairness and transparency and
competition in consumer finance. It means setting and enforcing
clear, consistent rules that allow banks and other firms to
compete on a level playing field.
The Bureau is not yet open for business. But 2 weeks from
today, on July 21st, pursuant to last year's Dodd-Frank Act,
the Bureau will receive transferred authority from seven
existing regulators to administer Federal consumer financial
protection laws.
And on that day, I am happy to report we will be--
Chairwoman Capito. Excuse me, Mr. Date. Could you move the
microphone a little closer?
Mr. Date. Certainly.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Date. On July 21st, I am happy to say that the Bureau
will be ready. And on that day, mortgage servicing will be one
of the CFPB's priorities.
That is because mortgage servicing is important. It is an
enormous market, with some $10.4 trillion of unpaid principal
balances.
It is, moreover, marked by two structural features that
make it unlikely that market forces alone can suffice to
protect consumers.
The first of those structural features is simple. In the
vast majority of cases, consumers can't actually choose their
mortgage servicers, at least not over time.
Let me introduce the importance of that, just as an
example. Last week, I had the occasion to go to a drugstore. If
my pharmacist had made me stand in a long line, or if she was
rude, or if she was losing my paperwork, or if she was
impossible to find on the phone, or if she gave me guidance
that was wrong, I would just go to a different pharmacist next
time.
That is how most consumer-facing markets work.
I get to choose my drugstore. I typically don't get to
choose my mortgage servicer, at least not over time.
The second structural feature of mortgage servicing that
relates to consumer protection is that under the current system
of servicer compensation, taking on the servicing of a mortgage
resembles a bet on credit.
If a loan remains performing, then servicing the loan
remains profitable. But if the borrower becomes delinquent,
then the cost of properly servicing the loan is likely to be
greater and perhaps substantially greater than the revenue from
servicing that loan.
If a servicer's portfolio, therefore, contains many more
non-performing loans than the servicer expected, the servicer
tends to lose money.
Faced with that unfortunate financial reality, when they
encountered an upswing in mortgage delinquencies, servicers
apparently started cutting corners. Rather than making
necessary investments in capacity, they have loosened
operational protocols, even to the point of violating State and
Federal laws.
The evidence of this is striking. In the examinations of 14
major servicers this spring, the Fed, the OCC, and the OTS
discovered critical weaknesses in governance, in foreclosure
processing, and in vendor management.
They discovered unsafe and unsound practices. They found
violations of State and Federal law. They discovered these
weaknesses and deficiencies in all 14 of the 14 servicers
examined, together accounting for more than \2/3\ of the entire
mortgage market.
In the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress took important steps that
will correct flaws in Federal regulation of mortgage servicing,
in particular the lack of comprehensive Federal standards for
mortgage servicers and the lack of direct full Federal
oversight over independent non-depository servicers.
The CFPB, when it has its full authority, will have the
tools to address both of those problems.
And to make sure that we deeply understand the markets we
will be regulating, our team has already been in contact with a
range of stakeholders, community banks, credit unions, big
banks, consumer groups, academics, and many others.
But while the CFPB can and will address consumer
protection, a comprehensive approach that also protects
investors, the financial sector and the economy and the housing
market as a whole requires the coordinated action of a larger
group of Federal agencies, including the prudential regulators.
The Bureau will be working together with those agencies to
the maximum extent possible. Because, after all, both consumers
and the industry will benefit when regulatory action is
careful, and it is coordinated, and it is coherent.
Two weeks from now, the Bureau will be ready to start
helping make the consumer finance markets work for the American
people. And I am confident that the result of our efforts,
coordinated with those of the other agencies, should make the
servicing market work better for everyone.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Date can be found on page 86
of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final witness on this panel has already been introduced
by Chairman Bachus, but he is the Honorable Luther Strange,
Attorney General of the State of Alabama.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE LUTHER STRANGE, ALABAMA ATTORNEY
GENERAL

Mr. Strange. Thank you very much, Chairmen Capito and
Neugebauer, Ranking Members Maloney and Capuano, and members of
the subcommittee, and my Congressman, Chairman Bachus.
My name is Luther Strange, and I am the attorney general of
the State of Alabama. Thank you for inviting me to testify
today on the ongoing settlement negotiations with the mortgage
servicing companies.
In October of 2010, the Alabama Attorney Generals Office
joined 49 other State attorneys general to form the so-called
Foreclosure Multi-State Working Group. The purpose of the group
is to investigate allegations that mortgage companies
mishandled documents and violated laws when they foreclosed on
homeowners across the United States.
Like 26 other States, Alabama is a non-judicial foreclosure
State. The other States have elected through their legislatures
to adopt the judicial foreclosure process.
In March of this year, the Working Group submitted a term
sheet to the Nation's largest mortgage servicers, which was
presented as a draft agreement on behalf of attorneys general
and other State and Federal agencies. And it was intended to
settle allegations related to improper foreclosure practices
and loan servicing.
The servicers have responded to the term sheet. And
negotiations are currently under way between the States, the
Federal Government, and the mortgage servicers.
As I, as an attorney general, review any potential
settlement agreement, I am guided by three overarching
principles.
First, the settlement must hold the mortgage servicers
accountable for unlawful and deceptive practices under State
law. Second, attorneys general are not responsible for
legislating and setting policy. And the settlement agreement
should not attempt to overreach into the area of State and
Federal policy decisions.
Third, the settlement must contain provisions that
discourage and deter future illegal activity. Above all else,
unethical mortgage servicers and any other bad actors in the
mortgage servicing industry must be held accountable for any
unlawful or deceptive practices they engaged in.
Certain aspects of the term sheet, such as those dealing
with single point of contact, dual-track foreclosures, robo-
signing, and verification of account information, contain many
changes in practice that are beneficial to consumers.
Enforcement agencies and the entire industry should have a
vigorous debate on these proposals.
My staff and I take our duty to protect consumers
seriously. And we will work to investigate and prosecute bad
actors to the fullest extent of the law.
Any fines or penalties assessed on the servicers, pursuant
to a settlement agreement, should be linked, in my opinion, in
response to specific documented violations of State and Federal
law.
Protecting consumers, like many other goals of the
Foreclosure Multi-State Working Group, is not only laudable, it
is something that I consider my highest duty.
But I am concerned that what started out as an effort to
correct specific practices harmful to consumers has evolved
into an attempt to establish an overarching regulatory scheme
that fundamentally restructures the mortgage loan industry in
the United States, an effort which is well beyond the scope of
responsibility of attorneys general.
Here are just a few specific concerns that I have. First,
any ultimate settlement must not preempt State law sovereignty.
Alabama, like the majority of other States, has made the policy
decision to permit non-judicial foreclosures.
I am skeptical of any agreement that essentially makes all
States subject to the judicial foreclosure process without a
legislative mandate.
Second, mandated principal reduction is bad public policy
and creates questions of fundamental fairness and justice.
Mandated principal write-down would create an incentive for
homeowners to default and seek a reduction of principal.
Requiring lenders to reduce mortgage balances would remove
incentives for banks to lend money and for investors to
purchase mortgages, denying people access to the credit they
need to purchase a home.
Third, a settlement must not impair an efficient
foreclosure process that clears local markets and facilitates
economic recovery. I am very skeptical of any settlement that
forces servicers to violate contracts with mortgage owners and
abrogates the rights of second lien holders.
Finally, a settlement must not impose onerous regulatory
burdens on community banks. In my State of Alabama, we have
over 130 community banks that are an important economic driver
in the State.
We must not increase their regulatory burden when it is
clear they generally were not engaged in the conduct giving
rise to the investigation.
Thank you again for holding this important hearing. And I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strange can be found on page
123 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Thank you all.
And I would like to begin questioning.
Ms. Williams, one of the concerns that I have, and I think
it has already come to light as we have had before or before in
testimony, is we have the OCC over here, developing a standard.
You mentioned in your statement that the GSEs had looked at
a servicing standards. The State attorneys general want to make
sure that there are no State preemptions, so they have
servicing standards.
Who is going to enforce all this? And what kind of singular
standards--in my view, if we are going to move in this
direction, a singular standard would certainly be better in
terms of how the servicers meet those demands, but also in
terms of the service provided to consumers.
Could you comment on that?
Ms. Williams. Certainly. As I indicated, a concern that we
have with the processes under way right now is whether there
will be, at the end of the day, multiple and potentially
inconsistent sets of standards.
And so we very strongly urge the effort to try to come
together, at least on core principles and core elements of the
servicing standards that are going to be the components of the
different enforcement result here.
And that would also, we think, carry over to the
discussions that are on going at the banking agencies, the CFPB
and FHFA, for example, with respect to developing uniform,
consistent national standards that would apply to all
servicers.
So, I think the enforcement processes, in other words, will
identify a body of core standards and some detail under those
standards that hopefully will translate into significant
portions of uniform standards that the agencies can adopt going
forward.
There are potentially different enforcers involved for the
different entities subject to the standards, at the end of the
day.
Chairwoman Capito. I thank you for that.
And I think you highlight properly that there can be some
serious issues involved with trying to figure this all out, and
deliver the best service, and stop some of the practices that
have gone forward.
The other thing I would like to ask about is the principal
reduction. And I would like to ask all of you all this question
briefly.
The State attorney general, Mr. Strange, has already
mentioned that he doesn't think this should be mandated.
Principal reduction should not be part of a national servicing
standard.
Is this something that you are recommending?
I will start with you, Mr. Date. What does the CFPB think
about that?
Mr. Date. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
The way in which I try to think about the notion of
principal reduction is within the broader context of loss
mitigation within mortgages, which is, after all, largely
speaking, a non-recourse secured lending market.
In that kind of market, there is always a potential for
moral hazard. And indeed, most of the loss mitigation
techniques that are employed by servicers today in the
marketplace involve some manner, appropriately, of economic
concessions to a borrower in order to try to keep that borrower
current.
Principal reduction is one of those manners of economic
concessions, and one that could very well, and indeed today
does for some servicers play a part in the overall loss
mitigation arsenal.
Chairwoman Capito. So what you are saying is that it might
be one of the tools in the toolbox, but it wouldn't be a
requirement of a national servicing agreement?
I think just a quick ``yes or no'' because I am running out
of time here.
Mr. Date. National servicing standards may or may not
address any particular loss mitigation techniques. But I know
that the interagency group is working hard to frame the issues
and at least think about what those--
Chairwoman Capito. Are you aware if this is already
included in the settlement agreement that is being worked with
the State attorneys general?
Mr. Date. I am not specifically aware; I am not involved in
the day-to-day conversations with mortgage servicers. That
clearly is a process being led by the Department of Justice and
State attorneys general.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce, did you have a quick comment on that?
Mr. Pearce. Yes. I think the way servicers look at whether
to do a loan modification is to figure out whether doing a
modification of some kind is better than the alternative of
going to foreclosure and losing a significant portion of money
there.
And so I would agree--
Chairwoman Capito. I guess I am asking for the mandatory
issue.
Mr. Pearce. Right.
Chairwoman Capito. Do you think it should be a mandatory
part of a national servicing standard?
Mr. Pearce. Right. I think the attorneys general and the
Department of Justice are really working out whatever voluntary
agreement they can come to with the largest servicers on that.
And so, I can't really speak to where they are in that process.
But I don't think that sort of a mandatory process is
something that--certainly the FDIC hasn't talked about, that
people should make principal reductions when they don't make
economic sense.
Chairwoman Capito. Right. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. For the overall economy, the large number of
defaults, the losses, the servicer challengers are really
putting up a barrier that could delay a broader recovery of our
economy.
So moving forward and getting this solved is critical. And
I would like to Attorney General Strange and then Mr. Date and
down the line about the servicing process.
In New York, we had some of the highest numbers of subprime
loans. But under the leadership of our Governor, we organized
regional meetings with other elected officials, and banks and
not-for-profits voluntarily participated. And we one-on-one
worked out details that helped people stay in their homes.
So, I would like to ask you, do you think that servicers
have done a good job of communicating to borrowers about their
loss mitigation policies and about their rights and options
once they have gone into default?
If not, what improvements need to be made? And what is the
best mechanism to ensure that we have this improvement?
Starting with Mr. Strange, then Mr. Date, and down the
line.
Mr. Strange. We have a consumer protection unit in our
Office of the Attorney General. And we have received a number
of complaints.
We deal with those on an individual basis. I wouldn't say
it is a crisis situation in Alabama. But we have State laws
that deal with it.
And I believe they work well. That is the decision we have
gone with. As I mentioned, the non-judicial foreclosure
process, which contains a number of protection for consumers.
So, we are very diligent in making sure that those
procedures are followed. And I think it is working fairly well
in our State.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Date?
Mr. Date. Thank you.
Mortgage servicing, because of its size and the relative
diversity of the participants in it, naturally has a range of
players in terms of how good they are, frankly, at some of the
harder pieces of the business.
Loss mitigation in particular and making sure that there is
a high touch customer context during delinquency is a difficult
skill. And there is no doubt in my mind that some firms happen
to be quite better at it than others.
The question of whether or not, therefore, there should be
some manner of baseline expectation is exactly the kind of
question that I would love to be addressed in this interagency
dialogue on national mortgage servicing standards. It is
precisely that kind of question.
Mrs. Maloney. What do you think would be the baseline?
Obviously, what we saw in the past was robo-signatures, moving
to evict people from their homes without even meeting with them
or telling them their options, or even looking at their bank
accounts to see whether or not they could work it out.
What kind of baseline would you suggest would be
appropriate?
Mr. Date. There is, obviously, the most rudimentary
baseline, which is abiding by current Federal and State law.
Despite, for example, the diversity in the standards across the
various States and as promulgated by, for example, by the GSEs
or FHA, the fact of the matter is there is no State in which
falsely notarizing an affidavit is an acceptable thing to do.
So there is that baseline. But, unfortunately, that
baseline comes down to effective supervision and effective
enforcement over time.
With respect to mortgage servicing standards, more broadly,
there are certainly mechanisms that one can use at a trigger
point, in terms of number of days of delinquency, where if you
are going to proceed, for example, to foreclosure, some other
steps should have taken place.
One form of that is restraints on so-called dual track
processing.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Pearce?
Mr. Pearce. Certainly, in our participation, in our agency
review, we found significant efficiencies throughout the
foreclosure process to ease around staffing and training. And
that is in my testimony.
And I think one of the things that Mr. Date raises is that
there are different departments in mortgage servicers. The
larger mortgage servicers don't always communicate very well
with each other. And that can present some real challenges for
borrowers.
That is why the FDIC has strongly supported the idea of
having a single point of contact, to have a real individual
person there who can answer a borrower's questions, regardless
of whether they are in the process of foreclosure or in the
process of a loan modification.
We think that would really add a lot to making this process
work smoother, in addition to the improvements in staffing and
training.
Ms. Williams. I think you are asking a question that has a
couple of dimensions: one, how the borrowers are dealt with in
their interactions with the servicers; and two, the outreach to
the borrower in working out the problems that they have with
their mortgagers.
I think what we have seen over the course of the last
couple of years is that the servicers got a slow start in both
respects. They have done a lot to improve on the outreach part
in the initiatives they have undertaken in themselves and in
the way that they partner with local, regional and national
community organizations in those sort of events that
Congressman Scott described.
And there have been significant improvements in the way
that they have dealt in their internal operations with
customers, the single point of contact being one example.
In the complaints process that we envisioned in our orders
to have the servicers reach out to borrowers who were in any
stage of the foreclosure process during specified time periods,
we are going to be requiring even more aggressive outreach in
that process.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The gentlelady's time has expired.
I would like to recognize Chairman Neugebauer for 5 minutes
for questions.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Just to restate, I think everybody agrees that if the
mortgage servicers violated the law and didn't have good
policies, that you have taken the appropriate action. And
nobody is faulting that.
We also need to understand, though, that these servicers,
in many cases, did not originate these loans. And so, in many
cases, we have to careful of what we are punishing them for.
Are we punishing them for poor servicing? Or are we trying
to punish them for some mistakes that were made up the food
chain?
What I am most concerned about, though, is clear evidence
that this Administration has been trying to install into this
settlement agreement policies that this Congress has rejected.
And that is the point that I want to cover this morning.
And, Mr. Date, if you recall, Chairwoman Capito and myself
and others wrote Secretary Geithner to express our concern
about Ms. Warren's involvement in promoting the State attorneys
general settlement.
The response we got back was that the request was basically
limited to advice. Yet, when we received documents that were
produced to this committee Tuesday night, those documents
showed that Ms. Warren actually took a leadership role in the
settlement talks.
For example, emails showed that the CFPB convened an
emergency meeting with certain attorneys general to push
settlement solutions that focus on principal reduction
modifications. Would you agree that activity constitutes a
little bit more than advice?
Mr. Date. Thank you for the question.
With respect to the request that was made to the Treasury
Department and to Professor Warren, with respect to her
participation or the Bureau's participation in the mortgage
servicing settlement conversation, I do feel that the response
has been unambiguous over time.
And I suppose that, for my own part, I would reiterate it
again today. We have been asked by the Secretary of the
Treasury to provide advice to those Federal and State agencies
involved in this matter.
We tried to do that. And in doing so, we were active and I
hope engaged participants in that dialogue. That, I believe,
was the response at that time, Mr. Chairman. And I believe it
is my response now.
Chairman Neugebauer. I don't think it is just this one
event here. We can look at a series of emails between Ms.
Warren, yourself, and U.S. Bank CEO Richard Davis, documenting
meetings held on March 10, 2011, and March 11, 2011.
What was the nature of these meetings? And was anything
about the settlement discussed in those meetings?
Mr. Date. Mr. Davis, as you say, is the CEO of U.S. Bank.
And we have had the opportunity to talk on several occasions in
the past about a variety of issues. The nature of my role in
particular is to lead the division that is called Research,
Markets and Regulations.
And, indeed, my intent and our division's intent is to make
sure that what we do from a policy point of view is
simultaneously grounded in empirical analysis, on the one hand,
and a deep grounding in the pragmatism of what actually happens
in the marketplace.
To my recollection, any conversations with Mr. Davis and/or
his team has been with that in mind. And in particular, in the
meeting that you are discussing, I recall Professor Warren
actually prefacing that meeting with an explicit statement that
what that meeting was about is about the market broadly and
not--
Chairman Neugebauer. Let me just refresh your memory a
little bit. In that email, it describes this needs test to
determine the eligibility for principal reductions in loan
modifications.
So, this loan modification discussion has been evidently
going on for a long period of time.
And, in fact, I think in one of those emails, Mr. Davis
said--it goes into detail of this presentation that he has and
discussions that you all had on determining who is going to get
loan modifications.
Mr. Date. Without talking about anything in particular as
it relates to U.S. Bank, I would be happy to talk about the
nature of that conversation with Mr. Davis. It is broadly known
that the institution acquired through the FDIC institutions
with what I would characterize as a deeply-troubled mortgage
portfolio.
They, like other mortgage participants, have thought about
the range of loss mitigation devices to use therein. Loss
mitigations are a form of economic concession. And if you don't
carefully think about how they are offered, it can trigger
moral hazard which, of course, as any kind of non-recourse
secured lender, you want to avoid.
Chairman Neugebauer. Yes.
Mr. Date. He was talking about one of the means by which
that is done.
Chairman Neugebauer. My time has expired. But I think that
you have done a great job of avoiding answering the question.
The truth is that the CFPB has been extremely involved in
these negotiations. And there is other email traffic here with
other CEOs where they are wanting to know, can we meet off the
record, because we are concerned about what we are reading in
the paper.
And so, I think that is the troubling part of what we see
going on here, is the fact that this agency, which you say on
July 21st which has no Director, by the way. And a lot of us
question whether your agency can actually be up and running
on--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chairman Neugebauer. --July 21st or not, because of the
fact that you don't have an acting Director or the Director has
not been nominated and confirmed by the Senate.
But I think it is troubling that we find the extent of the
involvement, be it banal, by the CFPB of really having much
input--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like to recognize Mr. Capuano for 5 minutes.
Before I do that, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record a statement from the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, and also a statement from the
National Association of REALTORS.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Attorney General, I think you raised some interesting
points. I just need some clarification.
You or your predecessor--I assume it was you--voluntarily
joined this lawsuit?
Mr. Strange. That was my predecessor.
Mr. Capuano. Your predecessor, voluntarily. He wasn't
required by any law, so he voluntarily joined. And for any
settlement, is there a way for you to step back and say,
``Look, we were glad to be a part of it up until now, but we
don't want to participate.''
Mr. Strange. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. So anything that is agreed to by, for the sake
of discussion, 49 others or 5 others, you do not have to
participate in it?
Mr. Strange. That is correct. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. That is a fair point. Thank you.
That is important because I think some of the points you
raised are important and particularly when they are important
to you. I totally agree on the sovereignty issue. No one should
require any State to take action that they don't want to take.
So, I think you just answered that question for me
satisfactorily.
When you have been involved with other cases like this, or
even in this case itself, in the final analysis, how do 50
States or 10 States, or whatever the number is going to be, how
do you finally come to an agreement at the end?
Do you vote on it? Or is it a general consensus? How is it
generally done?
Mr. Strange. I am relatively new to this, since I was not
sworn in until January of this year. So I sort of inherited
this.
Mr. Capuano. Okay.
Mr. Strange. And so, as I have weighed into it, I couldn't
speak to the history of these things that are done. This
particular case is being led by Attorney General Miller from
Iowa, who has been extremely active in these types of things
for many, many years.
So, I am sort of learning about it. That is why I am really
speaking in terms of principal--
Mr. Capuano. In the end, though, the attorneys general who
are left at the table, the ones who have not walked away will
have a say in the final decision. Is that accurate?
Mr. Strange. The way this is structured is with a sort of a
working group within the AGs. So I think there are maybe seven
or eight AGs who are actively involved. I have not personally
been involved in--
Mr. Capuano. But no one from the outside can force you to
come to a decision. Is that a fair assessment?
Mr. Strange. Yes, sir.
Mr. Capuano. And that includes the CFPB?
Mr. Strange. I don't think anyone can force the attorney
general to do anything.
Mr. Capuano. That is my understanding. When you have done
other--before the attorney general, were you involved in these
kinds of matters?
Mr. Strange. I did a lot of different types of corporate
business transactions over the years.
Mr. Capuano. And when you were involved in things like this
in the past, would you ordinarily reach out to people who may
not be participants for their expertise, for their input, for
their advice?
Mr. Strange. In my experience, I was typically dealing with
parties and negotiated arrangements. There were two parties
with direct involvement in the situation.
So I really don't have a lot of experience in dealing with
these sort of global policy matters.
Mr. Capuano. That is a fair answer.
I would like to ask Ms. Williams or others, you have been
involved in similar things? Is it ordinary for people to reach
out either to you or for you to reach out to other people who
might have expertise and knowledge in an area that you don't?
Ms. Williams. My experience is in the interagency process
with the banking agencies. And so, I don't know if that
parallels the experiences of having a 50-AG negotiating group.
Within the OCC, we reach out to experts within the
different departments to provide support.
Mr. Capuano. Yes.
Mr. Pearce, at the FDIC, have others reached out to you
when you were a party to a suit? Or have you reached out to
others to find expertise that you may not have available?
Mr. Pearce. Sure. I think especially, as Ms. Williams'
points out in her testimony, we are trying to align these
things up as much as possible. And so having interagency
consultations is a key part of that process to understand.
Mr. Capuano. Fair enough.
And I believe it was you, Ms. Williams. I would like to
clarify.
Is it fair to say that everybody should have a general
interest, not to give up any rights or abilities, but a general
interest in coordinated oversight and regulation of the
financial services industry?
Has anybody ever heard of anybody who is interested in
having a discoordinated oversight and regulation, to make sure
that every bank, every financial service agency has 20
different regulators? They have not even talked to each other.
Has anyone on the panel ever heard anybody advocate that
position?
I didn't think so, because we all want coordinated
oversight. Is there anyone here who disagrees that Mr. Date's
comment that on July 21st, the CFPB, whether you like it or
not--that the CFPB will take over a significant amount of the
regulatory oversight of this particular aspect of the financial
services industry?
Does anybody disagree with that statement?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, one thing that I would clarify
here is the transfers that occur on July the 21st do not
transfer the safety and soundness authorities of the banking
agencies.
Mr. Capuano. I understand that. But do you disagree that a
significant portion of the oversight of this industry will be
transferred to the CFPB on July 21st?
Ms. Williams. That is correct.
Mr. Capuano. So, what we have is a situation where people,
who may or may have not certain expertise, have reached out to
an agency that is still in the creation situation, to ask their
advice and coordination.
And when they did that, though CFPB has no authority, no
right, nor have they ever said that they can force anyone to
agree to anything, nor do they have a vote at the table, so
that the big crime here is that someone actually reached out
and asked for advice.
Chairwoman Capito. That was your time, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. I would suggest that is not only not only a
crime, but it would be a crime to do otherwise.
Chairwoman Capito. I would like to recognize the chairman
of the full committee, Mr. Bachus, for 5 minutes for questions.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you. I would like to clarify
something first.
When Ms. Warren testified in March before our committee, I
specifically asked her if she had participated in negotiations.
Her response was that she gave advice when asked. I then wrote
her after the hearing and asked her if she would like to
clarify.
And at that time, she did say that she had been an active
participant with both Federal and State agencies. I consider
that quite different from advice, because I had her asked her
if she participated.
She was forthcoming in response to my letter, although most
of the headlines at that time said that she gave the same
response she gave at the hearing. You would have to be
illiterate to think that. I don't think people read her
response and compared it to her testimony.
In that letter in March, Mrs. Capito and I asked her for
any documents pertaining to that participation. We didn't get
those until last Tuesday night.
A lot of the documents were put out by Judicial Watch about
a month ago. But it was Tuesday night of this week when we were
given information which other independent sources had picked
up.
I think the staff has handed you the ``Perspective on
Settlement Alternatives.'' This is a settlement proposal that
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau gave the attorney
general back in February, is it not?
Mr. Date. This is a document, Mr. Chairman, that
describes--lending not comprehensively but in a way that is
meant to propose ideas, put those ideas in--
Chairman Bachus. No, it is more than an idea. You actually
proposed a settlement of at least $25 billion. You actually say
a $25 billion settlement would not be sufficient, do you not?
Mr. Date. Mr. Chairman, I apologize. Would you mind?
Chairman Bachus. Look at page two, where you say that
servicers saved $20 billion, and $20 billion plus a $5 billion
settlement seems too low.
Mr. Date. No, Mr. Chairman. My reading--I am looking now at
the top of the page.
Chairman Bachus. Yes.
Mr. Date. The second sentence says, ``as a result, a
notional penalty of roughly $5 billion would seem too low.''
Chairman Bachus. Yes, but you say that they saved more than
$20 billion. Were you all proposing a $5 billion settlement or
saying $25 billion wouldn't be enough?
Mr. Date. Oh, I see. Here is what was done here. Obviously,
there are a variety of ways to calibrate any kind of monetary
penalty.
Chairman Bachus. I am sure. But what I am asking is, you
were suggesting that $25 billion would not be enough, correct?
Mr. Date. No, I believe it says that $5 billion is not
enough.
Chairman Bachus. For a penalty.
Mr. Date. If I am looking at--
Chairman Bachus. For a penalty.
Mr. Date. That is right, a notional penalty of roughly $5
billion is too low.
Chairman Bachus. Okay. And you proposed that the settlement
be used for principal reduction, correct?
Mr. Date. Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to describe the
analysis that underpins this document that, obviously, is in
the public domain.
Chairman Bachus. When you say, ``A principal reduction
mandate could be meaningfully additive to HAMP'' on page six,
and ``PRM would mandate 3 million permanent modifications,''
you are advocating for a program to be an addition to HAMP or a
HAMP-like program? Is that correct?
Mr. Date. To be clear, this would be a component of a
voluntary settlement.
Chairman Bachus. I understand. Yes. You are right. You are
proposing components of a settlement. Is that right?
Mr. Date. That is right.
Chairman Bachus. Okay.
Mr. Date. Not by any means comprehensive. But the notion,
just to ground what is here a bit, if it is helpful, is that
because there are different means by which to think about the
size of the penalty, what this principally does is it tries to
say, well--and the analogy would be, ``If I stole a car and it
is your job to punish me for stealing that car, I don't know
what the right way for you to punish me is, but you should
probably take the car away.''
That is, in general, the--
Chairman Bachus. Sure. So you propose taking the $20
billion that they saved plus a penalty?
Mr. Date. That would be a way in which--
Chairman Bachus. Right. I am not arguing with you about the
merits. I am just saying that you suggested that they saved $20
billion. So in addition to that, you believe they ought to pay
a penalty, which--
Mr. Date. Mr. Chairman, I don't think that is what is
actually in this document. I am not contesting that reasonable
people might think that. But I am just not sure I have seen
that.
Chairman Bachus. Yes. All right, let me close by saying
this. You proposed that the money from this settlement be used
for mortgage principal reductions, correct?
Mr. Date. That is a facet of what is presented here.
Chairman Bachus. Right. Okay.
Are you aware that we have a law, the Miscellaneous Receipt
Settlement, that says that a settlement needs to go into the
Treasury to pay down on the debt, as opposed to being used to
create a new program?
Mr. Date. I would not be able to tell you the specifics
with respect to that. But I--
Chairman Bachus. So you wouldn't be opposed to that, would
you, that we just pay down the debt with this settlement?
Mr. Date. Mr. Chairman, again, I should not--
Chairman Bachus. Instead of--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chairman Bachus. I will close. But instead of a principal
reduction, that would be an alternative, would it not?
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The ranking member of the full committee
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Frank. I guess, I am here thinking of Claude Rains and
his great role in ``Casablanca'' as the police chief.
Apparently, my colleagues are shocked--shocked--that a leading
consumer adviser to the President made suggestions about how we
should deal with a major consumer problem.
I am absolutely baffled by what this is all about. Yes,
Elizabeth Warren, who is a very able, very thoughtful expert in
the field, apparently made some suggestions.
They weren't binding. They weren't coercive. She made some
suggestions.
And instead of talking about the merits of the issues, we
are in this panic or outrage that she dared do that. This is
the silliest thing I ever heard of. I am very pleased that Ms.
Warren made these suggestions.
Let me ask you, Attorney General Strange, were you attorney
general in February of this year?
Mr. Strange. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frank. Did you feel coerced by Elizabeth Warren? Did
she threaten you in any way? Did you need to get protection
against her?
Mr. Strange. I think I may have met her once in passing,
but she didn't seem threatening.
[laughter]
Mr. Frank. Thank you. I appreciate the--
Mr. Strange. Personally, anyway.
Mr. Frank. Maybe some of my Republican colleagues will take
heart from your courage in being willing to stand up against
this incredible force, this Elizabeth Warren.
I guess, maybe it is a play that we should be writing:
``Who is afraid of Elizabeth Warren?'' She made suggestions.
She actually made them in the form of coherent proposals.
Maybe if she was incoherent or internally inconsistent, my
colleagues would have been less threatened.
And then, she had the temerity to suggest that those
financial institutions, many of which made loans they shouldn't
have made and packaged them into securities that shouldn't have
been sold, and then incompetently serviced them, that they
should pay some penalty.
That is consistent, because my colleagues on the other side
have, throughout this, been very protective of the financial
assets of the large institutions. Indeed, there have been
complaints about the money that has been spent in part of this.
Under the bill that originally passed the conference
committee last year, in the financial reform bill, there was a
section that said $20 billion would come to administer this
financial reform bill, including some of the mortgage relief
for the unemployed and others, from an assessment on financial
institutions that had $50 billion or more in assets.
And to get the Republican votes we needed in the Senate to
pass it, that was transferred from the large financial
institutions to the taxpayer. So there has been a consistency
here, in terms of worrying that the financial institutions
would be somehow unfairly put upon.
And the suggestion, apparently, the CFPB--actually, Ms.
Warren suggested that the estimate be what they saved and a
penalty. That might be wrong. That might be right. Maybe you
want to do principal reduction. Maybe you don't.
I have been a little skeptical of too broad a scale
principal reduction. Although where we are talking about the
unemployed, I think there is a very clear case for that.
But the notion that it is improper for Elizabeth Warren to
suggest that in a wholly non-coercive way--there is an
obsession with Elizabeth Warren.
And let's be clear where it comes from. It comes from
people who never wanted an independent consumer bureau, who
wanted consumer protection to continue to be with the
regulators whose job, as the chairman said, was to serve the
banks.
They did not want independent consumer protection taken
away from those regulators. We found in the Majority that the
regulators had not done a good job, and we wanted to put
consumer protection in an independent agency.
Part of what they want to do is to take away that
independence, and give the bank regulators the right to
overrule the consumer agency. But they don't like the consumer
agency.
They haven't been able to make a head-on assault because it
is kind of popular. Someone said what we have is, let us
demonize Elizabeth Warren. Let us discredit the consumer agency
by attacking the person who I think ought to be the head of it,
and who had certainly played a major in coming up with the idea
and worrying about it.
And what did they convict her of? In fact, I guess Ms.
Warren should take comfort in the fact that the worst thing
they can say about her, people who are really determined to
kind of diminish her reputation--as the chairman said once,
this isn't about Elizabeth Warren. But I wouldn't take a lie
detector test on that.
The worst thing they can come up with to discredit
Elizabeth Warren is that a woman charged with protecting
consumers and looking out for consumer interests proposed a
scheme, a plan for dealing with the mortgage situation.
How terrible of her. Shame on her that she would actually
sit down and try and figure out what she thought was good, and
then submitted in a wholly non-coercive, suggestive way to
others.
I have to tell you that the attorney general wasn't
intimated. I know Ms. Williams. Sometimes I wish I could
intimidate her a little more than I have been able to.
I don't think she was in any way frightened by this. They
would have different rules on preemption if she were more
easily influenceable. I don't think anybody has ever said, oh,
that Elizabeth Warren, she threatened to beat me up. She did
all this to me--
Chairwoman Capito. Your time has expired.
Mr. Frank. Come save me and protect me from Elizabeth
Warren. And I hope--a little more time. To the chairman,
another 10 seconds. I would just say this, I would like to--
Chairman Bachus. Madam Chairwoman, I would like at least 30
seconds to respond to the--
Mr. Frank. I don't see why--
Chairwoman Capito. Oh, hold it. Hold it. Hold it.
Mr. Frank. Pardon me, but the gentleman--
Chairwoman Capito. In respect to this, you can finish in 10
seconds.
Mr. Frank. The gentleman had 6 minutes. And I don't
understand that we go back and forth and respond. That is not
the 5-minute rule.
But the point is this. I will now offer to anyone who feels
threatened by Elizabeth Warren, let us know, and I will do
everything I can to protect them from this menace of a consumer
protection advisor making suggestions.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Fitzpatrick for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Date, what is about the deficiencies of the mortgage
servicers that justifies a principal reduction?
Mr. Date. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
As you point out, the deficiencies of the mortgage
servicers, which principally have been documented by the
examination of our sister agencies, are troubling in that they
are pervasive and, within the scope of the examinations, quite
profound.
And it is certainly a fair question to ask in those cases
where violations, for example, of a law have taken place. So it
would be a reasonable question, I suppose, to ask in a case of
an active duty soldier who has been foreclosed upon in
violation of the Service Members Civil Relief Act. What is the
appropriate penalty for that kind of activity? And what is the
appropriate remedy and how should it be structured?
Of course, there are a range of alternatives with respect
to these questions. And that is precisely why I have been glad
that the Secretary of the Treasury has asked us to try to
inform those deliberations amongst the agencies that have
authority here.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. For instance, do you see a causal link
between robo-signing, on the one hand, and a particular
mortgager or borrower being underwater? Is there a causal link,
one to the other?
Mr. Date. It is a good question, because the robo-signing,
in the way that it is most customarily thought about, entails
the systematically false provision of the affidavits with
respect to various judicial mechanisms around mortgage
servicing in particular.
And because, after all this is not the furniture business--
it is not as if the paperwork is somehow ancillary to the main
business. This is financial services. The paperwork is kind of
the point, in that the documentation with respect to these
transactions is meant to provide investors with the comfort
that they have and that they need in order to put money into
the system.
And it is meant to provide borrowers with the confidence
protection that they have with respect to the credit
transaction that they have entered.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Attorney General Strange, you testified
that you are concerned that the proposed settlement terms would
force a State like Alabama, which is a non-judicial foreclosure
State, to become a judicial foreclosure State. Can you expand
on that?
Mr. Strange. Yes, Congressman.
My basic concern is that our State has chosen a method for
handling home foreclosure. Our State legislature considered the
alternatives and voted on it.
My concern is that a settlement of some kind that imposes
on not just my State, but the 26 or 27 other States, the
majority of States that have chosen this path, is somehow
altered or converted without the approval of the legislature
that put in place the original plan.
That is really my overarching concern. That kind of policy
issue really to me seems to be a decision for the Members of
the Congress here or for the members of the State legislature,
not a group of attorneys general.
Attorneys general are very good at enforcing the law and
preventing future illegal activities. They are not very good,
in my experience, economic policy experts.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Where you aware of the proposed settlement
terms before they were sent to the mortgage servicers?
Mr. Strange. I have not been in the loop in terms of the
details of the settlement, no.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Do you believe it is the role of attorneys
general to be involved in setting national servicing policies?
Mr. Strange. I do not. I believe it is our job to enforce
the law, to protect consumers. As I mentioned in my testimony,
that is a top priority of ours.
I believe the policy matters ought to be left to the
policymakers, who are here in this room in the Congress and in
the State legislatures.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from California is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I don't know if I have questions as much as I am perplexed
about how this subprime meltdown, which has caused all of these
foreclosures, and the so-called efforts to help homeowners has
could fail so miserably.
This review, I guess that was led by OCC--was it--that
supposedly found about 14 loan modifications that have been
turned down and haven't been done correctly. Where is that? Are
you familiar with that, Ms. Williams?
Ms. Williams. Congresswoman, are you referring to the--
Ms. Waters. The interagency foreclosure review.
Ms. Williams. The interagency foreclosure review.
Ms. Waters. Are you familiar with that?
Ms. Williams. I am familiar with that report, yes.
Ms. Waters. Are you familiar with the fact that out of
2,800 files, they found a small number of foreclosures that
should not have proceeded because the borrower was a member of
the military, covered by the Service Members Civil Relief Act?
Is that what you understand they found?
Ms. Williams. That is correct. But as I said in my
testimony, the horizontal examinations--
Ms. Waters. I can't hear you.
Ms. Williams. The horizontal examinations that were done
relied on a sample of loan files of each of the servicers. So
there was a limited sample that was covered in those exams.
Ms. Waters. We have basically projected out, with the
number of foreclosures that have taken place, that exactly
10,000 homeowners probably had been wrongfully foreclosed upon.
Did you do those kind of projections?
Ms. Williams. Congresswoman, the purpose of the look-back
process that is part of the enforcement orders issued by the
OCC and the other banking agencies is to specifically identify
homeowners who were financially harmed as a result of the
deficient practices.
So we have not done a look back of the envelope
extrapolation. What the enforcement orders require is a very
robust process using independent consultants to identify
homeowners who did suffer financial harm as a result of the
petition.
Ms. Waters. I am not so sure what that means, but let me
tell you what I experienced in working with servicers. I did
get some waivers from homeowners. We were bombarded with calls
and we started calling trying to find out what was going on.
And over a period of time, it was just unbelievable.
First of all, they lost records. Was that identified, how
many records get lost all the time? Is anybody aware of that?
Ms. Williams. Yes.
Ms. Waters. Also, are you aware of the problem of fees?
Homeowners sometimes, even if they get to modification, by the
time they pay the late fees, the attorney's fees, the brokerage
price opinion fees, the process fees that the mortgages back
up, the payments back up where they were before they got the
loan modification. Are you familiar with that?
Ms. Williams. The area of fees, whether fees were
excessive, whether they were reasonable and customary, whether
they were specifically authorized by the loan document that the
borrower had with that particular lender, is an area that will
be specifically looked at in this look-back process, pursuant
to our enforcement order.
Ms. Waters. Don't you think that consumers should have more
protection than anyone should be able to say that you signed
this document and you agreed to all of these fees. I am sure
you are aware that most people don't know in that fine print
that they have all of these brokerage price opinion fees and
process fees.
Most consumers don't know that. Wouldn't you agree?
Ms. Williams. I think that consumer disclosures is an area
where there is a lot of room for improvement in the financial
services arena. And we strongly support that.
Ms. Waters. Since we have three of the too-big-to-fail
banks--Bank of America, Wells, and Chase--who have 60 percent
of all servicing, don't you think we ought to be able to get
our arms around that? They are the ones who are doing all of
this servicing.
In addition to all of the lost papers and the fees, etc., I
discovered that many of these servicers were not very well
trained. Has that been looked at? And has something been done
about that?
Ms. Williams. That has also been looked at. And there are
provisions in our enforcement orders that specifically
addressed staffing, both in terms of numbers and training of
staff involved in the servicing loss mitigation, loan
modification, and foreclosure process.
Ms. Waters. Are you aware that at Bank of America, when one
first calls to try and get some help, they go to a loss
mitigation that is offshore, oftentimes?
Ms. Williams. I am personally not aware of that.
Ms. Waters. Would you check it out?
Ms. Williams. I certainly can.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlewoman--
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Hensarling for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Williams, in your testimony, you talked about the
examinations that were produced by your agency and several
others, the prudential regulators. I believe there was a sample
size of 2,800 borrower foreclosure cases, correct?
Ms. Williams. Yes. That is correct.
Mr. Hensarling. How was that sample chosen?
Ms. Williams. First of all, the sample was 200 per
servicer. It was a judgmental sample, determined by the
examiners responsible for the particular institution. There was
a mix of judicial and non-judicial States that were--
Mr. Hensarling. Did the agencies consider it to be
representational of the larger universe? As I understand it,
there are 1 million, 2 million, maybe 3 million under the
consent decree, foreclosure cases that the mortgage servicers
are going to be required to reach out to. Is that correct?
Ms. Williams. The samples were intended to be
representative of the types of standards and of the processing
centers and--
Mr. Hensarling. Okay. On page four of your testimony, you
say, ``In general, the examinations found that the loans in the
sample were seriously delinquent.''
So I think you are telling me that at least you consider
the sample to be representational. The loans in the sample were
seriously delinquent.
I know that mortgage servicers have gone out and done a lot
of bad and sloppy work. And now I am trying to figure out the
extent of it.
So, to some extent, what we are trying to figure out here
is just how widespread this damage is. So it sounds like the
vast majority of these loans, there are going to be foreclosure
proceedings against these people anyway.
I will ask anybody else on this panel, is there another
sample size between the 2,800 borrower foreclosure cases that
your agencies have examined? And what is the number of those
who have been foreclosed upon who were not ``seriously
delinquent.''
Do you have a number, anybody else on the panel?
So what we know is limited to this 2,800 sample size. And
the conclusion is that these folks were seriously delinquent.
Mr. Date, in your testimony, you say that the Bureau is not
yet open for business. It sounds like you have been pretty busy
for an agency that is not yet in business.
In your term sheet, you clearly suggest a $20 billion
settlement. I am looking at your term sheet dated February
14th, although I don't see a page number. I am sorry, on page
two, you suggest a $20 billion settlement.
I guess my question is this, you have been charged with
protecting consumers and you are also suggesting $20 billion in
principal write downs, is that correct? And I believe you
testified earlier that was ``an aspect to it.''
Did I hear you correctly, Mr. Date?
Mr. Date. Yes. But just to clarify, you are referring, I am
assuming, to the presentation called, ``Perspective On
Settlement''--
Mr. Hensarling. Correct.
Mr. Date. And not, by contrast, the 27-page State attorney
general term sheet that I believe was--
Mr. Hensarling. Wasn't this your perspective of what a term
sheet should be?
Mr. Date. The term sheet is rather more comprehensive than
the--
Mr. Hensarling. Okay.
Mr. Date. That is the distinction I am trying to draw.
Mr. Hensarling. Here is my question. If you are suggesting
a $20 billion in principal write down, we know right now that
already the taxpayers are out $150 billion so far in the GSEs.
The Fed, I believe, has invested over a trillion or about a
trillion dollars in mortgage-backed securities already.
That deals with taxpayers not consumers. But every single
investor group I know of in America is fearful of a government-
forced principal reduction.
And so I guess my question is this. If you are there to
protect consumers, does a robust private capital mortgage
market--does the CFPB consider that to be part of consumer
protection, yes or no?
Mr. Date. Access to financial markets is a part of our
mandate, Congressman. I am happy that it is.
Mr. Hensarling. So would you be concerned if there was less
private capital coming into the market because of this global
settlement that you suggest?
Mr. Date. Congressman, I am concerned that the pervasive
and profound deficiencies in mortgage servicing have made it
difficult for mortgage private label investors to have
confidence in how it is that their assets are going to be
serviced. I think we should all share that concern.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlemen's time has expired.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hinojosa
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I ask unanimous consent to insert into today's joint
hearing record Supplemental Directive 11-06, entitled, ``Making
Home Affordable Program--Updates to Servicer Incentives,''
dated July 6, 2011.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
Last month, the Treasury Department rated the performance
of the 14 largest servicers participating in the Making Home
Affordable Program, ranking them on three criteria: number one,
identifying and contacting homeowners; number two, homeowner
evaluation and assistance; and number three, program management
reporting and governance.
Treasury determined that six of the servicers needed
moderate improvement and four needed substantial improvement in
the first quarter of 2011. None of the servicers needed only
minor improvement.
The interagency review of foreclosure policies and
practices found that, ``individuals who signed foreclosure
affidavits often did not personally check the documents for
accuracy or possess a level of knowledge of the information
that they attested to in those affidavits.
``In addition, some foreclosure documents indicated they
were executed under oath when no oath was administered.
Examiners also found that the majority of the servicers had
improper notary practices, which failed to conform to State
legal requirements. These determinations were based primarily
on servicers' self assessment of their foreclosure processes
and examiners' interviews of servicer staff involved in the
preparation of foreclosure documents.''
It seems to me that there is room here for investigation
claims that borrowers are often charged exorbitant and
unjustified forced place insurance. Can one of you tell me how
this is being handled so as to help these individuals we are
trying to help out?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I can start.
Mr. Hinojosa. Yes.
Ms. Williams. The issue of fees and whether borrowers were
charged unreasonable fees, fees that were not reasonable and
customary, or fees that were not authorized under the terms of
the agreements that they entered into, is an element that is
part of the look-back process pursuant to our enforcement
orders.
So that is one of the things that will be part of the
review of the borrowers who are in the scope of that look-back.
Mr. Hinojosa. Anyone else?
Mr. Date. Congressman, I know that Title XIV of Dodd-Frank
appropriately, to my mind, includes the request for the Bureau
to undertake an evaluation of this forced-place insurance issue
and includes rulemaking authority. Obviously, anything that the
Bureau would do in this respect would be grounded in real
analysis on what the impact would be and whether it would, in
fact, help the market and help consumers.
Mr. Hinojosa. We have seen an impact that the actions of
the top 14 servicers had on our military servicemen,
servicewomen, who put their lives at stake each and every day
to protect us here in America. What actions can be taken to
ensure that those troops are protected from unscrupulous
lenders and mortgage servicers?
Mr. Strange. Congressman, from the law enforcement
perspective, we are seeking and extremely interested in any
instance like that. And I am sure I can speak for all the
attorneys general that if that type of activity comes to our
attention, we will pursue it to the fullest extent of the law.
Ms. Williams. Congressman, actions have already been taken
by the Department of Justice in some respects. But I think the
short answer to your question is 100 percent compliance with
the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.
Mr. Hinojosa. That is good to know.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Royce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I am going to ask Ms. Williams some questions.
And Ms. Williams, I am not a fan of bifurcated regulation.
I think it has had some very adverse consequences. But as I
mentioned in my opening statement, the number of existing or
proposed servicing standards is pretty daunting.
You have HAMP, FHFA for Fannie and Freddie, individual
State laws, bank regulator consent orders, the bank regulator
joint interagency initiative, the legal settlement reported in
the press. You have risk retention for qualified residential
mortgages. You have congressional proposals.
You have the potential activity by the CFPB. And I quoted
from the New York Times, in terms of the overhang or the
inability here. I think you have 60-some years worth in New
York State in order to work through the backlog.
So you mentioned in your prepared testimony that the OCC
supports the development of a uniform servicing standard. And
you are all working with the various regulatory agencies to
come up with such a standard.
I wanted to ask you about that. And I was going to say,
looking at the backlog of foreclosures throughout the country,
what impact does the lack of a clearly defined set of rules
have on the confusion throughout the market?
Is that adding to the delays? And does that add perhaps to
recovery when you have that amount of confusion out there?
Ms. Williams. To the extent that lenders and servicers are
uncertain about what the rules of the road are in proceeding
with their mortgage servicing and with the foreclosure process,
that does slow down the process.
As I said in my testimony, there are under way right now a
number of different initiatives that deal with mortgage
servicing, in the larger sense, mortgage servicing with respect
to current and performing loans, loss mitigation, including
loan modification efforts, and also the foreclosure process,
and of mortgage servicing.
And we do think that it is very important for the different
players to try to bring those together to be as consistent as
possible, so that there is a single set of standards, to the
extent possible, so that the servicers clearly know what is
expected of them, and so that customers know what to expect
from their servicer.
Mr. Royce. The committee has heard a lot about coordinated
rulemaking efforts. I can just give you my take on this sitting
through the hearings and then talking to people in the
regulatory community about their feelings.
And the truth seems to be that there is little
communication and coordination occurring in many, many ways,
partly due to regulatory turf battles, partly the fact that we
just don't have this one clear set of rules.
And I think it is in everybody's interest to see that this
is done right. But let us say for a minute the New York Times
is right in this story of a week-and-a-half ago. Let us say
that New York State, that it will really take lenders 62 years
at the current pace.
What might that portend going forward? How are we going to
see a return to the private market when we are building so many
inconsistencies into the system?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I don't recall all of the
details of the article that you are referring to. But it is
premised on the current pace. One would hope that that current
pace isn't going to be the pace going forward once we got some
clarity in the standards that are expected going forward.
Mr. Royce. As the story goes through also other States, New
Jersey 49 years, Florida, Massachusetts, Illinois--it would
take about a decade in those States. So, again, we are dealing
here with bifurcated regulation, with 50 different States, with
50 different sets of rules.
And even at the Federal level, bifurcated regulations
without the common standard yet. Until we get it, it is hard to
figure out how we move out of this morass and sort things
through in the marketplace with respect to the overhang.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Miller, from North Carolina, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The American people are justifiably skeptical and I am
skeptical that anybody who has been involved in all this, who
is supposed to be independent, has actually been independent.
That certainly was true at the rating agencies. Everybody
involved seems to have deep business ties with each other.
And even when they are supposed to be looking after
somebody else, they seem to be just looking after each other.
It is all the same folks, whether they are called servicers or
trustees or securitizers or whatever else.
Ms. Williams, the consent order a couple of months ago with
the 14 servicers required an independent review, a consultant's
independent lay review of some of the files.
Mr. Pearce, in his testimony, said that review should
include all foreclosures where the homeowner had applied for
modification or had filed a complaint against a servicer or was
a member of the military, and that because of the importance of
the review and the skepticism about whether they are really
independent or not, that there will be an interagency group
that would sample the reviews and look hard at them to see how
they had been done.
Do you agree with that?
Ms. Williams. I think the approach that we are taking at
this point is to share information. We have been sharing
information among the agencies that have been participating in
the reviews in other respects. But we have not gotten to the
point of having sort of an interagency second review as part of
that process.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Are you telling me, then, you
are taking a--whether or not you are doing it in consultation
with others or with an interagency group, I took that to be
that the FDIC was volunteering to be part of an interagency--
just as in Mr. Pearce's testimony, they volunteered to work
with you in that and be part of an interagency operation.
But you say that you are taking a hard look at a reasonable
sample of those files?
Ms. Williams. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. And does it include all of
those, whether it is in the foreclosure, where the homeowner
applied for modification or filed a complaint or is in the
military?
Ms. Williams. What we are in the process of doing is
identifying the level of review for different segments,
different high-risk segments, and what the factors are that
will trigger a 100 percent review versus the sampling approach.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay. There is a further
concern that contributes to the skepticism of the American
people and me. Brandeis said that the best disinfectant was
sunlight, and the street lamp the most efficient policeman.
There has been no light on most of this. All of this has been
in the dark.
Will the result of those reviews be public? To what extent
will it be public, so the public can look over your shoulder
and decide whether you are really being an independent
watchdog, as you were supposed to be?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, what we anticipate is probably
two public-type reports as we go through this process. One, an
interim report to describe the structure of the look-back
process, sort of the details of how the whole process is going
to be conducted. And this will get to some of the questions
that you just asked.
And then a report at the end of the process that will be
similar to the interagency horizontal report--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Reports from the consultants,
the independent--
Ms. Williams. No, the reports that the agency would put out
describing the--
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Their review?
Ms. Williams. --the look-back process, describing the
findings, describing the financial remediation that would be
provided.
What we would not anticipate doing is having bank-specific
information because that is confidential bank supervisory
information, but providing information about the scope and the
details across-the-board.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. Pearce, do you have a
response to the question about the necessary views that address
your testimony?
Mr. Pearce. I guess I would say that people have been
skeptical about what has gone on in the mortgage servicing, and
whether the servicers that have made errors in following State
laws and other laws that have been on the books for a long
time, whether they are going to be held accountable for that.
And so I think the FDIC's view, in consultation with our
fellow regulators, is that that this look-back process really
does need to be robust. And it needs to look at the areas where
we think there is likely to be harm.
As Ms. Williams stated, the sampling approach can really
identify where there might be errors and then how many errors
you might find there. But it won't go all the way for these
high risk segments, like borrowers who applied for a loan
modification and then ended up through foreclosure that--excuse
me.
Just to finish up, having a full review of those files
seems to be pretty fundamental, in our view.
Mr. Grimm [presiding]. Thank you.
Representative Hayworth, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for questioning.
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Date, in particular, there have been questions about
whether or not the CFPB should be viewed primarily as a
banking--or substantively as a banking regulator or more as a
consumer protection agency to the extent that it has considered
itself, if you will, or if it is considered to be a banking
regulator, then the Federal Financial Institution Examination
Council's policy presumably would be applicable to the CFPB's
actions, vis-a-vis some type of financial institutions
obviously.
And in the assessment of penalties and in this prospective
document that we have all been talking about, there was
reference to penalties in particular regarding deficits in
mortgage servicing.
There are mitigating factors that have to be considered in
terms of FFIEC policy. There is the whole list of mitigating
factors, including the size of the institution, evidence of
past violations, evidence of concealment, etc., that themselves
flow from certain statutory requirements regarding banking
regulations.
So how is the CFPB considering its activities in terms of
those FFIEC guidelines?
Mr. Date. Thank you, Congressman.
With respect to specifically the FFIEC guidelines, broadly
speaking, the Bureau will, as my understanding, participate in
the FFIEC. The Bureau's Director will be a member of the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.
I spent most of my career as a banker. I can assure you
that in that capacity, someone with supervisory authority over,
for example, the Truth in Lending Act and RESPA, etc., I would
view it as a bank regulator. And that is certainly how it is
that we are thinking about what we are setting up.
With respect to the mitigating circumstances associated
with any putative settlement, I am confident that the people at
the table, in terms of the Department of Justice and the State
attorneys general, as well as presumably the legal
representatives of whatever servicers might be involved, are
considering and making arguments about mitigants in the
industry.
Dr. Hayworth. So, in other words, you are not necessarily
subscribing specifically to FFIEC policy. That hasn't been
internally determined, yet it is still all under consideration?
Mr. Date. For context, I will explain my role at the
Bureau, but then also point towards what might be a productive
answer to your question. I think examination practices in the
main.
My role at the Bureau is really running the division called
Research, Markets and Regulations. There is an Assistant
Director for Depository Supervision who, among other things,
has been recruiting a team that is ready to take over
supervisory authority with respect to the specifically
enumerated Federal consumer financial protection laws, as of
July 21st.
And they have been hard at work to make sure we are ready
to use guidelines, policies, and procedures to that end. Again,
my understanding is that would be in light of existing
protocols, and to the extent possible coordinated.
Dr. Hayworth. The importance being obviously that since we
are talking about penalties being assessed against banks in
regard to their relationship to the mortgage servicers--
obviously, you are getting in that issue through the banks
here. And we are talking about the broader issue of bringing
private capital into the mortgage marketplace, encouraging
that.
If penalties are assessed without due consideration for
what banks, as you know very well, consider to be a policy that
they understand and are familiar with, then it increases the
uncertainty. It might deter further or enlarge participation by
private capital in the marketplace.
Any comments by any of our other panelist would be welcome
in that regard.
Mr. Pearce. I guess that from the FDIC's point of view, I
think we are concerned that the servicing errors have really
created an environment where there may be lots of different
litigation and claims at either the State level or Federal
level, not only bank regulators or the Department of Justice,
but there may be other Federal agencies or other State
regulatory authorities that have issues.
So the range of government parties out there that may have
some claim related to servicer errors. There is private
litigation going on relating to loan modification programs,
enhanced and non-enhanced, whether a chain of title is secure
in that.
And so I think the point there is that resolving these
issues is really important to get private capital back in the
marketplace, and so a comprehensive resolution, we would like
to see that if we can.
Mr. Grimm. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Georgia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
that.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, we had extraordinary
success in Atlanta, Georgia, with our home foreclosure event.
And Mr. Raj Date--I hope I didn't do too much injustice to your
name there. But you are with Treasury, although you are with
the CFPB--is that correct?
Mr. Date. During the stand-up period for the CFPB, the
Bureau of which I am an employee is under the governance of the
Secretary of the Treasury, during that--
Mr. Scott. Excellent. The only reason is I want you to get
a message to the Treasury for me, especially Ms. Alvina McHale,
Assistant Secretary Kim Wallace, and the acting Secretary for
the U.S. Treasury Office of Financial Stability, Tim Massad.
They really worked tremendously in making such a success that
we got over 2,000 homes prevented from foreclosure in this
event.
It opened my eyes to a world of which I was only dimly
aware. And I feel so much stronger now about how we can attack
and solve this problem.
This is a war that we have going out here. And so many of
our American people and the struggling homeowners are just
victims because of a lack of information, or a lack of access
for that information. For it is there. We have a plethora of
programs.
And the reason we were able to solve this--and people came
out. As I have said before, thousands and thousands. I walked
the lines. I talked with thousands of people, so I learned
exactly what was on their minds. The complaints about the loan
servicers not returning calls, multiple people, people
foreclosing without the proper knowledge of the loan, etc.
People were very, very frustrated. But when we were able to
get in there, we were able to solve those problems.
But there are two points I want to address here. One is the
HAMP program, which has come under a lot of criticism--but let
me tell you that we were able to effectively use HAMP in over
200 of those cases right there on the spot.
And the reason for that was because there are some banks,
like Bank of America was there, who made the decision to bring
their--what do you call--loan underwriters. Excuse me. When
they brought their underwriters there, they could do the deal
right there.
This was a major move. And it should be encouraged.
So, I really believe that if your Department continues that
kind of work and outreach--if it worked in Atlanta, Georgia,
that way, just imagine what that would be if it was done over
and over. Like I said, it is a war. We have to get this
information out to the people and make sure that happens.
I do want to get your comments, especially the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency and the FDIC, on the move that
you are making to deal with the loan servicers' issues and
deficiencies which is this consent agreement.
Could you tell me exactly, and the American people, what
that is and why we are having the consent agreement? And then
explain which types of servicers are not subject to the consent
agreement? This I understand is a major tool that we are using
now to address some of these deficiencies of the loan
servicers.
Ms. Williams, could you start?
Ms. Williams. The reason why we have these consent
agreements is because there were serious deficiencies in the
foreclosure processes of the large mortgage servicers.
And the consent agreements are extensive. They require
major changes in significant areas of the servicers'
compliance, governance, mortgage servicing oversight, loss
mitigation, including loan modifications, foreclosure
processes, MIS.
They are very comprehensive.
Mr. Scott. Why are certain loan servicers not subject to
the consent agreement and others are? Why is that? And who are
they?
Ms. Williams. When we embarked on the interagency
horizontal exam, the 14 largest federally-supervised mortgage
servicers were identified, just in looking at the volume of
mortgages that they handle. And so those were the entities that
were subject to the interagency exam process.
None of those entities came out of it with a good grade.
And so, therefore, all of them are subject to the orders.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Canseco, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Williams, I am curious about the overall goal of the
consent orders that the OCC and other agencies have provided
the banks. And as a follow up to my colleague, Mr. Scott here,
let me ask you this, please expand on what exactly the OCC is
trying to do with the guidelines they are requiring banks to
follow?
Ms. Williams. What we are trying to do with the guidelines
with respect to servicing practices or all of the guidelines--
Mr. Canseco. Servicers' practices.
Ms. Williams. --in the consent?
What we are trying to accomplish with the--I will call them
the action plans is what they are referred to in the consent
for mortgage servicing procedures, loss mitigation activities,
foreclosure processing, is to make sure that there is a
rigorous process with integrity in handling the way that those
operations are conducted by the servicers, that customers are
dealt with properly, that the servicers are making decisions
based on accurate and complete information, and that they are
conducting themselves in accordance with all of the applicable
State and Federal laws in how they operate.
Mr. Canseco. These consent orders or consent decrees, will
they do anything to reduce foreclosures?
Ms. Williams. They could to the extent that there are
foreclosures that have been based on incorrect information,
that have been based on, for example, incorrect information
about amounts owed or fees that have been charged.
Mr. Canseco. But not to the extent that it is going to
prevent somebody who has not been paying his mortgage, prevent
them from being foreclosed on.
Ms. Williams. No, sir.
Mr. Canseco. Okay. There has allegedly been some discussion
among the regulators about changing the way in which mortgage
servicers are compensated. And one idea apparently being
floated would pay servicers less for performing loans and more
for non-performing loans.
And my concern is that this conversation among regulators
is focusing only on the larger servicers, and little attention
is being paid to community-based servicers that have close
relationships with borrowers.
So since the loans at these banks tend to perform much
better, simply because of the personal relationship that they
have with their community, any cut in service compensation for
performing loans would cause smaller servicers to get out of
business.
And these servicers might not be the most efficient in the
industry, but their business model is exactly what some
customers are looking for. Has your agency, the OCC, considered
the impact on community lenders of these proposed changes that
would change the way servicers are compensated?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, the initiatives that you are
describing are actually not initiatives that my agency or the
other Federal bank regulatory agencies have commenced. The FHFA
and I believe HUD, together with the GSEs have embarked on a
significant initiative to revisit the compensation structure
for the GSE-held mortgages and the servicing of those
mortgages.
So, the driver of the standards or the potential changes
that you are describing are the GSEs, the FHFA and, I believe,
HUD. I completely agree with the point that you are making
about the implications for community institutions.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce, would your answer be the same?
Mr. Pearce. Yes. I would agree that it is a process that
HUD and FHFA have taken on to look at servicing initiatives.
And I do think we want to be careful here that problems we have
identified really are in the larger institutions that have sort
of the economies of scale and different foreclosure and loss
mitigation and collections departments.
And so the problems we have seen really been, the right
hand doesn't know what the left hand is doing, and the borrower
falls through the crack.
Mr. Canseco. Right.
Mr. Pearce. But that has not been the problem in community
banks.
Mr. Canseco. Okay. Great. I appreciate your answer. And I
don't mean to be rude by cutting you off, but I am running out
of time here.
I want to know from both of you, have you considered any
measures that would help to keep high-quality community-based
servicers in their business, especially those involving
community banks and other smaller servicers?
Mr. Pearce. I am sorry. I didn't hear that.
Mr. Canseco. If you have considered any measures that would
help to keep high-quality community-based servicers in
business, in your rules and regulations and orders?
Mr. Pearce. Certainly, as the primary Federal regulator for
most of the community banks, we didn't find those problems in
those institutions. And we are very concerned about new
initiatives and are paying attention to that.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, sir.
And Ms. Williams?
Ms. Williams. I think that is something that we should
certainly be sensitive to in doing interagency mortgage
servicing standards.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you both very much. And I yield back my
time.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Perlmutter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to follow up on Mr. Canseco's line of questioning
and just come at it a little differently.
My law firm, for many years, had a general practice. We
represented a lot of lenders, a lot of financial institutions.
And so, from time to time, when the economy went south, we did
a lot of foreclosure work.
Sometimes, we were swamped, and we couldn't process as fast
as our client wanted us to. And, ultimately, I am going to get
to you, Mr. Attorney General.
But, in this instance, we have a huge number of
foreclosures into the system. So we got all sorts of competing
pressures. But there is this need for speed, so to speak.
But where I have seen the excesses and where I am concerned
about--before I get there, just a public comment. The new form
that CFPB has done on disclosures when you take out a loan,
good work. I just want to applaud you for that.
But getting back to the default side of all this--not the
lending side, but the default side--we have the biggest banks,
and we have Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. And, generally, they
pay a certain amount to process a foreclosure. Isn't that
right? Like $650 for the foreclosure and ``X'' number of
dollars for the bankruptcy. Correct? Mr. Attorney General, I
don't mean to ask leading questions, but am I off base on that?
There is a standard--
Mr. Strange. I am sure there is.
Mr. Perlmutter. There is a standard payment for the bulk of
the foreclosures that are processed, unless they are a private
kind of a loan that has been made?
So, within that amount that mostly Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac pay to have a foreclosure process, now we have this
tremendous number of foreclosures coming through. And now we
have, as opposed to what I used to deal with, there is sort of
a middle man who is taking charge of the default process, the
loan process servicer, LPS, or whatever they are called.
And from my review of the cases and the consent decrees,
that seems to be where we have a lot of problems.
Mr. Attorney General, can you sort of expand on that? Am I
off base or--
Mr. Strange. I think you are describing the situation and
the problem. I think that is a new twist to the whole
experience. It sounds like yor experience with this issue is
similar to mine.
As the individual cases state law process--that is still
really typically the situation in Alabama, in my State.
Mr. Perlmutter. So, we have this massive number of
foreclosures that have to be processed. And the client who is
up here could be a big bank one or could be a Fannie Mae number
one.
You have a loan processing servicer company here, and then
you have lawyers and title companies down here. How in
regulating all of this--Ms. Williams you were talking about
some standardized processing, because we have State-by-State
laws.
But how would you approach this? Because I think in your
testimony, you talked about trying to standardize this stuff.
Ms. Williams. What we found in our examinations--and it is
part of the areas where additional corrective action is
required in our orders--is that the oversight of these, I will
call them third-party vendors, and they include law firms, but
they also include the paper processor, packagers.
The large servicers relied significantly on third-party
vendors of different types to do important components in the
foreclosure process. And they did not oversee them properly.
We have guidance that we have issued, supervisor guidance
that deals with oversight of third-party vendors that banks
use, regardless of what particular service is being provided.
That guidance was pretty well ignored in the oversight of the
law firms and wasn't adequately applied elsewhere.
Mr. Perlmutter. And so that sort of reminds me of what used
to be doctor-patient, then it became doctor-insurance company-
patient. Here it is client-servicer-lawyer. And hearing from
the lawyers, they were getting nicked like crazy by the
servicer, almost a RESPA in reverse, that they would have to
payback kickback, if you will, moneys to the servicing company.
Then, there was this piecemeal or piece process, where they
just had to speed these things through. And you lost the
lawyer-client relationship.
And I don't know if in Alabama, there are ethics issues
that are going on. I want to be here on behalf of the lawyers
to say, let them do their job.
Mr. Strange. I agree with your comment. And some of the
things I pointed out in my testimony that I think are good, as
far as this overall negotiation process, the single-point
contact, the dual-track negotiations, eliminating this robo-
signing problem, verifying accounting information, a lot of
things that consumers deserve and should have in a simple forum
are very good parts of this whole discussion.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Strange, just very quickly, I am curious, how many
cases have you filed so far in your investigatory work against
servicers?
Mr. Strange. In our State?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes.
Mr. Strange. I don't know of any at this point.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. How long have you been investigating
them?
Mr. Strange. I have been in office for 5 months.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. You are following a predecessor. Are
you initiating--
Mr. Strange. We have had a lot of organizing to do. But we
have a very robust consumer protection division. We have
received lots of information, complaints that we are pursuing.
But I couldn't comment on specific investigations right
now.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Can you give me a number of complaints? I
know you can't get specific.
Mr. Strange. In the hundreds.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. In the hundreds. What would be the fine
for someone who is deemed to have committed fraud here or
committed an offense? What would be the fine?
Mr. Strange. I think it depends on what the offense is,
obviously. And I would have to get back to you on that. I am
not exactly sure. It depends on where they fall.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Mr. Strange. I would be happy to get that information for
you, though, for our State.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. What do you see, so far as--I
think we have had a pretty good discussion this morning--
afternoon now, I guess--with regards to the events that all
transpired, and how it has all come about with regards to some
of the servicing, obviously, has fallen short here.
And now in the default process, there is, obviously, some
lack of communication, probably some other shortfalls. Is that
what you see so far? Are there some other players along the
line here that did some inappropriate things as well?
Mr. Strange. Most of the complaints that we receive are
lack of communication or a lack of understanding of the
process. And it can be from lots of different sources or
reasons. We try and do everything we can to inform the consumer
and then try and adopt the approach that I think Congressman
Scott mentioned, get people together so that they can get the
information. And oftentimes, that will solve the problem.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Mr. Date, I am just kind of curious. A while ago, you were
talking about, basically, the 14 mortgage servicers have 50
percent of the market, roughly. And then, you were talking
about working with all the stakeholders. And you included
academics in that.
Can you explain how the academics are part of the
stakeholders in mortgage servicing?
Mr. Date. What we have tried to do within the Bureau
broadly, and certainly within our work in our research and
markets team, is to make sure that we are plugged in to both
the actual pragmatic market reality of how these financial
markets work, operationally how do they work, how do the
financial incentives work, what is the structure and
concentration in the markets, and then, simultaneously, be
aware of and be on top of advances in the conceptual
understanding from a research point of view.
There are lots of great economists, for example, who are in
the employ of the bank regulatory agencies. But we really know
that we don't have the monopoly on good ideas or different
perspectives. So we want to make sure that we are talking and
getting the insights and the perspectives of a wide range of
people.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Even those people who are not on the
ground dealing with it everyday? That is just kind of curious.
It is kind of interesting to me, how they can impact it, since
they don't have a working knowledge of it, because they are not
there everyday? They are just conceptualizing.
Mr. Date. Congressman, I appreciate your point, certainly.
But I will say that when I was in the business, I would
occasionally talk to academic researchers. It is a different
perspective and, therefore, valuable.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. That is fine.
In April, a letter from the Center for Responsible Lending
was sent to Federal bank regulators stating the preference for
State solutions to addressing deficiencies in the mortgage
servicing as opposed to solutions crafted by the Federal
Government. Does the CFPB concur with this position?
Mr. Date. I am sorry. Would you mind? I couldn't quite--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. In April, there was a letter sent from the
Center for Responsible Lending to the Federal bank regulators
stating the preference for State solutions to address the
deficiencies in the mortgage servicing, as opposed to solutions
crafted by the Federal Government. I just asked if CFPB concurs
in this position.
Mr. Date. The CFPB has the advantage structurally of being
able to have supervision authority with respect to Federal
consumer protection laws, irrespective, when we have our full
authority, of a particular charter or locale that the servicer
is in.
So it does allow us, over time, to be able to be a
meaningfully additive voice to creating a baseline that is
consistent across-the-board.
That said, much of the constraints on the mortgage market,
because of the size of the real estate market, are matters of
State law, which is why I assumed that the State attorneys
general figure so prominently in this debate.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So, is that a yes or a no?
Mr. Date. State law issues and solutions ought to, I
suspect, be an important part of the solution. But I don't
think that somehow excuses the Bureau or other Federal
regulators from trying to improve what today appears to be a
broken market.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. McHenry for 5 minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
Mr. Date, in connection with this loan servicing issue, has
CFPB proactively reached out to the State attorneys general?
Mr. Date. With respect to the mortgage servicing settlement
conversations, I assume, Congressman? At the invitation of the
Treasury and the Secretary, we have been asked to participate
in the interagency Federal and State dialogue in that way.
There are 50 State attorneys general. Although I don't
personally know, I would expect that some reached out to us and
that members of the team reached out to some of them.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. And in connection with this loan
servicing issue as well, has the agency proactively reached out
to loan servicers?
Mr. Date. Just to clarify, with respect to the attorneys
general, the CFPB will have an enforcement division. And in an
effort to make sure that we are at some level coordinated with
State attorneys general, I know that we have, at least, been
trying to connect with State attorneys general over time, in
respect with their significant authority over these areas.
But that is a more broad-based comment than mortgage
servicing.
Your comment with respect to reaching out to mortgage
servicers, my job, just a component of it, is to make sure that
we are very plugged in to how it is that these businesses, as a
practical matter, actually work in the moment.
And what that means is that it is incumbent on me and it is
incumbent on my team to make sure that we are connecting, I
would hope on a regular basis, with those who can provide
market color and market insight.
As the gentleman pointed out a moment ago, the mortgage
servicing market has come to be quite concentrated. And so my
expectation is that members of my team, if not me personally,
have talked with the institutions that have mortgage servicing
platforms of some sort.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. In light of that, is it part of your
practice, in terms of your engagement in this mortgage
servicing settlement issue, to float ideas with the industry to
see if it is workable?
Mr. Date. In general, that has not been the approach. What
we have tried to do is to provide advice to Federal and State
agencies that are at the table.
I would argue that it would become confusing and slightly
entropic to be making some parallel set of negotiating rounds
with servicers. And so, that is not something we have done.
To be clear, I have tried--I have personally tried to
provide ideas to our sister agencies and to State attorneys
general, to put those ideas in perspective, those perspectives
in some grounded analysis, to communicate that analysis and to
listen and receive feedback with respect to--and provide
feedback about ideas. All of that is certainly true.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So, that is in light of the PowerPoint
presentation that has been going around for a few months now,
that some proactive solutions that the CFPB is proposing as a
part of this agreement.
Do you have an email from Richard Davis at U.S. Bank to you
and Ms. Warren, from back in March, where it appears that it is
a follow-up from a conversation? You are asking about details
of a needs test.
And so, I just want to be clear, sometimes you are
soliciting opinions from the mortgage servicer on what would be
workable? I just want to make sure that I give you another
opportunity to answer that question. Perhaps I didn't word it
correctly.
But it appears, in light of the email that we have--we are
not privy to your conversation you had with U.S. Bank. But in
response to that meeting, they go through a detailed analysis
of what a needs test would look like and how operationally it
worked.
Is that something that you solicited?
Mr. Date. Congressman, I can't recall this specific
conversation with Mr. Davis around the--I remember the meeting,
of course. But I want to make sure that I understand your
question.
A needs test is one of, frankly, many structural mechanisms
that a variety of mortgage servicers use in order to prevent
what otherwise can be an arguably pernicious impact of moral
hazard when loss mitigation techniques are used.
And as a large mortgage servicer, I would expect that
particular institution would have some experience in that,
particularly in light of delinquencies in the marketplace. And
I naturally, by virtue of my role, would be very interested in
their perspective and--
Mr. McHenry. So you did solicit their opinion on that?
Mr. Date. I have solicited. I don't remember that in
particular, but it would not surprise me. I have solicited
opinions about a great many things with respect to the mortgage
market and otherwise.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you for your testimony.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Duffy, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Just to revisit an issue that came up earlier, there was
quite a bit of conversation earlier in this hearing about Ms.
Warren. And, I think one of our concerns is that she has come
into this committee and told us very specifically that she was
here just providing advice for certain folks as her role with
the formation of CFPB.
But as we have come to learn, I think she has been less
than forthright, that she has been actively engaged in the
negotiations, actively making proposals for these settlements.
As one of my Democrat colleagues mentioned earlier,
sunlight is the best disinfectant. And when we feel like there
has been a cloud around what she has been doing, that will
raise our need to question further. And I think that is what
has been happening here.
But with that clarification, Mr. Date, is it fair to say
that the CFPB is making recommendations that we should have
some form of principal write-down as a settlement proposal?
Mr. Date. We have provided ideas and perspectives on
mortgage servicing broadly. I personally had--
Mr. Duffy. That is not my question. Have you guys provided
ideas that a principal write-down should be part of the
settlement?
Mr. Date. That is an idea that we have presented in the
past.
Mr. Duffy. So you have set out the idea that principal
write-down could be part of the settlement?
Mr. Date. As part of a broader settlement.
Mr. Duffy. Are you aware that the Senate and the House last
year considered the concepts of principal write-down? And they
soundly rejected those ideas?
Mr. Date. Congressman, I wouldn't be able to point to
specific provisions that were considered or not. But obviously,
that was not in the context of a voluntary settlement by
parties.
Mr. Duffy. Sure. But you are aware that it was considered
last year in the Senate when we talked about bankruptcy judges
being able to do a principal write-down as part of a
bankruptcy?
And then in the House, there was a measure to allow
mortgage cram-down that was rejected. Are you aware of that?
Mr. Date. I am not specifically aware of the specific
contours. But I do know that the Congress appropriately is
thinking about and considering different ways in which to help
American households through what is a grotesquely difficult
period.
Mr. Duffy. That is right. And so, the Congress has rejected
these ideas. But here at the CFPB, even though we, the elected
Representatives of the people of the United States, have
rejected it, you all come in and said, as a form of a
settlement, as per the documentation that was provided to you
earlier by Mr. Bachus.
You say, no, no, no. This is an appropriate form of
settlement, even though we have all rejected it, and we are the
ones who are the elected officials. I take some offense to that
because I think, in the end, what it does is it is going to
drive up interest rates. It is going to drive capital out of
the private marketplace.
And in the end, it is not going to serve consumers in my
district. I think it is going to make it more difficult for
them to obtain a mortgage for a new home.
Ms. Williams, as you have been dealing with this issue, is
it fair to say that the Federal Reserve and the OCC have been
discussing the deficiencies in the servicing process over the
last couple of years?
Ms. Williams. The OCC, the Fed, the FDIC, and the OTS--this
has been a subject of interagency discussion.
Mr. Duffy. And is it fair to say that you guys have entered
into consent orders with the Nation's largest mortgaging
services?
Ms. Williams. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duffy. Yes. And part of that consent order is that
there would be significant remedial steps taken to make sure
this doesn't happen again?
Ms. Williams. Absolutely.
Mr. Duffy. And so, you have stepped in. And I hope that you
would have taken appropriate caution to make sure this doesn't
happen again. Do you then see the need to have the CFPB and the
State attorneys general stepping in to supplement the remedies
that you have implemented?
Ms. Williams. The settlements that the State AGs and the
DOJ are involved in deal with areas that are separate and
distinct from the areas that we addressed in our orders. They
deal with matters of State law. They deal with other Federal
agencies' issues.
So, we have moved on parallel and coordinated tracks, but
it is a separate track.
Mr. Duffy. But the concern for everyone here is that there
have been some deficiencies in the servicing process, right?
Ms. Williams. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duffy. And you wanted to make sure this doesn't happen
again, right, moving forward?
Ms. Williams. That is correct.
Mr. Duffy. And you have implemented procedures to make sure
that doesn't happen again
Ms. Williams. We are in the process of doing that. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. Okay, fine.
I am out of time. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
The first panel--I believe we have had all the questions--
is dismissed.
I would like to thank the first panel very much. You had
great testimony and great responses to questions.
Thank you very much.
At this time, I would like to call up our second panel of
witnesses. I ask everyone to take their seats.
Hello. Welcome to the second panel. I will introduce them
individually for the purpose of giving a 5-minute statement.
Mr. David Stevens is no stranger to the Financial Services
Committee room. And I welcome him back in a different capacity,
as president of the Mortgage Bankers Association.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF DAVID H. STEVENS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, MORTGAGE
BANKERS ASSOCIATION (MBA)

Mr. Stevens. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, Chairman Neugebauer, and Ranking Member Capuano for
the opportunity to testify today on mortgage servicing and
national servicing standards.
We at MBA believe that a consolidated national servicing
standard, if developed in a cooperative manner, could stimulate
much needed reform of a residential mortgage loan servicing
system that has admittedly failed a great number of consumers
during the recent foreclosure crisis.
In 2008, we faced a ``perfect storm.'' As the global
economy collapsed, the subprime market imploded. Many Americans
lost their jobs and millions of Americans defaulted on their
mortgages, putting extraordinary strains on the existing
servicing system.
When the crisis hit, I was in the private sector running a
large real estate firm. I saw firsthand the buy and sell sides
of the business grind to a halt. All the members of these two
subcommittees know from your own experiences the devastating
impact that ensued.
It is clear that the real estate finance industry as a
whole was unprepared to handle these unprecedented events, and
that mistakes were made. What brings us here today, and what is
grossly lacking at every level within the industry, is trust.
There is a lack of trust between borrowers and servicers.
There is a lack of trust between servicers, regulators, the
State attorneys general, and the courts to find a joint
solution as to how to equitably handle borrowers facing
foreclosure. And there is a lack of trust between investors,
underwriters, and credit rating agencies to restore private
capital to the mortgage market in a meaningful way.
Without the trust, the housing industry goes nowhere. And
by trust, I mean the ability of policymakers, borrowers, and
the industry at large to have faith in the products and
services we provide, and how those loans will be serviced. It
must do better moving forward.
I am here today representing an important segment of the
mortgage finance market. In my prior job as FHA Commissioner,
you may recall that my staff and I worked hard to get
bipartisan support for FHA reform last year. That proposal
passed overwhelmingly in this House.
Now here today, I believe the environment exists to reach
similar consensus amongst regulators and stakeholders regarding
national mortgage servicing standards. Certainly, the MBA will
support such an effort.
I can assure you that the mortgage finance industry and
servicers have not stood still and we are constantly in the
process of addressing our shortfalls in implementing new
program upgrades.
Creating a truly national servicing standard would
streamline and eliminate many overlapping requirements,
providing clarity and certainty for servicers, borrowers,
lenders, and investors alike.
It is critical that all of the Federal regulators involved
act in a coordinated manner to establish one national
consolidated servicing standard that applies to the entire
industry, rather than each piling on requirement after
requirement.
A national standard should start with a complete analysis
of existing servicer requirements and State laws governing
foreclosures. Development should include an open dialogue with
stakeholders in the servicing arena, all of whom must
ultimately work together to ensure the standard achieves the
dual goal of better serving borrowers while allowing for a
sustainable mortgage servicing business model.
MBA actually initiated the process in January by convening
a blue-ribbon council on Residential Mortgage Servicing. That
council examined the entire servicing model and is the basis
for work that is currently under way to identify
recommendations to improve the system for all stakeholders.
In May, the council released its preliminary White Paper.
In it, the council examined the current servicing model,
educated the public on the role and compensation of servicers,
and addressed popular misconceptions relating to servicing
practices and incentives.
I believe this White Paper has provided useful information
to you and other policymakers that are currently engaged in the
debate, and I encourage your two subcommittees and Congress to
use MBA and its counsel as a resource going forward.
In conclusion, as we develop servicing standards, I urge
you to pay careful attention to the interdependence of
servicing and the impact that changes to the system will have
on the economics of mortgage servicing, tax and accounting
rules and regulations, and the effect of the new requirements
on Basel capital requirements and the TBA market.
Servicing does not exist in a vacuum. Instead, it is part
of a broader interdependent and interconnected ecosystem that
involves all the varied elements of the mortgage industry. The
housing market remains fragile. Therefore, when considering
changes to the current model, policymakers must be mindful of
unforeseen and unintended consequences that could ultimately
result in higher housing costs for consumers and reduced access
to credit.
I have spent more than 30 years in this industry. Despite
what we have just lived through, and the challenges we continue
to face, I am optimistic that we can successfully address the
challenges in the mortgage servicing system.
To both subcommittees and the full Congress, I would
reiterate that MBA supports reasonable national servicing
standards that apply best practices to the process to better
serve the needs of borrowers, servicers, and investors alike.
Again, we want to be part of the solution and we look
forward to working with you and other policymakers towards that
end.
I look forward to any questions. Thank you
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stevens can be found on page
106 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to introduce Mr. Michael Calhoun, the
president of the Center for Responsible Lending.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CALHOUN, PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR RESPONSIBLE
LENDING (CRL)

Mr. Calhoun. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, ranking members,
and members of the subcommittee, for this opportunity to
testify today.
It has been noted what a critical time this is for the
housing market. And the housing market is increasingly probably
the most important drag on our recovering economy. For the
point on that, housing starts today are at the lowest point
that they have been at since World War II.
We have an overhang of housing in the real estate market
that will take far more than a year to clear--that is, existing
houses for sale--without the addition of the many other houses
that face foreclosure now.
CRL comes to this and other consumer financial issues from
a dual viewpoint. We work to help families achieve and maintain
financial security in two ways.
First, we fight for consumer protection that helps families
have access to sustainable lending. And second, through our
affiliates, we provide, through this affiliate, substantial
financing, over $6 billion to date, primarily for
homeownership.
We currently, today, have a large portfolio of loans for
which we have 100 percent of the credit risk, that we are
wrestling ourselves with these very issues of how do you sort
out which families can be helped, and which ones need to
transition to the next stage.
And so, we deal with this in a very real way on an every
day basis.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today with David
Stevens and the work we do with the MBA.
There are three main points. The first is documented by the
regulator's repeated studies. There are serious servicing
deficiencies and they continue. Importantly, these harmed not
only borrowers, but also investors, surrounding property
owners, local government, and the overall economy.
Second, there are deep structural barriers to a properly
functionally servicing market. As noted, borrowers do not
select or control the servicer. Investors, likewise, have very
little control over selecting or controlling the servicers.
And perhaps most important, typically, the servicer does
not own the loan that they are servicing. They are doing it for
another party. That changes the incentives.
And indeed, often, the servicers have conflicts of
interest, in that they own second loans and unsecured loans
that are subordinate to the very loans that they are servicing,
and can be adversely affected depending how they service those
loans.
There have been questions about what has been the impact of
the servicing deficiencies. And I think it is critical to
remember the same company, the same personnel who have been
charged with the robo-signing, cutting corners, and inadequate
staffing foreclosure, are the very same companies, the same
personnel who have been responsible for implementing loss
mitigation efforts, have been where the rubbers meets the road
of processing which families can be saved and which should be
moved forward.
And I think it is noteworthy that the largest legal action
to date regarding servicing deficiencies was brought by
investors who felt their investments were being damaged by the
inadequacy of the servicing, and that too many families were
being pushed into foreclosure rather than through loan
modification.
And indeed, the remedy in that proposed settlement is that
the servicing for troubled loans be transferred to another
servicer. In effect, we are trying to figure out how you make
servicers treat other people's loans like they do their own.
The solution, as we outlined in our testimony, is better
baseline servicing standards and coordinated oversight. Key
among the particular individual protections, there needs to be
required loss mitigation evaluation before foreclosure can be
either initiated or continued.
As noted by many, we need to get in place promptly a single
point of contact, so people don't get lost in the maze of these
servicing companies.
There needs to be third-party review of loan modification
denials. Audits continue to show very high failure rates and
error rates by the servicers. And again, this provides the
safeguards and improves the quality of the modifications.
And there need to be standards for imposition of fees.
Often, borrowers start with a small delinquency and are buried
under an avalanche of pyramided fees that push them into an
unrecoverable delinquency.
Again, in summary, everyone who is affected by this housing
crisis and the key role of servicing in it, we need to move
forward with coordinated common sense ground rules and careful
oversight, to restore the health of the housing market and our
economy.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Calhoun can be found on page
72 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to thank you
both. I would like to recognize myself for questioning.
Mr. Stevens, I would like to ask you about something that
the first panel got into quite a bit, and that is the mandatory
principal modification write down.
How do you feel about that? Do you think that will help
solve the problem? Is there a fairness quotient? How do you
decide how much, in which direction, and what harm?
I would just like to hear your comments on that.
Mr. Stevens. So, as briefly as I can, when I was FHA
Commissioner, we introduced the FHA Short Refinance Program,
which was a program created to provide principal write-down,
but it was optional.
I believe mandatory principal write-down is extraordinarily
problematic for a variety of reasons. One, it will have a
direct impact on future liquidity being provided from this
mortgage finance system which desperately needs private capital
to reengage. If there are concerns that, down the road,
agreements made in pooling and servicing agreements could
suddenly be changed at some point, with principal write-down
being thrown in as a mandatory provision at awkward moments in
economic cycles, the willingness for private capital to
reengage will be problematic.
The second reason why I am not in favor of mandatory
principal write-down, but do favor, again, optional principal
write-down, is that the critical component during this crisis
was people's ability to afford their home. In some cases, they
may not be able to afford the home without principal write-
down. And the servicer and investor combined should take a look
at that particular borrower's need, and use that if that is the
best solution, based on their determination.
But if forced principal write-down were to occur, it could
encourage strategic defaults of people who can make their
payments, took a prime mortgage, knew what they were getting
into when they bought the home, and simply because of property
value loss, they want the investor to take that loss.
And so in each case, I think we need to look at the broad
spectrum of loss mitigation options and work primarily towards
finding the best resolution, whether it be forbearance,
principal write-down, payment reductions or payment
modification programs that are provided for in HAMP,
proprietary modifications, all of those components.
And that is just the tip of the iceberg, not going into the
GSE solutions, the FHA solutions, or the private market
solutions.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. Calhoun, you wrote a
letter, I believe, asking the regulators to withdraw their
consent orders, and saying that you think the States were
better positioned to make these decisions. Could you give me
some background on that or clarification, please?
Mr. Calhoun. Certainly. As set out in our testimony, and I
think this follows the comments of Ms. Williams, we believe
that you need a coordinated approach from the Federal banking
regulators, the State attorneys general and State banking
regulators, as well as the CFPB.
As also as Ms. Williams--I was on the panel with her some
time ago when she made the point even more explicitly. The
State attorneys general are investigating State law violations.
They are not Federal statutes that they are acting under.
And we believe, first, in general, in the preservation of
State rights and the preservation of enforcement of those State
responsibilities by the State AGs.
We certainly have been supportive, in our testimony today
and other times, of the need for the Federal regulators to also
have a baseline of servicing standards. But in terms of
resolving those State claims, we believe it is appropriate for
the State attorneys general to take the lead on that.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay. Thank you.
One of the points I think that has been made and the
servicing standard suggestions have been the singular point of
contact, individual point of contact. Boy, that sounds great.
But can you really get it done when you are talking about
servicer moves to servicer? Who is in charge? Who is on first?
Who is on second? We all like to have the day where you really
just had to walk down the street and talk to your local
mortgage guy and say, ``I am going to be a little late this
month. Can you help me out here?''
I talked to Ms. Williams about this previously. Is that
achievable? As much as I think it is great and we should do it,
is this workable? And what kind of suggestions would you make
to make it workable, so that when somebody has a problem, they
actually have somebody that they can impact. and they are not
stuck with, ``push one for this, push two for that, and call
back in 24 days.''
Do you have any suggestions? I don't have much time, but
how might that work?
Mr. Calhoun. I think, as you know, it can make a lot of
progress where we are now. There are some debates. Some of the
servicers are already going to a goal of a point a contact, to
make sure that if you have a problem, you can call and get a
live person who has access to all your information, not
somebody who is just writing down a note to pass on to someone
else.
And that, at least as the minimum, should be there. And
hopefully, the goal is actually there is a case manager.
The loan modifications are very akin to re-underwriting a
loan. And in that process, I think it is noteworthy that the
servicers typically do have a single underwriter assigned to
underwrite the loans for the original making of the loan.
And so, I think that suggests that there is a lot of wisdom
in having that same process when you, in fact, are re-
underwriting the loan for purposes of the loan modification.
Chairwoman Capito. Yes. I would agree with that. And I
think that what we have found here is that the servicers did
not have the staff available, didn't anticipate, I don't think,
the numbers and the complexities of where we were going to be.
Hindsight is always better.
So, hopefully, this will help with that, because I think
that is a very valuable point of a national servicing standard,
if that is the direction that we end up going, which it looks
like it is.
So I will recognize Ranking Member Maloney for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. My main question is, how do we prevent this
from happening in the future? And is the consent agreement that
has come forward from the regulators--is that strong enough? Or
what changes need to take place so that we prevent this
disaster to individuals and our overall economy from happening
again?
I would like to start with Mr. Calhoun, then Mr. Stevens.
In what way does the consent agreement fail to provide
sufficient accountability for servicers, either in their
foreclosure procedures generally or in their loan modification
or loss mitigation efforts?
And I would also like you to comment on the point that my
colleague, Mr. Perlmutter, raised, where the servicers come in
and they say to the bank, ``Oh, we are not going to charge you
anything. We will handle it for you.''
Meanwhile, they contract with the lawyers who are paying
them, that they have obstructed the lawyer-client
responsibility, where the lawyer must look out for the best
interest of their client. And maybe that has cost this country
more, in terms of what it is costing us individually and as an
overall economy and government to respond to this.
If an attorney-client relationship was there, where they
were really forced to look at every option and work with that
individual, but it is cut off. And if I understood him
correctly, the attorneys then are pressured, don't ask
questions; just pay us and get it done.
And maybe it would have been better if there were able to
have that communication and that responsibility, and to ask
those questions on the individual basis of how to best work
through it, both for the individual and the country.
Starting with you, Mr. Calhoun, and then Mr. Stevens.
Mr. Calhoun. I think the first point is that the best way
to avoid this, again, is--and I think we are making great
progress on this--strong but workable mortgage origination
standards, so that we are not flooded with portfolios where you
have 50 or 50-plus percent of the loans going to foreclosure.
It can be very difficult to design a system that can absorb
that.
We have worked with the MBA, for example, on concerns with
the qualified residential mortgage standards. We are very
concerned at CRL about access to credit. We think that is a
huge thing. But specifically, you need some bright line ground
rules because of the structure of this market in good times.
These structural problems have been there. They were masked
by the bubble housing economy of 2000 to 2006, when the
securitization and a lot of the structure grew up. Default
rates were so low and they were illusory low, because people,
in point of fact, were defaulting, but instead they could get
an easy refinance. And there really was a buildup of the
foreclosures.
But you need more specificity, so that there are basic
ground rules that then the system can operate competitively
with.
Mr. Stevens. I would completely agree with the statement
about strong, well-founded, secure origination practices being
the first bellwether to protect this environment from ever
occurring again.
If we all reflect back, we had an industry that was
designed for efficiency over the last decade. It became fully
automated only in the late 1990s. So we didn't even have
automated underwriting systems until the 2000s that were
actually been using in this country.
All the processes of servicing became based on efficient,
low-cost, low-touch, highly technologically-oriented servicing
systems that could work efficiently for performing loans.
When the bubble collapsed, the models had never been
tested. The automated systems had never been through this, a
testing of a market correction. When the house of cards
completely collapsed, these low- cost, low-touch, efficient
servicing models found themselves completely incapable of
dealing in what was now needed to be a high touch, a highly
trained, extraordinary set of underwriting skills, a personnel
base that just absolutely did not exist.
The servicers were not prepared for this. The capital had
already been expended. The market was not prepared for the
extraordinary collapse of these models that proved to not be
able to withstand the pressures of an economic downturn, no
matter how they were viewed when the loans originated.
And that subsequent collapse has created all of this
backlog, the extraordinary pressure on all of our systems in
our economy, that could be avoided going forward if we had
strong rules about performing loans.
This is the last point I would make. If you look at prime
owner-occupied residential loans originated by the GSE's fully
documented, the default rate is only about 5 percent. It is
high, but it is extraordinarily low. And had we stuck to those
kinds of underwriting characteristics, we wouldn't have found
ourselves anywhere near the predicament we are in today.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Renacci, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
It is interesting, because I am still hearing you say that
if we had all the procedures and all of the things in place in
advance, this would not have happened. Even going into the
future, I think I heard you just say that, Mr. Stevens.
And my concern is even if they are in place, you are always
going to have issues going forward. But I also heard you talk
about personnel. Do we have the personnel? Are we going to have
the servicing agencies? Are they going to be available with the
personnel and the opportunities for another major downturn?
I am not talking about one that happened in 2007, 2008.
But, what are we going to do to make sure those things don't
occur in the future?
Mr. Stevens. I really believe that is the discussion that
we are all actively engaged in, and my worry in the process
today is that we are so concerned about coming up with a
perfect answer in the current moment, that we see, again,
multiple sets of rules and regulations coming out of the
various regulators, some untested ideas--even single point of
contact, for example, is not really tested.
It is now being required in HAMP, but we don't ultimately
know if that is the right solution.
Independent servicers has been a proposal. We don't know if
independent servicers can ultimately handle the volume.
My contention is that if we go back decades in the
industry--and I started in this industry in Colorado--yes. And
we all know Mayor McNichols lost his job because he didn't have
enough snow plows for the big snow storm, yet he had enough
plows for normal sets of snow storms.
We will go through market corrections. In Colorado, they
also experienced the oil patch crisis. And during the oil patch
crisis, we saw market corrections. And there were home value
declines. And there were large numbers of foreclosures.
I was personally in the industry at that time. We were able
to manage it because we hadn't built on top of that this
extraordinary bubble of unsustainable mortgage products, given
to people who never should have qualified for that product in
the first place, created this frenzy around using their home as
an ATM machine.
And I do believe when we come back to it--and we will go
through market corrections again, there is no question about
it.
If we can create safe and sustainable guidelines for
mortgage products, and we can create a standardized set of
servicing requirements that protect the consumer, but also
provide for an industry that can actually deal with these
crises, I think we will come a long way to creating an
environment that will allow us to withstand the storms of the
future.
And I think that is the most important thing we need to be
prepared for.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Calhoun, do you have any comments?
Mr. Calhoun. I think your point is well taken, that there
need to be basic protections and quite frankly, some basic
rights for consumers. I am sure you had constituents who called
their servicer and they were basically at the mercy of what the
servicer decided to do, for example, with imposing fees, with
how they treat their payments, etc.
In the absence of the rules, we should expect that. So what
happened was servicing companies pay the originator of loans to
get the right to service the loans. And then again, they get
paid a monthly fee, typically 25 basis points for a GSE-type
loan.
And they are supposed to make the money back through that
fee and through the additional fees that are charged, because
they get to keep the late fees, the property inspection fees,
the third-party vendor fees.
Without standards there, companies who can charge a lot of
those fees are going to bid up the price of the value of
servicing. And so, if you want to be in that market, you have
to match what they are doing. If you are allowed to charge
those fees and everyone allows it, that is the only way you can
stay in the market.
So we need that baseline of--and I think we are close.
There can be areas of disagreement. But there is evolving
consensus of what the contours of that baseline of protection
should be.
We need to get those in place. And then at the other side,
investors are now much more attuned to making sure that they
have more protection about servicing and start to insist on
protection in the securitization field, when up to now, no one
even thought about that when they were doing due diligence on a
security.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Calhoun, how would you protect consumers
from illegal mortgage servicing in the future, the illegal
things that have occurred, some of the ones that have occurred?
Mr. Calhoun. I think the CFPB will play an important role
in this, because you need the flexibility to respond to the
changes in the market. The CFPB needs to be careful to not
throttle innovation, to not adversely impact credit, which I
think for the next probably--
Mr. Renacci. Excuse me, not to interrupt, but how is the
CFPB going to do that?
Mr. Calhoun. Under Dodd-Frank, it transferred those
specific statutory responsibilities for servicing under RESPA.
It also is given a general mandate to oversee the servicing
companies, along with the Federal banking regulators, and to
police and prohibit any unfair deceptive practices by the
servicers.
Mr. Renacci. I know I ran out of time, but I was really
trying to get to the specifics.
Mr. Calhoun. Forced-place insurance is a big thing, where
the servicers will place insurance with a company that the
owner has interest in, and charge the borrower 3 or 4 times
what the regular insurance rate is.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Perlmutter?
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay. And again to follow up on my
colleagues' questions--and first of all, thank you two for
being here. The wisdom you are bringing to the table is really
important.
In Colorado, I would say, though, having done the
foreclosures during that period when our economy fell apart,
we, as the lawyers, did say 10 foreclosures a month, boom,
boom, boom. All of a sudden, we were doing 100.
And we weren't ready for it. Okay.
This time around, some guys have been doing 100
foreclosures a month. All of a sudden, they have 5,000 a month.
And they can't do it.
So the system has just been swamped, from beginning to end.
And it started with some lousy loans being made in the first
place.
So you two are right on the money. That is where it starts.
But I don't know that any system is going to be foolproof when,
all of a sudden, you have this giant lurch in the numbers that
are being processed. Because we are going to go back to some
normal at some point here. And then we will deal with it.
And then there will be another downturn. And for a while,
there is going to be a backlog.
But what I don't want--and I want the servicers or whoever
is processing these things to do them, to do them in a speedy
fashion. But the real problem here is that the borrower is
entitled to some due process. And that is what has been missed
in so many of these cases. That is why that robo-signing isn't
right.
That is why pushing these out the door so fast, in some
instances, because that borrower has rights. The investors have
rights. Everybody has rights in this deal. But the borrower's
rights were getting hurt in the name of speed.
So, let us go back to some of those things that need to be
corrected, whether it is robo-signing or, in my opinion, I
think the lawyers are being asked--as they process these
things, they have to kick back in effect.
They are paying certain fees back to the servicers that
really weren't ever in the deal in the first place. But to get
the foreclosure, they have to do it.
So I will let you follow up on Mr. Renacci's question. And
if you can answer that and my questions, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Stevens. Let me just try just a couple, the robo-
signing, where, in fact, the laws were violated--robo-signing
became a big catch-all phrase. But where, in fact, affidavits
were signed by people who are not the individual who was
actually supposed to sign, or could not support the
attestations being made in that affidavit, because they hadn't
reviewed the subsequent documentation, those are legal
violations.
And those are fully enforceable. So, to some degree, I
think what we found during this process of this collapse is in
the effort to respond to this massive pile of foreclosures,
people were setting up the proverbial, as the stories would
call it, card tables with Burger King kids, which was the story
in Florida, of just untrained, inexperienced people signing off
on documents.
All of that is illegal. That is fully enforceable. And that
clearly has to change. I still come back to the--
Mr. Perlmutter. If I could--
Mr. Stevens. Yes.
Mr. Perlmutter. I guess that is what I am trying to say.
Here you have these massive numbers of foreclosures coming
through. Everybody is trying to deal with it. There are plenty
of laws in place to go after a lot of these practices.
I would caution the regulators as they get involved in this
to not go overboard.
Mr. Stevens. Right.
Mr. Perlmutter. We had something--there is a huge swamp of
the system. So, go ahead and finish. But I agree with that
point.
Mr. Stevens. So if you take that at its premise, there were
laws broken by not all institutions but some. Those cases are
being fought either through State attorneys or through class
action lawsuits or other measures where people are paying
fines. Some are going to jail. Many institutions have failed in
this process, because they were not legitimate.
So that is one core measure that exists anytime crimes are
committed. There are other provisions that exist today. And I
think FHA is actually a good example. FHA has had in state, in
their processes as a requirement, by rule and by statute, a set
of servicing standards that must be complied with. Even the OTC
consent decree references the FHA as a model for how you set up
servicing centers.
What we found through this last cycle was that not all
guarantors of risk, not all institutions that paid out
servicing fees to companies that service their loans had the
same set of standards. They vary significantly. Even Freddie
and Fannie had different sets of standards that weren't
completely in sync.
But the FHA sets of standards also came with explicit
penalties for noncompliance, which could, at bare minimum,
include nonpayment of claim, meaning your loan is not insured
and you take the full loss on that loan if you don't service it
appropriately.
Mr. Calhoun. Dave, could I add--
Mr. Stevens. Yes, go ahead.
Mr. Calhoun. --a couple of specifics there. The first is
how your payments are treated.
One of the real scams that goes on is say, you make a
payment that there is a late fee taken out, or your payment is
$50 short. Many servicers now, instead of crediting you--should
have paid $1,050, you paid $1,000; instead of crediting the
$1,000, they put it in something called the suspense account,
meaning you get no credit for it.
The account is treated is if you made no payment. And so
interest accrues as if you had made no payment. Penalty accrues
as if you paid no payment.
That should not be allowed. There should be prompt and full
crediting of all your payments.
All the junk fees that get piled on, that has been the
business model, if you are a servicer, of how you make this
possible, is you just pile on the jump fees. If people are
late, they ought to pay a reasonable fee.
I think much like what was done with the Card Act, where
for credit cards we had no basic ground rules and we saw all
these abuses and games come up. Put in a set of basic ground
rules and then let the market compete.
You didn't set credit card interest rates, appropriately
so, as the focus of that bill was on the basic ground rules. So
let the companies compete on service, benefits, and the fee,
and their interest rate, but don't let them have all these
under the table, things that people can't shop on and make the
market not work.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I am going to go to our last question, because we are going
to be having a vote and, if we can, we will come back.
Mr. Manzullo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you very much. I am going to date
myself, because I was practicing law when RESPA came into
effect, and we had to back-date the documents 3 days in order
for the homeowner to buy the house. I used to be able to close
a real estate loan as an attorney in 20 minutes, with a stack
of papers maybe the size of my thumb. And now it is 2 hours and
there are so many disclosures, there are so many protections
out there, no one knows what goes on.
If they think it is bad in housing, any of you who are
making payments on a student loan, look at the national
organization that really screws that one up. They hang up on
you. They put things in a suspension account. They scream at
you. You can't pay in advance. There are a lot of problems
there.
But what I wanted to return to is the fact that when I was
first elected back in 1992, shortly thereafter, somebody came
up with the brilliant idea to bypass recording home mortgages
with a local recorder, something called MERS. That is the
reason now where we have a lot of people who don't know who
owns the notes. They don't know who owns the mortgage.
And so, in all those great automations to make things
easier, to standardize things, things got worse. It is almost
to the point where there is no longer, with the exception of
many community banks, any type of face-to-face contact.
And oftentimes, the only real people that the homeowner
will see is the community bank that originated the loan, sold
under secondary markets and maintains the relationship of
collecting the payments. And it is obvious that relationship
must exist. Otherwise, local homeowners absolutely have no idea
as to whom to contact in the event that there has to be
something taken care of.
The second thing is in the FHFA extended the timeframe
within which a mortgage has to be foreclosed. But the problem
that we see is every State has its own mortgage foreclosure. In
some States, it is an administrative function that doesn't even
go through the courts. In the State of Illinois, it is a formal
legal proceeding with the equity of redemption and everything
rolled into it.
I know what you are trying to do. And I know what you are
advocating. The problem is that that you are advocating common
sense. And that is never going to find its way into anything
that makes sense coming out of this City.
Isn't there a way, for example, of coming out when a loan
is originated, that there are 10 principles that can be
followed that would add to the stack of papers I guess that the
homeowner would get, that would talk about exactly what is
expected of when the person makes the payment?
Could that be adopted as a standard of the industry as
opposed to, in fact, allowing the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau to come up with some more standards?
On page five of your testimony, Mr. Stevens, you say,
``Unfortunately, each of the parties mentioned has a different
opinion on what the servicing standards should be, making it
very difficult for a servicer to implement what has already
been issued.''
Mr. Stevens. I think you are highlighting the extraordinary
complexity to this process and the concerns that we have about
creating more confusion, rather than finding a solution to
protect consumers.
We are moving in that direction, to come out with what we
believe could be an industry response. And we are moving as
rapidly as possible, so as to hopefully contribute to what
ultimately we could get others to join in with us to get to
that solution.
The point that I would continually emphasize is that our
industry desperately believes that we need a solution to create
servicing standards, but that we need to change the perspective
that there is some value creation in doing it badly. Servicers
have paid an extraordinary price for the mistakes of this broad
industry and the crisis that we have just been through.
Even these partial payment applications, the servicer must
redeem a full payment to the investor every month, whether the
consumer makes no payment or a partial payment. And a consumer
who decides to be constantly late by choice and continues to
make partial payments, I think the question ends up being
asked, should the servicer have to pay the brunt of that
continuous delinquency in the process.
All of these are very complex questions, which is why what
I said in my testimony and we continue to advocate for, we need
to work collectively and aggressively to try to conclude with a
national set of servicing standards that can be adopted to
protect consumers, to reach our objective, but not to overreach
and create a system that is just nonfunctional for either the
industry or the consumer, or for capital to engage back in the
system.
And I will pledge to you that the mortgage bankers are
moving on that path. We already have started down that path and
we hope to have something--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired
Mr. Stevens. --to talk about here at the short-term.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Neugebauer for 5 minutes.
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. The first
thing I would like to do is ask unanimous consent to offer
material that I used during my questioning this morning for the
record.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you.
I apologize, I am kind of bouncing back and forth.
But, Mr. Stevens, one of the things that my friend, Mr.
Hensarling from Texas brought up earlier, and maybe others
have, is that we need to get the mortgage market back
functioning again. And particularly, we need to get private
capital back into play here.
I know a number of my colleagues have been sitting down
with people who have been in the past participants in the
private mortgage market. There is a lot of reluctance, quite
honestly, right now for those participants to come back into
the market. And particularly, they point to just a lot of
uncertainty.
And I think the latest round of uncertainty is now there is
this huge proposed settlement that we haven't seen yet. But
also that the implications of that in the chain of title and
the rule of contract, where servicers are going to be mandated
to basically enter into modifications and principal reductions.
Without really a lot of input from I think really the
ultimate holders of those mortgages, the investors are buying
those mortgage-backed securities. And while obviously having
some certainty of what the world is going to look like moving
forward, I think the troubling part is that we may have created
so much what I call regulatory risk in the mortgage market that
is going to cause an increased pricing premium for new risk
that is out there that subsequently wasn't there in the past.
Is that a sentiment that you share?
Mr. Stevens. Congressman, if I could, I would like to
separate the settlement discussions going on with the broader
question about the regulatory environment and the mortgage
capital and I need to do that because of my previous role as
FHA Commissioner and that I was with the ethics council prior
to leaving, and the servicing settlement discussion is a
subject that I cannot discuss and have not been involved in
since I became FHA Commissioner at all.
On the broader question, when we created the FHA short
refinance program, which has received mixed reviews, those
kinds of programs were created with the intention of it being
an optional opportunity to write down principal refinancing to
a new mortgage.
The uncertainty premium that exists right now in the market
is clearly impacting the desire, the inclination of private
capital, private market players to come up with private
capital, there is no question about it.
There are other things, home prices being flat or
declining, that uncertainty as well makes the investors
concerned about the collateral they are investing in.
But there is no question that many of the actions that are
being discussed or to take place in the future from a
regulatory standpoint are going to have extraordinary impact on
who invests in the U.S. mortgage market.
One fact we all know is to finance $1.5 trillion of annual
mortgage production, sort of a normalized market, we cannot
depend solely on the banking system to provide that financial
capital and so that will have to come in from external parties.
To do so, we need confidence in the servicing environment.
We need confidence in that terms that are agreed to in investor
documents will be upheld and that there won't be changes to
those documents down the road.
And the more uncertainty we create to this discussion while
trying to reach a conclusion to help protect consumers and
create a safe market, that has to be in balance to the notion
that we need to have a functioning housing finance system going
forward or there will be no really functional recovery for a
much longer period.
So I do appreciate your concern, and I think it is one that
why we are so concerned about making sure that we are all
actively engaged in this discussion, regulators as well as
private sector participants and the other stakeholders before
decisions are made because these all have extraordinary impacts
on this ecosystem which we depend on to make the housing market
function.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Calhoun?
Mr. Calhoun. First, I think there is very broad evidence
that there are not enough loan modification efforts taking
place and that they are not being done well.
As I have made the point earlier, the servicers who messed
up the foreclosures are the same ones doing the loan
modifications. And indeed, it is the investors who are coming
in and demanding, including a legal action, so that there will
be more modifications because they ultimately are paying a
heavy price.
Second, the touchstone still needs to be net present value,
that the modification results in a higher return for the holder
of the mortgage or the investor who holds the security. But I
do think we can move to a better place and there is broad
consensus of the contours of how we do that to get some
baseline standards in place and that will help both consumers
and the investors which also indirectly helps the consumers.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Carney, for 5 minutes, will be our final questioner, as
we have votes, so proceed.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate it.
And I apologize to the panel for just coming in a minute ago. I
am probably going to ask questions that you may have addressed
in your testimony.
But I would like to follow up on really the conversation
you were just having about what we need to be doing or what
ought to be done to address the problem at large, and in
particular, to address the problems that folks in delinquency
and foreclosure experiencing.
In my State, the State of Delaware, we put together a group
of people that included the banks and servicing agency, the
community service organizations that have housing counselors
and working with homeowners, the government agencies.
And in my view, it has always been that it requires a whole
series of talks. We have had debates in this committee with the
other members here about anything else, the government has been
the problem, one side argues and, today, we have heard about
the problem that the servicers have had.
And it seems like I was frankly appalled to hear about the
practices that were not being done. Could you elaborate again
on what you were just addressing what we need to really address
these problems?
Getting people processed through in my State, we ran into
consumers who can't get one single point of contact that is
going to get it fixed. The documents get lost. They can't move
through the process. Nobody is willing to make a decision.
The HAMP program in Delaware has been very successful. It
hasn't been as successful in other States. Could you offer your
thoughts on what we should be doing? Both of you, if you would,
please?
Mr. Stevens. I will start. This is the billion dollar
question that we really need to be thinking about.
I will cover a couple of points. The HAMP program works
particularly effectively obviously with Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae loans. But Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae can't do principal
write-down using the FHA's short refinance program.
Private label investors, because of concerns about Safe
Harbor provisions, etc., working through trustees, it makes it
difficult for a servicer to take action on a certain
modification initiative because they could expose themselves to
litigation for violating the pooling servicing agreement.
We are in a very complex financial environment, on top of
which, as I said earlier in my testimony, I would never want to
back away from that, the entire servicing industry has been
working frantically to hire tens of thousands of people across
this country and train them to be underwriters--the skill that
they didn't typically have to have in the servicing world to be
able to respond to the enormous need of families across
America.
I would be glad to do this as a follow-up. Let me just
start at a high level. And this is going to sound
extraordinarily limited. But I view the market issues right now
as both a supply and a demand struggle.
On the supply side, we have excessive inventory as it were
of foreclosures and borrowers at risk, either do the
unemployment, causing them to not be able to pay their
mortgages or having them put into mortgages that were not
sustainable, or strategic default due to the overhang of
negative equity. Each of those has a set of solutions we need
to work with and systems need to be created.
And then on the demand--
Mr. Carney. Do we have those systems?
Mr. Stevens. I think the system is--there is a lot of--
Mr. Carney. And tools?
Mr. Stevens. Let us talk--
Mr. Carney. Every situation is different.
Mr. Stevens. Let us talk about--let us finish this up and I
will turn it over, because it is a long answer.
Mr. Carney. My time is running out.
Mr. Stevens. Look at modification today, about 4.7 million
modifications have been proprietary modifications done by
financial institutions, the same servicers that we have talked
about in this hearing today.
HAMP modifications have been about 700,000 because the
proprietary modifications have actually been far more effective
as a solution than--
Mr. Carney. And that is a good thing.
Mr. Stevens. It is a good thing.
Mr. Carney. It is a good thing.
Mr. Stevens. But it tells you that it is impossible to come
up with a one-size-fits-all solution.
Mr. Carney. Exactly.
Mr. Stevens. And it takes the private sector and these
regulators working together to come up with a broad set of
solutions and then training expertise--
Chairwoman Capito. Will the gentleman yield for 2 seconds?
Mr. Carney. Sure.
Chairwoman Capito. Following up on your comment that Fannie
and Freddie cannot write down loans, do you think they should
be able to write down loans?
And I yield back to the gentleman.
Mr. Calhoun. If I can respond to that?
Mr. Carney. Please do.
Mr. Calhoun. In the broader question, the baseline that
needs to be there is you should not be allowed to start or
complete a foreclosure unless the servicer can demonstrate that
they have gone through a good faith evaluation of whether an
alternative loan modification is possible.
Obviously, if the borrower doesn't respond, or the borrower
doesn't have the income to make it work, they don't have to
modify. But, as you have said, when you get people into the
room and you force them to commit those resources, and as we
heard from Congressman Scott, it works.
Second, on principal reduction, industry analysts and
investors are calling for principal reduction because it
generates a higher return than foreclosure, which right now is
producing horrific losses. And there are repeated studies,
Amherst Securities, for example, shows that currently
performing loans, if they are deeply underwater, are rapidly
falling into default and foreclosure.
And that is why some servicers have recently published
these--added some banks on their portfolio loans are offering
principal reduction in carefully controlled ways because it
makes sense. Again, we need to force the servicers to treat
other people's loans as they are treating their own portfolio
loans.
Mr. Carney. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. The time has expired. The Chair notes
that some members may have additional questions for this panel,
or both panels, which they may wish to submit in writing.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 30
days for the members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
I would like to thank all of the witnesses, and I
understand some have come from far away, so I appreciate that.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:37 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.
A P P E N D I X

July 7, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7939.145


