- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY AT THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE
ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY AT THE
CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 8, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-99

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-071 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
February 8, 2012.............................................     1
Appendix:
February 8, 2012.............................................    45

WITNESSES
Wednesday, February 8, 2012

Hunter, Michael J., Chief Operating Officer, American Bankers
Association (ABA)..............................................     9
Pincus, Andrew, Partner, Mayer Brown LLP, on behalf of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce............................................    11
Stinebert, Chris, President and Chief Executive Officer, American
Financial Services Association (AFSA)..........................    13
Wilmarth, Arthur E., Jr., Professor of Law and Executive
Director, Center for Law, Economics & Finance, George
Washington University Law School...............................    14

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Huizenga, Hon. Bill..........................................    46
Hunter, Michael J............................................    47
Pincus, Andrew...............................................    54
Stinebert, Chris.............................................    64
Wilmarth, Arthur E., Jr......................................    70

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of the Consumer Bankers Association (CBA)..    86
Letter to Representative Huizenga from Bill Cheney, President
& CEO, the Credit Union National Association (CUNA)........    90
Maloney, Hon. Carolyn:
Written statement of Americans for Financial Reform..........    91

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE
ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY
AT THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL
PROTECTION BUREAU

----------

Wednesday, February 8, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Royce,
Hensarling, McHenry, McCotter, Pearce, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga,
Duffy, Canseco, Grimm; Maloney, Gutierrez, Hinojosa, Baca,
Miller of North Carolina, Scott, Velazquez, and Carney.
Ex officio present: Representative Bachus.
Also present: Representatives Neugebauer and Green.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order. I would
like to thank the members of the subcommittee and our witnesses
for joining us today.
The title of this morning's hearing is, ``Legislative
Proposals to Promote Accountability and Transparency at the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,'' which is better known
to all as the CFPB.
We will be considering three bills: one, legislation which
is authored by Mr. Neugebauer; two, legislation which is
authored by Mr. Renacci--two of these bills address the funding
of the Bureau and responsibilities of the Bureau's Director;
and three, legislation introduced by Mr. Huizenga that seeks to
address an oversight in the Dodd-Frank Act to ensure that
information shared with the Bureau is protected by the
attorney/client privilege and work product immunity.
A little over a month ago, President Obama used his
executive power to appoint Richard Cordray to be Director of
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau using a recess
appointment. However, it is still unclear whether or not the
Congress was technically in recess when he made that
appointment. While this may seem like a technicality to many
across the Nation, it will undoubtedly lead to significant, I
think, litigation, further damaging the credibility of this
Bureau. I stated nearly 6 months ago that I felt that the
Administration had mishandled the appointment of the Bureau's
Director from the beginning. The complexities of moving a
nominee through the United States Senate are not new.
For an agency that was supposed to be the crown jewel of
the Dodd-Frank Act, waiting until the last minute to appoint a
nominee and then subsequently dismissing constitutionally
mandated procedures for appointment, I think creates an
uncertainty over the Bureau and its actions until it is
resolved. The legislative proposals before us today are an
important step in improving the accountability for this new
agency. The first measure, H.R. 1355, sponsored by Mr.
Neugebauer, will remove the Bureau from the Federal Reserve and
place it within the Department of the Treasury, where the
Bureau will subsequently be subject to regular authorization,
budget, and appropriations processes.
The Bureau's stated goal is to regulate financial products.
And it is prudent for Members of Congress to have some say over
the budget of an agency that could decide which financial
products are appropriate for their constituents.
The second measure, H.R. 2081, as sponsored by Mr. Renacci,
moves the Bureau Director off of the FDIC Board and fills the
vacancy with the Chairman of the Federal Reserve. The primary
goal of the FDIC is the safety and soundness of the
institutions that benefit from the Deposit Insurance Fund. And
it is appropriate to have all of the prudent regulators
represented on the FDIC Board.
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Huizenga for the third
bill we will consider today, H.R. 3871. We have worked with Mr.
Huizenga to address an issue of an oversight of the Dodd-Frank
Act to ensure information that is shared with the Bureau is
treated as privileged information and cannot be shared with
third parties.
It is our intent to move this legislation quickly,
especially given Mr. Cordray's recent statement that,
``Congress may want to look at a legislative fix.'' We hope our
colleagues across the aisle will work--and we have already been
talking about this--with us on moving this forward without
delay. I would like to thank the three sponsors of the bills
before the subcommittee today for their leadership, and I look
forward to hearing the testimony of the witnesses.
At this time, I would like to yield to my good friend and
colleague, Ranking Member Maloney, for the purpose of giving an
opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank the gentlelady for yielding
and I welcome the panel of witnesses. There are three bills
before us today, which according to the title of this hearing
will ``promote accountability and transparency.'' However, two
of these proposed bills are seriously misguided and meant to
distract from the CFPB's important work to protect the American
consumer. But I would argue that for the most part, they do
nothing to further that goal of transparency because the CFPB
is already the most accountable agency in our government. The
first bill will ensure that privileged documents used in CFPB
exams maintain that privileged status.
I support the goal of this bill, but I want to make sure
that we are amending the right part of the law. In the Senate,
Senator Shelby has a bill that does the same thing, but it
amends the FDI. I believe this is a better way to provide for
this protection as that is where the OCC, the FDIC and the
Federal Reserve have this protection. The bill before us amends
Dodd-Frank. I do not support the other two. The second bill
takes the CFP Director off the FDIC Board and replaces him with
the Federal Reserve (Fed) Chairman. The purpose of giving a
seat to the CFPB Director was to enable him to interact with
the prudential regulators who conduct exams of financial
institutions. And this would eliminate the ability of consumer
and prudential bank regulators to work together for consumers
and safety and soundness.
Finally, we have the most blatant attempt to dismantle the
Bureau, which would move it out of the Fed and put it under the
Treasury Department, where it would be subject to the political
and uncertain appropriations process. I oppose this bill and
this change to the law. To subject a regulatory agency, and the
CFPB in particular, to appropriations in this Republican-led
Chamber is to put it on a chopping block. I remind you that all
of my colleagues on the Republican side voted against this bill
and this would leave the American people without an effective
watchdog and put this country back on the path that led to the
financial crisis. This bill also eliminates the Consumer
Financial Civil Penalty Fund, which holds the proceeds from
enforcement actions and directs those funds back to victims.
Many of my colleagues talked about how we needed to help
the victims from Madoff and other scandals, but this would
eliminate that. And if the victims can't be identified, this
would go to financial literacy and consumer education, a stated
goal of this committee. But I would note that the CFPB already
has unprecedented accountability, and since opening its doors,
the CFPB has issued its semi-annual report justifying its
budget. It has testified before Congress 14 different times. It
has provided its financial operating plans to the Office of
Management and Budget. It has a budget cap, and the Bureau is
subject to potential vetoes on rulemakings by the Financial
Stability Oversight Council. And it has already been audited by
the Comptroller General. This is all in accordance with the
rules as set forth in Dodd-Frank.
I fail to understand why my colleagues want to try to
dismantle the power of the CFPB. I would like to place in the
record some of their accomplishments, a whole list of them,
such as opening up an office to help veterans, opening up an
office to help students, coming out with a one-pager for
mortgages that people understand, coming out with information
so that students understand the dangers of financial products
and how they can go into debt. I have a list here of many, many
different things that they have done that help our economy,
help our consumers, and help our country. So, I would ask
unanimous consent to place it in the record.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. Maloney. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. I would like to recognize the chairman
of the full committee, Mr. Bachus, for 2 minutes for an opening
statement.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for holding
this hearing on three bills that our committee continues to
advance. We think they are reforms that will bring much needed
oversight, accountability, and transparency to the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau.
I think all of us agree on the need to protect consumers.
But I think in honesty, we have to go beyond that and say that
at times, it was not a priority for the Federal regulators. At
times, they focused on safety and soundness and they should
have done that, but I think consumer protection was sacrificed,
probably particularly as it dealt with non-banking companies.
There has also been criticism--Professor Wilmarth, you
discuss this in your written testimony--that they sometimes
focused on profitability of the banks as opposed to consumer
protection. I associate myself with your remarks, Professor,
saying that you can have both and it has to work for both
parties. And if it doesn't work for the consumer, ultimately it
won't work for the financial institution. I think that there
are other witnesses at the table who would agree. What these
bills do--actually the bill that forms the commission is
exactly what we passed out of the House; an overwhelming vote
was for a bipartisan commission.
And I will say that, because we resisted the formation of
this board as a group--that I am sure that our colleagues
express some skepticism now. But I will tell you that I
actually, in 2005 proposed a subprime lending bill and we
encountered resistance from the regulators and the
institutions, and I think there was a push back. I want to
close by commending Mr. Huizenga and Mr. Renacci and Mr.
Neugebauer for their strong work on these bills, and hopefully
we can come to some consensus. I think we have an agency where
maybe the recess appointment is questionable, and we could have
lawsuits for years about that. That is not going to benefit
anyone. But I will acknowledge that we didn't always put
consumer protection--we didn't elevate it to the level we
should have. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to recognize Mr. Hinojosa for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito and Ranking Member Maloney, I thank you
both for holding today's hearing on examining the
accountability of the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
I believe we should continually strive to ensure the
strength, the independence, and the accountability of the
Bureau, and holding hearings such as this contributes to that
effort.
After the financial collapse in 2008, it became apparent
that consumers were left holding the bag, and that the agencies
charged with their protection were too fragmented to be
effective.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau was created in
response to this fragmentation, to hold the protection of
American consumers as its sole priority. The American public
needs to be informed of the House Majority's attempt to cut the
funding of the CFPB, which can help prevent another financial
crisis like the one that started at the end of 2007.
It is our duty to make certain the Bureau follows through
on its mission. However, subjecting the Bureau's budget to the
appropriations process in order to reduce its funding, and
stripping the Director of his membership on the FDIC Board of
Directors, is counterproductive to the mission of the Bureau
and will weaken its ability to guard consumers against fraud
and predatory practices.
I look forward to hearing today's testimony and our
distinguished panelists' response to our concerns.
I yield back the remainder of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you
I recognize Mr. Renacci for 1 minute for the purpose of an
opening statement.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I would like to begin by emphasizing that I am fully
committed to consumer protection. I recognize that consumers
are the driving force behind our economy, and I believe
consumers depend on a sound financial system.
Main Street consumers are the ones most impacted by the
reckless decisions made on Wall Street. As the financial system
crumbled around them, consumers were the ones who lost their
jobs, lost their homes, and were unable to access credit.
It is for this reason that we must enact sound policies of
protecting the entire financial system and put an end to
special interest carve-outs that favor one segment of the
economy over the other.
Therefore, I offered H.R. 2081, a bill to ensure the safety
and soundness of our financial system.
During the creation of the CFPB, the proponents argued for
an agency whose sole purpose was consumer protection. By
placing the CFPB Director on the FDIC Board, whose mandate is
safety and soundness, the bill drafters created a conflict of
interest when the CFPB Director was making decisions during the
FDIC Board meeting as to which mandate should he follow.
The best thing we can do for consumers is to ensure a
transparent banking system that protects their savings,
provides access to credit, and creates safe and innovative
products.
One of the best things we can do for the CFPB Director is
to allow him to do his job with no perceived conflict of
interest.
I look forward to hearing your comments on all three
proposals. Again, thank you for your testimony.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott is recognized for 3 minutes for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
The American people basically have spoken and have declared
that we really need consumer protection in this country and
unfortunately, these three measures before us are, to me, a
declaration of war on the CFPB, the Consumer Protection Bureau.
They clearly want to move it out of the Federal Reserve, they
want to put it into Treasury. They want to revoke the automatic
and unrenewable annual funding of the agency. They want to
repeal the establishment of the consumer financial protection
fund and the consumer financial civil penalty fund. They
totally weaken the educational effort in this bill. They reduce
the resources that are available to consumers. They remove some
of the oversight of the CFPB and its reach for accountability
and its reach for transparency. They omit fairness and openness
and totally weaken the entire thrust of this bill, which is to
provide unfettered protection for consumers.
We must remember how we got into this situation in the
first place. It was because of abusive kinds of actions. Now, I
don't mind us moving on and trying to correct some things and
certainly, to enable the financial services industry to better
to do its job, but we cannot re-alter and re-shape this agency
so that it cannot do its job.
This agency must be allowed to breathe. These measures
simply put this agency into a form of a straitjacket so that
they cannot do it.
And I understand my friends on the other side have never
approved of this agency, they don't want this agency, they have
been trying to kill this agency ever since it has been here.
But let us be real, our American people deserve protection.
There is nothing more complex than some of these financial
instruments, and this is especially true in very tough economic
times. We have all kinds of financial products and services and
to be honest, we have some unscrupulous actors in this field.
Not all, but some. I would hope that we can look at this. I
would be interested in--not only during my questions--to find
your opinions about this and some of my comments, but I believe
firmly that they are true.
I am one who is willing to work with the financial services
industry to make sure that they can do their job. But I am also
one who wants to make sure that this agency lives and breathes
and is able to do its essential job of protecting the American
people from financial abuses.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Royce for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
The Administration just went to great lengths to usurp
regular order and recess-appoint the head of the CFPB, and what
was the Senate asking for in return that elicited such a step
that many argue violates the Constitution itself? They were
looking to subject the CFPB's budget to the normal
appropriations process and to move the agency from a Director
to a board, and these are the steps, frankly, that were
originally envisioned by Mrs. Warren and Secretary Geithner.
The real worry we have in terms of the way that this has
been done is it is going to undermine safety and soundness. It
is going to take away the inputs of the prudential regulator.
So these reforms would reduce the potential abuses that may
come from this agency, which unlike any other regulator now has
an independent budget, has broad regulator authority over a
number of different types of institutions, and is run by a
single individual. I am encouraged by the bills being discussed
today which get at what Senate Republicans were trying to
achieve in the first place, which was to provide added
transparency to the CFPB and ensure safety and soundness
regulation remains the chief function of our regulatory
structure. I would argue that lack of proper safety and
soundness regulation, the lack of efficient prudential
regulation, is also what helped bring on the original crisis,
so it needs to be addressed, and we can't walk down this road
again with bifurcated regulation as we did with Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac without the prudential regulator having the
necessary authority to protect safety and soundness.
Thank you, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I will recognize Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I thank you for
allowing me to become a part of the committee. I would also
like to thank the witnesses for appearing today.
I would like to associate myself with the comments made by
the ranking member, and I would like to say to the persons
listening, whereever they happen to be, whomever they happen to
be, I believe the President did the right thing.
More than 40 Senators indicated that they would approve no
one until certain things were done that can be done
legislatively, but there was an understanding that without
leadership, the organization could not function. There had to
be leadership for the organization to function.
Leadership is key to any organization's being efficacious.
The President did the right thing. He made the appointment. And
for those who think that the wrong thing was done, the courts
are available to sort these things out.
Funding is important to the existence of any organization.
If you assault leadership and you can circumvent funding, you
can thwart the efforts of the organization.
These measures assault leadership and funding. This agency
is designed to help people, people on Main Street, but also
people on a third street. We talk about Wall Street and Main
Street, but there is a street called ``Home Street'' where
people have their houses that are being foreclosed on. They
understand the need for the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau because they understand what they have gone through, and
even if their homes are not directly impacted, they are
indirectly impacted by other homes on their blocks that have
been foreclosed upon. Leadership and funding are key.
I thank you for the time, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Huizenga, for 1 minute, for an opening statement.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking
Member Maloney. I appreciate this important hearing and the
legislative proposals that will create some piece of mind, I
think, for our financial institutions.
CFPB as created under Dodd-Frank has been identified to
fail the safeguards from proprietary information given to the
Bureau by financial institutions.
Let me be clear. We all agree that we need to have
stringent consumer protections, but these reforms are much-
needed common-sense measures, I believe. Specifically, my bill,
H.R. 3871, the Proprietary Information and Protection Act,
immediately closes a loophole created under the CFPB creation.
Unlike current statutes regarding other Federal agencies
assessing relevant information, Dodd-Frank failed to provide
such protections. The simple truth is that the CFPB could
largely legally share privileged information with third parties
at this point. Absent specific congressional legislation, the
courts have permitted this practice in the case of other
Federal agencies.
Richard Cordray, Director of the CFPB, appointed by
President Obama, recently testified that this was an
``oversight.'' And, that he supports a legislative solution to
ensure privileged information is not leaked to third parties
through the CFPB. My bill is that real legislative solution, a
common-sense fix that would put an end to needless uncertainty
and legal costs to both the CFPB and to financial institutions.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco, for 1 minute?
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Last March, Elizabeth Warren told this committee, with a
straight face I should add, that the CFPB was the most
accountable agency in government. And needless to say, there
has been some disagreement over that assertion. In the past
year, this committee has led several efforts to bring
transparency and accountability to the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau. And each time, these efforts have been
rebuffed, either by a crusading President, or by a Democratic
caucus that for a five-member commission before they were
against it.
And so, what we have now is a rogue agency, headed by a
rogue Director who operates with almost no accountability, and
whose mandates will be subject to the whims of whomever happens
to be sitting in the czar's throne--excuse me, the Director's
chair.
This is an unacceptable way for a Federal agency to run,
and I look forward to considering more measures that would
shine a little more light on the CFPB.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Grimm is recognized for 1 minute for the purpose of an
opening statement.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I appreciate you holding this hearing to examine proposals
to improve accountability and oversight of the CFPB. The CFPB,
created under Dodd-Frank, I think is a classic example of an
ever-expanding Federal bureaucracy. It is given a funding
stream directly from the budget of the Federal Reserve, which
removes from Congress one of its most basic and fundamental
powers, the ability to appropriate funds to a Federal agency as
it sees fit; and by extension, the ability for the Congress to
hold that agency accountable for its performance, or for the
lack thereof.
Therefore, I welcome the proposal of Chairman Neugebauer to
place the CFPB under the Department of the Treasury and restore
Congress' rightful role in determining the funding of this
agency and its direction going forward.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses their thoughts
on the bills today before us, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Neugebauer, for 1 minute, for an opening statement.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you very much.
This hearing is not about consumer protection; it is about
accountability, accountability that the American people desire.
Our country was founded on the principles of checks and
balances. And, we now have an agency that has basically
unlimited powers, which is being run by a person who has not
been constitutionally ratified to hold that position. And
people are expecting us to do something about that.
For example, this new agency just put out its very first
rule and it turns out that it is going to take 7.7 million
manhours to comply with this new regulation. I would remind you
that it took just over 7 million manhours to build the Empire
State Building. So the accountability and responsibility is an
important part of our government. As my good friend, Mr. Scott,
said, ``automatic funding.''
The American people are tired of automatic funding. In
fact, that is kind of how we got into these record deficits is
automatic funding. And so, moving this agency to the budget,
going through the normal appropriations process is the right
thing to do. And I encourage my other colleagues to support
H.R. 1355.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final opening statement is Mr. Duffy for 1 minute.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
To echo what has been said before, we all agree that we
want to have sound consumer protections in place. We want our
family members, our friends, and our constituents to be dealt
with fairly when they deal with a financial institution in a
transparent way.
But we hear heightened rhetoric in this room. We hear
comments like, we want to put the CFPB in a straitjacket. We
hear comments like, we are going to de-fang the CFPB. And I
guess I would like the panel to talk about, when agencies like
the SEC, the CFTC, the FTC, the FCC, and the EEOC all are
agencies that are funded by Congress, how that has put them in
a straitjacket that doesn't allow them to effectively do their
jobs?
We also hear a concern about this agency being run by a
commission, and then therefore, how the Federal Reserve is
ineffective because it has a board, or the FDIC is ineffective
because it has a five-member board. Or the SEC, or the CFTC,
NACU--all of these agencies run by a board.
I would like to hear the panel talk about how they are so
ineffective because they have a board or a panel which runs the
agency. Or, those panels that receive their money through the
appropriations process, how they, too, are ineffective.
I would like to hear the panel talk about that throughout
the hearing.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Duffy.
That concludes our opening statements, and I would now like
to introduce our panel of witnesses for the purpose of giving a
5-minute opening statement. I will introduce you individually
before you speak.
First, Mr. Michael G. Hunter, chief operating officer of
the American Bankers Association. And I would like to remind
the witnesses that if you can pull the microphones close to
you, it is easier for us to hear you in this room.
Thank you. Welcome, Mr. Hunter.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. HUNTER, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER,
AMERICAN BANKERS ASSOCIATION (ABA)

Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee, my name is Michael
Hunter. I am the chief operating officer of the American
Bankers Association. I come before this subcommittee not only
as a representative of the banking industry, but also as
someone with experience in government at both the State and
Federal levels. I served in both the Oklahoma House as
Oklahoma's secretary of state, and was chief of staff to
Congressman J.C. Watts, a former member of the House Financial
Services Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to present the ABA's views on
several pieces of legislation that would improve the
accountability of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
Let me first begin by emphasizing that the banking industry
fully supports effective consumer protection. Americans are
best served by a financially sound banking industry that
safeguards customer deposits, lends those deposits responsibly,
and processes payments efficiently.
No bank can be successful without treating customers
fairly. It is no surprise, therefore, that two-thirds of banks
in this country have been in business for more than 50 years,
and one-third for more than a century. The Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau will play a pivotal role in setting new rules
that will affect access and availability of consumer financial
products.
We appreciate the work of Congressmen Renacci and
Neugebauer to put forward options to address concerns about the
role of the Bureau and its exercise of power; and to
Congressman Huizenga for his work in the area of privileged
information. We strongly support an effective mechanism of
checks and balances for the Bureau and we applaud congressional
efforts to achieve this goal.
Let me comment briefly on each of the three bills. First,
H.R. 2081 would replace the Bureau Director with the Chairman
of the Federal Reserve as one of the five members of the FDIC
Board. Maintaining a safe and sound banking system is at the
heart of protecting the FDIC insurance fund. Therefore,
regulators with safety and soundness responsibilities are
important for directing the FDIC, which is the rationale for
including the Fed.
What is missing on the FDIC's Board is representation from
the banking industry. Banks bear the full cost of the FDIC
without any taxpayer assistance. Yet, banks have no voice in
the priorities, policies, and staffing of the agency. We would
be happy to work with the subcommittee on how this might be
accomplished.
The second bill, H.R. 1355, would move the Bureau under
Treasury, and subject it to the appropriations process. At the
heart of this bill is the need to ensure accountability for
Bureau decisions and ensure that the funds used are done so
effectively.
On the question of accountability, there are many ways to
achieve this. The ABA has long advocated the use of a
commission or a board structure to accomplish this, as
currently there is too much power vested in one person to
fundamentally alter the financial choices available to
consumers. Such a structural change would provide an effective
check and balance.
ABA supports H.R. 1121, introduced by Chairman Bachus,
which created a five-member board for the Bureau. This bill
passed the subcommittee, the full committee, and later the full
House as part of H.R. 1315.
The last bill, H.R. 3871, is intended to clarify for the
Bureau the protection of confidential information. Banks
currently have legal protection that allows them to be
comfortable in voluntarily turning over privileged documents
upon the request of banking agencies. While the Bureau has
expressed its willingness to address this issue through
regulation, the ABA believes it is appropriate to add certainty
by enacting the same express rules regarding privilege of
information for the Bureau as those already established for the
other Federal banking supervisors.
In testimony before the House and the Senate, we note that
Richard Cordray has indicated his support for such action. We
appreciate Representative Huizenga's work on this important
issue. We would suggest a technical modification to the bill to
address the privilege issue with respect to the sharing of
information with other Federal agencies. The bill currently
only addresses one of the two statutory provisions that would
put the Bureau on equal footing with the other banking
agencies.
We look forward to working with Congressman Huizenga and
the subcommittee on this very important issue. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hunter can be found on page
47 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our second witness is Mr. Andrew Pincus, partner, Mayer
Brown LLP, on behalf of the United States Chamber of Commerce.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW PINCUS, PARTNER, MAYER BROWN LLP, ON BEHALF
OF THE U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Pincus. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on behalf of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the
hundreds of businesses that the Chamber represents.
The Chamber, too, strongly supports consumer protection. At
the same time, we have to recognize that consumer protection
regulation must be efficient and focused. Unjustified
regulatory burdens harm all Americans by diverting the
resources that are essential to fueling economic growth, and
perhaps even more importantly in this context, by preventing
small businesses from obtaining the credit they need to expand
and create the new jobs that our economy so desperately needs.
The bills that are the subject of this hearing address
significant problems confronting the CFPB. Although they
certainly don't address all of the Chamber's concerns about the
Bureau, they will resolve several important issues. And I would
like to talk first about the attorney-client privilege issue.
As Mr. Hunter has said, the critical issue here is that
statutory protection that exists in the bank examination
process, with respect to interactions with the prudential
Federal regulators in terms of the protection of the attorney-
client privilege, were not extended to the examination
processes that the Bureau administers, both with respect to
federally-regulated banks, and with respect to the many other
non-bank institutions as to which the Bureau can exercise
examination authority.
The Bureau has addressed this issue as best it can in a
July 4th guidance bulletin that was issued, saying that its
analysis was that the submission of information to it in the
examination process does constitute the waiver of any attorney-
client or associate privilege But of course, as useful as that
guidance document is, it does not provide the certainty that a
statute does. The situation that Congress confronts here is
very similar to the one it confronted in 2006 with respect to
the banking regulators. There, the OCC in 1991 had issued an
opinion letter very similar to the one that the Bureau has
issued here saying, ``We believe that there is protection
against a waiver.''
But Congress in 2006 recognized that providing statutory
certainty was critical, and therefore enacted the provision,
Section 1828(x), that provides that certainty. And I think what
is critical is extending that statutory protection to the
examination interactions that the Bureau is having with the
entities that it is examining.
I think, just being a lawyer for a minute, the reason for
this is that any general counsel, although comforted by the
Bureau's opinion, is going to be a little nervous about
interactions that involve important, critical, privileged
documents. And it would just be cautious for the company to say
to the examiners, ``Gee, we would really--can we do this
another way?''
And that obviously is going to burden the examination
process. It is going to take longer and eliminate the flow of
information back and forth that I think everyone agrees is what
makes the examination process work. So providing the statutory
certainty is not only good for businesses; it is going to be
good to make the examination process work effectively.
Let me turn next to H.R. 1355, which would subject the
Bureau's expenditures to the congressional appropriations
process. I think it is a fundamental principle of American
government that those who exercise power have to be accountable
to the people through their elected representatives.
And for that reason, every government agency that Congress
has created has historically been subjected to various robust
checks and balances to ensure their accountability to the
people and to provide oversight of their fidelity to the law.
Here, I think it is undisputed that the Bureau Director
lacks all of these accountability mechanisms. He has sole
decision-making authority about rulemaking, enforcement,
hiring, and every other matter. He has policy independence to
the President, and can only be removed from office for
``inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance,'' and has the
ability to spend more than half a billion dollars without
getting approval of anyone, Congress or the President.
And there is no regulatory agency that has this same
combination of features as the Bureau that oversees the private
sector, and certainly none that has the extraordinarily broad
oversight, not just of the financial services sector, but of
large, other segments of the economy that this agency has.
And it is important to note that one of the important
constraints in the statute, advice and consent, was eliminated
by the recess appointment. H.R. 1355 begins to address this by
addressing the appropriations process. And that is critical
because, as I note in my testimony, the Appropriations
Committee noted in its report that it received no information
from the Bureau about how it plans to spend hundreds of
millions of dollars in the next fiscal year. Thank you, and I
would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pincus can be found on page
54 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Pincus.
Our next witness is Mr. Chris Stinebert, president and
chief executive officer, American Financial Services
Association.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS STINEBERT, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, AMERICAN FINANCIAL SERVICES ASSOCIATION (AFSA)

Mr. Stinebert. Good morning, and my appreciation as well to
the chairwoman and the ranking member for holding these
important hearings on these important proposals. Like my
colleagues, AFSA is certainly committed to consumer protection.
AFSA's members include consumer finance companies, auto finance
companies, mortgage lenders, and credit card issuers.
Before the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, most AFSA members
had been regulated, licensed, examined, and supervised by the
State banking agencies. They are funded by putting their own
capital at risk, not dependent on federally-insured deposits.
Importantly, this testimony should not be taken as kind of
a negative comment about the professionalism of the civil
servants at the CFPB, many of whom have been veterans of many
administrative agencies.
Unlike traditional agencies governed by a bipartisan
commission, the CFPB is directed by a single regulator. Unlike
the traditional independent agency model, the CFPB is
guaranteed a percentage of the Federal Reserve Board's budget.
Therefore, there is no congressional oversight through the
normal budgetary process.
We are grateful to the chairwoman for her co-sponsorship of
H.R. 1121, the Responsible Consumer Financial Protection
Regulations Act, which replaces the single Director of the CFPB
with a five-member commission, a structure similar to the FTC.
The original plans to create a consumer agency--as has been
pointed out numerous times, including the Administration's
proposal and the Wall Street Reform Consumer Protection Act of
2009--all structured the agency as a commission.
AFSA also supports H.R. 1335, introduced by the Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee, which would move the CFPB into
the Treasury Department in a structure similar to that of the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Doing so would
provide congressional oversight and budgetary accountability.
AFSA members are also concerned about the treatment of
confidential information collected during the examination
process. There are certainly precedents for maintaining this
confidentiality in the long-standing practice by the Federal
banking agencies and claiming privilege with regard to bank
examination records. We are pleased that the recent CFPB
bulletin states that institutions providing privileged
information in response to a supervisory request will not waive
any privilege; however, it is unclear whether the CFPB is a
Federal banking agency under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
which governs the treatment and waiver of privilege for
depository institutions.
In a recent CFPB bulletin, the Bureau asserts that it has
the authority to demand privileged documents from supervised
institutions without the privilege being waived, despite the
fact that the CFPB is not a Federal banking agency. It is also
doubtful whether this body of law extends to the non-depository
companies that AFSA currently represents.
We are encouraged that Director Cordray has indicated a
desire to work with Congress to include CFPB among covered
agencies for the purpose of maintaining privilege We are also
pleased to offer enthusiastic support of H.R. 3871. This Act
would clarify the law to say that the submission of
confidential information to the CFPB in the course of its
supervisory process does not waive any privilege to any
regulated entity.
The House of Representatives passed H.R. 10, the
Regulations From the Executive in Need of Scrutiny Act of 2011,
co-sponsored by the chairman. This bill prevents Federal
agencies from implementing major regulatory initiatives without
congressional approval, and ensures that new, major rules that
impose annual economic costs in excess of $100 million cannot
take effect unless Congress passes a joint resolution approving
this regulation.
And finally, most regulatory agencies promulgate rules
under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). Unfortunately,
the APA provides little for protection when agencies exceed
their congressional mandates. But there is a model that does
just that. Perhaps, it would be helpful for the Congress to
look at the FTC with the Magnus and Moss Warranty Act, which
imposes procedural safeguards on FTC rulemaking.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back the rest of my time. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stinebert can be found on
page 64 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. For our final witness, I want
to welcome back to the committee Mr. Arthur E. Wilmarth, who is
a professor of law at the George Washington University.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR E. WILMARTH, JR., PROFESSOR OF LAW AND
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR LAW, ECONOMICS & FINANCE, GEORGE
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL

Mr. Wilmarth. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for
inviting me to participate in this important hearing. For the
reasons set forth in my written testimony, I strongly oppose
enactment of H.R. 1355 and H.R. 2081. I do not oppose enactment
of H.R. 3871.
Congress created the CFPB because a previous dispersion of
consumer protection responsibilities among several bank
regulators produced a systematic failure of the consumer
protection function during the credit bubble leading up to the
financial crisis.
Title X of Dodd-Frank authorizes the CFPB to issue
regulations, perform investigations, create public education
programs, and prosecute enforcement proceedings in order to
protect consumers against unfair, deceptive, abusive, and
discriminatory financial practices.
Title X promotes the CFPB's independence from both
political and industry influence by granting the CFPB autonomy
in its policymaking, rulemaking, and enforcement functions, and
by giving the CFPB an assured source of funding from the Fed.
H.R. 1355 would severely weaken the CFPB in several ways.
Section 2(1) would repeal the CFPB's status as an independent
Bureau, and move the CFPB from the Fed to the Treasury. Thus,
it would transfer the CFPB from an independent agency that is
relatively insulated from political influence, to an Executive
Branch agency that is highly susceptible to political
intervention.
Section 2(2) would remove critical statutory protections
that enable the CFPB to function as an autonomous bureau when
setting policy. However, H.R. 1355 would not make any similar
changes to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which
is an autonomous bureau within Treasury.
Federal statutes prohibit Treasury from preventing or
delaying the issuance of any OCC regulation. And they also bar
Treasury from intervening in any matter, including any
enforcement matter pending before the OCC. If H.R. 1355 deems
it essential to remove the CFPB's autonomy and to subject the
CFPB to Treasury's unlimited oversight, why doesn't H.R. 1355
contain similar provisions removing OCC's policy-making
independence as well? Can this apparent anomaly be explained by
the fact that the OCC is widely viewed as the most committed
and vehement regulatory champion for the interests of major
banks? Indeed, those same banks have devoted enormous lobbying
resources to oppose the CFPB's creation and to seek to
undermine it since it has been created.
Section 2(3) would seriously impair the CFPB's ability to
attract qualified employees by requiring the CFPB to pay its
employees in accordance with the general schedule for civil
service employees. The CFPB would then become the only Federal
financial regulator that is not exempted from civil service
restrictions on pay. And the agency would find it extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to attract the best, most
experienced, and most talented employees.
Section 3 of H.R. 1355 would remove the CFPB's assured
source of funding from the Fed and make the CFPB's entire
budget subject to congressional appropriations. Except for the
CFTC and the SEC, no Federal financial regulator is subject to
congressional appropriations. Congress has undermined the
effectiveness of the CFTC and the SEC for more than 2 decades
by frequently failing to provide those agencies with adequate
funds.
At congressional oversight hearings in December, CFTC
Chairman Gary Gensler and SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro expressed
great doubts about their agencies' ability to adopt and enforce
the new Dodd-Frank provisions unless Congress gives them major
increases in their budgets. Republicans and banks took a very
different position when they pushed for legislation to create
the Federal Housing Finance Agency because they wanted a new
and more powerful and independent regulator for Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.
Republicans and banks insisted that FHFA must have
independent, secure funding that was not subject to
congressional appropriations. They pointed out that Fannie and
Freddie had often used their political clout to persuade
Congress to cut the budget of FHFA's predecessor, thereby
undermining that predecessor's enforcement efforts. When
Congress created the CFPB, as a Senate committee report
explains, Congress drew directly on FHFA's secure funding
model.
Briefly turning to H.R. 2081, there are two big problems.
One is that removing the CFPB Director from the FDIC's Board
will deprive the banking industry and consumers of the
beneficial interaction between the consumer regulator and the
safety and soundness regulators. I thought that is what the
CFPB's opponents wanted. I thought they wanted interaction
between the safety and soundness function and the consumer
protection function.
The other major problem is it is a very bad idea to put the
Fed Chairman on the FDIC's Board. The Fed already has
tremendous influence in deciding whether to grant bailouts and
other support and forbearances to major institutions.
When the systemic risk exception comes into question, when
regulators decide whether to bail out uninsured creditors of a
too-big-to-fail bank, the Fed already gets a vote on that. They
make their recommendation. It then goes to the FDIC.
Putting the Fed Chairman on the Board of the FDIC would
give the Fed two bites at the apple. As my written testimony
indicates, during the financial crisis, it was the Fed and the
Treasury that were constantly pushing for more aggressive
bailouts. And it was the FDIC that was constantly saying, ``We
don't think this is necessary. We don't think it is a good
idea.'' We shouldn't undermine the FDIC's independence by
putting the Fed Chairman on the FDIC's Board, as H.R. 2081
would do.
Thank you very much, again.
[The prepared statement of Professor Wilmarth can be found
on page 70 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Thank you all, and I would like to recognize myself for 5
minutes for questioning. I would like to go to the funding
issue because in 2012, the CFPB could access 11 percent, or
over $500 million. In 2013, it goes up to $597 million.
When we have tried to investigate how much is actually
drawn down and where this money is being spent, what we have
found is that they actually drew down in 2011, $161.8 million.
But I don't know if Members of Congress and the general public
are aware that after they draw the money down, if the money is
not spent, it goes into a fund that can then be invested. So
the money never goes back to the Treasury or to the Federal
Reserve, where it could be used for paying down the debt and
other issues.
To me, this sort of evokes--I don't want to use the term,
but I will say it anyway--a ``slush-fund'' sort of situation,
and a lack of accountability on that. Could you all speak to
the way the mechanism is and how we could get more transparency
and accountability--when, really, the Bureau doesn't have to
speak to Congress or ask Congress in any way to justify the
expenditures that they have over the course of a year?
Mr. Pincus, I will start with you, because you talked about
this.
Mr. Pincus. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I guess a couple of points--I think what is troubling is
that there is this lack of accountability, as I say, in all
directions. Once the Bureau Director is appointed, he is not
accountable to Congress because the appropriations process has
been avoided. And he is not accountable even to the President
because the President can only remove him if there is this very
tough standard. So just in terms of our constitutional
structure and accountability to the people, it is very
troubling.
I think the way the process works is just as you have
described. The money is drawn down, it goes into a fund, and
there is very little transparency.
And even on a forward-looking basis, as I laid out in my
testimony, and as I am sure you are familiar with from reading
the documents, the Appropriations Committee was very concerned
that a plan to draw down over $300 million was supported by
about 15 pages, most of which were white space and certainly
nothing close to the budget justifications that agencies
ordinarily have to give to justify their appropriations. So, I
think that it is very troubling.
And I guess one short-term solution--obviously we believe
that this kind of statutory accountability is essential and I
know Mr. Wilmarth talked about political influences.
But that is just a--sort of a derogatory--about talking
about the people's influence. It is--this money that comes from
the Fed is not a gift. If it wasn't spent, any surplus that the
Fed generates goes into the Treasury and is used, as you say,
to pay down the debt. So this money is really, in terms of its
economic effect on the government's finances, indistinguishable
from money that is appropriated and paid out.
If it wasn't paid out, the government would have it and
could use it to reduce the debt. So I think that is critical.
And I think the other thing that is critical is perhaps a
threshold step as the statute provides for some reports by the
Bureau to OMB. It doesn't say that those reports have to be
provided to the Congress, but one short-term way to get at
least some transparency might be to ask the Bureau to provide
those statutory reports to the committee as well.
Chairwoman Capito. Does anybody else have a comment on
that?
We will go to Mr. Stinebert, and then to Mr. Wilmarth.
Mr. Stinebert. To comment a little bit on what is being
said here, I have never really understood why putting it under
appropriations is going to, for example, gut or hurt the Bureau
or hurt consumers in the long run. I see no evidence of that.
In the cases where it has been done before, it can actually
bring efficiency and effectiveness to the program, knowing that
there is some oversight. We have never done a great job of
throwing money at a problem and having an unlimited budget and
that resulting in only good things. I think the accountability
to Congress would help the Bureau in the long run.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Wilmarth? I have 30 seconds left.
Mr. Wilmarth. Yes, certainly.
The OCC and the FHFA operate in exactly the same way. They
don't return money to the Treasury, and the FDIC keeps its
money as well. Now, some of that goes into the FDIC's Deposit
Insurance Fund, but there is no return of the money to the
Treasury.
So as I said, there are only two financial regulators who
are not given an independent, secure funding source: the SEC;
and the CFTC. And as I said in my written testimony, I don't
think anyone can seriously contest that those agencies have
been greatly weakened and seriously underfunded for a very long
time.
I will give a third example. The Consumer Product Safety
Commission is widely viewed as a very ineffective and weak
agency because it wasn't given the budget that it needed.
So I have given you three examples of agencies that have
been undermined by a lack of secure funding. And in each case,
there was very strong industry push back against the agency. I
point out in my testimony that the financial sector has been
the biggest contributor to political campaigns--congressional
campaigns since 1990, the biggest lobbyists since 1990--
Chairwoman Capito. My time has expired.
Mr. Wilmarth. --but anyone who thinks that they are not
effective, I--
Chairwoman Capito. Ranking Member Maloney for 5 minutes?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
This bill by my good friend, Mr. Neugebauer, would really
subject the CFPB to a double standard. No other banking agency
is subject to the appropriations process, not the OCC, the
FDIC, or the Federal Reserve, for purposes of independence and
not being compromised by political pressure.
As Mr. Wilmarth pointed out, the SEC and the CFTC, although
they have many more responsibilities, have been seriously
underfunded. And we have to recognize the reality that the
Republican Majority voted against Dodd-Frank and financial
reform. They voted against the CFPB. And they probably wouldn't
fund it, as they haven't appropriately funded the SEC and the
CFTC.
And as my good friend, Mr. Green, pointed out about the
confirmation process, I have never seen such an abuse of the
confirmation process, where they literally said they would not
confirm a Director unless you made changes to the law. So they
were trying to get through the confirmation process what they
couldn't achieve in the passage of the law, and literally
signed letters to that effect.
Now, many of my colleagues and panelists have said that the
CFPB is not subject to enough oversight. I would argue that it
has extensive accountability standards that were put in place
in the reform bill and I am going to list them for you.
They have more accountability standards than any other
agency. The President can remove the Director for cause. The
Director must appear before Congress biannually and report on,
among other things, its budget and list of significant rules.
Not only do we have this requirement, but we can call them any
time we want. They have been before Congress 14 times.
The GAO is required to audit the financial services,
including the CFPB. It is the banking regulator. It is the only
banking regulator that has a funding cap. The final rules of
the CFPB are subject to financial judicial review.
The CFPB is subject to the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the
Paperwork Reduction Act; the Inspector General of the Federal
Reserve monitors the CFPB. And the CFPB budget is statutorily
capped. The Financial Stability Oversight Council can review
and overturn any CFPB regulation. I don't know of any other
regulator that has that ability of an oversight board to
reverse their decisions.
The CFPB is required to consider the impact of proposed
rules on banks and credit unions with $10 billion or less in
assets as well as the impact on consumers in rural areas during
the rulemaking and issue reports on what they have done in
these areas.
The CFPB rules are subject to the Small Business Regulatory
Enforcement Flexibilities Act, Small Business Panel Review
process. The CFPB must review potential rules with affected
small businesses prior to the publication of such proposed
rules.
I would say that everyone here has said that consumer
protection, everyone is for it, but it often was a secondary
thought or a third thought or wasn't thought about at all.
So to have one agency working with the safety and soundness
regulators, which is important that they be on the FDIC is
something that is helpful.
I would like to ask Mr. Hunter--of the items that the CFPB
has done, have you reacted to them--such as your members--the
efforts to streamline the mortgage-disclosure documents; has
that been a positive for your industry? What about the shopping
sheet to compare credit card rates?
What about the information sheets to know before you owe
for students who are in school and often get into debt over
their heads? What has been the reaction of your members to
these, I would say, improvements really for the financial
institutions; for our economy as a whole; and certainly for
consumers? Have these been actions that your members and
consumers and bankers see as a positive step forward?
Mr. Hunter. We are working, Congresswoman, in a very
interactive constructive fashion with the CFPB on almost a
daily basis.
We recognize the authority that Congress has chosen to
repose in the CFPB. Our concern long term is that there is too
much power and authority reposed in one person and that there
ought to be more checks and balances with respect to that
person's decision-making.
If you are going to repose that much authority and power in
an entity, it makes more sense to have a commission. I think
that is a political science proposition that has stood the test
of time.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired. But I would say the CFPB
is already one of the most accountable Federal agencies with
the list that I gave you, the oversight that is there and I
think they have worked hard, Mr. Stinebert, would you say to
reach out to--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Maloney. --stakeholders for their influence?
Mr. Stinebert. Actually, we have been very encouraged by
the CFPB and how they have reached out to impacted industries
in a cooperative way.
In some instances, we have had some field hearings and
others which, I think all of us have received about a 24-hour
notice of some hearings that were somewhat disconcerting, but I
think we have been encouraged by what the Director has said,
and we are hopeful that will continue.
But going along with my colleagues--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlewoman's time has expired, so I
am going--
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. --to try to keep it moving here.
Mr. Renacci, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to kind of zero in on H.R. 2081, and it is
interesting because as I have listened to my colleagues and
also the testimony--this bill basically replaces the CFPB
Director with the Chairman of the Fed on the FDIC Board. And
that is important, in my opinion, for 3 reasons: expertise;
potential conflict of mandate; and a potential conflict of
interest.
So, it is very simple. It doesn't weaken the CFPB board or
Director and it potentially strengthens the FDIC Board.
With that in mind, Mr. Hunter, does the inclusion of the
CFPB on the FDIC Board jeopardize in any way, in your opinion,
the FDIC's focus on safety and soundness?
Mr. Hunter. As our testimony indicates, Congressman, that
is the principal responsibility of the FDIC Board. We think the
Fed is better positioned to serve on that commission based on
its responsibilities.
There is certainly something to be gained by forcing the
Director of the CFPB to have frequent dialogue with the
prudential regulators. It is our preference that a banker serve
on the FDIC Board, but there is certainly more to be gained by
someone whose focus is safety and soundness.
Mr. Renacci. So you would agree that the mandate for the
CFPB is consumer protection, and the mandate for the FDIC Board
is safety and soundness of the banking system--two separate
mandates?
Mr. Hunter. We think that the two better approaches would
the Fed or a banker.
Mr. Renacci. All right.
Mr. Wilmarth, you indicated at one point that--and it is
interesting because if there was a perceived or even actual
conflict of interest--wouldn't you agree that it would be
better not to have that?
Mr. Wilmarth. I actually don't think there is a conflict of
interest. And I agree with a comment that Chairman Bachus made;
that viewed in the long term, and from the broadest
perspective, consumer protection and safety and soundness are
inseparable and completely consistent.
So actually, I didn't agree with this notion that somehow
there was this terrible conflict of interest, but for the--
Mr. Renacci. But if there was conflict of interest--if
there was, you would agree, even if it is perceived, that it
would be better not to have the same--
Mr. Wilmarth. My view is that any perceived conflict is so
minor as to be greatly overwhelmed by the other problem I
pointed out, which is that putting the Fed Chairman on the
FDIC's Board is going to undermine the independence of the
FDIC, and I can give three very specific examples of how that
could have really aggravated the financial crisis--if you would
allow me.
First, was that in the period leading up to the crisis, the
FDIC was the only agency fighting for tough capital
requirements, including leverage requirements. And if you want
to know the one thing that differentiates--
Mr. Renacci. I am going to run out of time. I don't mean to
cut you off, but I am looking at the time running away from me.
You also talked about not having the ability to
communicate. Wouldn't you believe on the FSOC Board, there is
opportunity for the Director of the CFPB to get his influence
with the other members?
Mr. Wilmarth. There is some communication there, but I
think the FDIC deals much more with the type of institutions
that the CFPB is dealing with on a daily basis and therefore
there would be much more beneficial interactions on the FDIC
Board as compared to FSOC, which deals with the financial
giants of the world.
Mr. Renacci. Okay.
Mr. Hunter, I am going to move back to you because I know
you talked about expertise and you mentioned that several
members are already there because of their expertise.
Do you believe there is the requirement today that the
Director of the CFPB have any experience as a safety and
soundness regulator or even a requirement that a potential
Director have any banking experience at all?
Mr. Hunter. I don't think that requirement is in the Act,
Congressman.
Mr. Renacci. All right.
So with that, you could have someone serving on the FDIC
Board without the experience that the Chairman of the Fed would
have by being on that same board?
Mr. Hunter. That is a hypothetical probability, sir.
Mr. Renacci. Yes.
The Federal Reserve as a prudential regulator is keenly
aware of how regulatory policy can impact the likelihood and
cost of bank failures. Would the Fed, rather than the Director
of the CFPB, be able to contribute more meaningfully to the
FDIC's mission? Wouldn't the Chairman of the Fed?
Mr. Hunter. As a general proposition, yes.
Mr. Renacci. Yes.
Do you feel--I know I you mentioned this earlier--but do
you feel there is a conflict of interest, even a perceived
conflict of interest at this point in time?
Mr. Hunter. I guess if you start with--
Mr. Renacci. Because of the mandate? I know I am running
out of time--because of the mandate?
Mr. Hunter. Quickly, if you start with the statutory
responsibilities that have been placed with the Director, there
aren't safety and soundness responsibilities. So it is
certainly, as I say--it is certainly a situation where he could
be in conflict with what his legal responsibilities are as
Director.
Mr. Renacci. Okay, thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Hinojosa for questions.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
My first question is addressed to Professor Wilmarth.
Some of my colleagues have argued that the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau lacks accountability. However, in
creating this Bureau, this body inserted several measures to
ensure its accountability while also maintaining it as an
independent regulator.
In fact, the Consumer Federation of America contends that
the CFPB is the subject of more oversight than any banking
regulator. Some would like to see the Bureau's budget brought
under the appropriations process, as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, supposedly to increase accountability, even though no
other banking regulator has a budget which is subject to
appropriations.
I would like to ask you, what are the advantages for the
banking regulatory system to have regulators such as the FDIC,
the OCC, the OTS, and now, the CFPB, to have budgets outside
the appropriations process?
Mr. Wilmarth. Yes, thank you.
I would make two comments. One is that I believe the
President's power to remove the CFPB's Director is actually
broader than has been indicated because in the Supreme Court
case of Bowsher v. Synar in 1986, where the statutory language
concerning an administrative official's removal was very
similar, the Supreme Court viewed that as a very broad removal
power. Inefficiency or maladministration provides the President
with broad discretion to remove the CFPB's Director.
Moving to the appropriations issue, as you say, no other
Federal bank regulator is subject to appropriations and we know
that the three regulators I have mentioned have been greatly
weakened by industry influence because they do not have secure
funding.
We also know that OFHEO before it was replaced by the FHFA
was greatly weakened by the influence wielded by Fannie and
Freddie. I pointed out that no one can contest that the
financial sector has had unbelievable political influence and
power over the last 20 years and more.
The statutory drafters for all the other bank regulators
realized that because these regulators have such a critical
public interest and because in fact they are trying to properly
restrain very powerful regulated institutions for the public
interest, there will inevitably be push back through the
political system. And if you don't give some meaningful
insulation and independence to the regulator, they are not
going to be as successful in doing their job.
Mr. Hinojosa. I remember in the second term of the Bush
Administration, when Henry Paulson, the Secretary of the
Treasury, came to talk to us and asked for $800 billion within
a week to be able to save the financial system.
And one of the things that came out at that hearing was the
fact that we had wanted a smaller government, less involvement
by the Federal Government. And so, the end result was that we
didn't have the people to enforce the regulations and we got
into the mess that we did. This seems to be the wrong route to
take to improve consumer financial protection.
I would like to ask my second question to Mr. Michael
Hunter. In my district in deep south Texas, we have sought to
protect consumers from predatory payday lending while
partnering with community banks and credit unions, and also we
have worked to increase the financial literacy and capability
of our residents. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
recently held a field hearing to examine pay day lending and
CFPB is moving forward with its supervision and examination of
non-bank financial companies.
How do community banks view the efforts of the CFPB to
examine these non-bank competitors and level the playing field?
And the last part of the question, does the ABA anticipate a
budget cut will affect the ability of this Bureau to monitor
these non-bank companies such as payday lending companies and
others?
Mr. Hunter. The membership of the American Banker's
Association looks forward to Mr. Stinebert's members joining
the club of the most highly regulated industry in this country.
And we applaud the efforts of the CFPB in beginning to impose
its jurisdiction on non-banks. With regard to the implications
of a budget cut, as a general proposition--and I used to teach
political science--I think the democratic process works.
I think the appropriations process works and the idea that
we ought to have these independent agencies to protect Congress
from themselves is just a proposition that I have never been in
favor of.
Mr. Hinojosa. You can understand--
Mr. Hunter. Excuse me, I am--
Mr. Hinojosa. --you can understand why I am concerned about
budget cuts to weaken this Bureau. Because we saw it in 2007.
We saw it in 2008, that we didn't have the regulators to
enforce the regulations. So, I think my time has expired and
with that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Hensarling is recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I
certainly thank you for holding this hearing.
I think one of the lessons that we know from Dodd-Frank is
that when you essentially give unfettered, unprecedented
discretionary powers to unelected bureaucrats, they have a
tendency to use it. That in some respects is the subject of
this hearing, and a hearing later this afternoon in the Capital
Markets Subcommittee as well.
I guess the first question I would want to pose is,
frankly, the controversy surrounding the appointment of the
Director of the CFPB. I know back in 2005, then-Senator Barack
Obama said that recess appointments were ``the wrong thing to
do.'' He also went on to say that a recess appointment ``is
somebody who couldn't get through a nomination in the Senate.''
And I think that means that we will have less credibility.
And so the question that I really want to ask, as I am
concerned about the regulatory uncertainty that we already have
in this particular process, we have some questioning the
constitutionality of Mr. Cordray's appointment and Dodd-Frank
is explicit that the CFPB Director must be ``confirmed by the
Senate.'' Many legal scholars say a recess appointment is not a
Senate confirmation and there are further clouds on whether or
not Congress was in recess.
As I might also note, for the record, the latest extension
of the U.I. in payroll was done during a pro forma session. So
the first question I am--I guess I will pose it to you, Mr.
Hunter, have the members in your organization concluded
unequivocally that this is a constitutionally valid
appointment? Or is there some controversy? And if there is
controversy, is that uncertainty hindering your membership?
Mr. Hunter. Congressman, the president and CEO of the ABA,
Frank Keating, expressed concern after the appointment
occurred. It is certainly a subject of debate. Until a court of
original jurisdiction tells us that Mr. Cordray isn't the legal
authority for the CFPB, our responsibility is to recognize it
and work in as constructive and cooperative a way as we can.
Mr. Hensarling. Next question--I have seen a recent
interview with Mr. Cordray. He was quoted in the Associated
Press as saying, ``Frankly, there is a lot of fraud that is
committed in the marketplace that is not, on its face,
necessarily technically illegal.''
My question is: If we have a Director of CFPB who may or
may not be constitutionally appointed who now says that his
agency essentially has the ability to regulate activities that
are not necessarily technically illegal, how does this impact
your members, particularly product development, that they may
have their profitability, their survivability?
Mr. Stinebert, I will start with you. Is that a chilling
comment to you?
Mr. Stinebert. It was a very interesting statement. As far
as I know, fraud is technically illegal and I don't know of any
wiggle room there. It is either fraud or it is not fraud.
Certainly, we have laws on the books now which protect against
fraud. So it does cause some concern when we read that
statement.
I think that since that time, he has corrected that
statement to a better understanding. But going along with what
our colleagues here have stated--and I did not know we were not
members of the club to begin with--but if being State-regulated
is entirely different than being federally-regulated, it still
is being regulated.
Mr. Hensarling. I will let you gentleman work out that
disagreement in your own time. In the remaining seconds I have,
one of the reasons I am a strong supporter of Mr. Neugebauer's
bill to bring in greater accountability and transparency is the
unfettered powers that this agency has been given. I am hearing
from a lot of community financial institutions in the fifth
district of Texas that I represent, particularly about their
unfettered powers to essentially ban debit cards, overdraft
protection, reward checking, and identity-theft products.
My community bankers are telling me they are at a low-time
profitability due to monetary policy, due to the interchange
regulations. And so my question is--without that oversight,
could the CFPB's ability to essentially ban these products
impact profitability and the safety and soundness of community
financial institutions? Mr. Hunter?
Mr. Hunter. The concern that we have generally speaking,
Congressman, is that in our membership, there is a very
troubling ratio that is developing out there and I will be
quick. And that ratio that is developing that we are seeing in
our banks is a one-to-one relationship between bank employees
who are there to serve customers and bank employees whose
responsibility is compliance.
I don't think that is good for banks and I certainly don't
think it is good for customers. And at the end of the day, we
are hopeful that this can work, this being the CFPB. Again we
think it is important that if you are going to have an
independent agency with this kind of power and authority, the
better approach is to have a commission and have some
oversight. They should have, as opposed to reporting
responsibility, accountability to Congress with regard to
expenditures.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gutierrez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gutierrez. Thank you.
Welcome to you all.
I just wanted to follow up very quickly because as best as
I can recall, and I didn't know we were going to go into this
part of the conversation, Goldman-Sachs and others reorganized
themselves and some bank holding companies so that they would
have access to the discount window, not for $1 billion, not for
$10 billion, but for hundreds of billions of dollars in order
to acquire liquidity.
And now, people complain. We can't have it. You can't go to
the government when you get in trouble, have the government
bail you out, then continue to reorganize yourself under
government rules so that you have more access to the government
and their money, and then expect the American taxpayer and the
people to say, ``We are going to let you do whatever you
want.''
So, I think we should have a little more balance in terms
of our conversation that we are having in terms of the most
regulated. You are also one of the greatest beneficiaries of
the American taxpayers supporting who you are today, or you
would have simply have died and gone away just like the
dinosaurs had it not been for the intervention of this Congress
and specifically Members on this side of the aisle who many
times have said, ``Okay we are going to do it, but we are going
to watch carefully.'' So let us remember where we are at
because there was a crisis; it was 2002.
I know that everything has changed and it is kind of tough
because everybody on Wall Street is complaining that it was
``only $75,000; only $75,000, I am quitting.'' That is the
bonus, and people are complaining? Tell that to the rest of
America, that it is only $75,000.
Having said that, I want to make sure that what we are
talking about today is the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau. And it is just mind-boggling. The Bureau has been fully
operational for 34 days, yet we have brought them here to speak
14 times. I think it is interesting that my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle and representatives of the financial
industry continue to shout about how the CFPB has insufficient
oversight.
Fourteen times in 34 days--do the math--they have been
brought before the Congress. That seems to me to be pretty
diligent oversight on our part. The bills before us today are
really nothing new. Another attempt by the Majority to weaken
the Bureau so it doesn't look over the shoulder of their
friends in the banking industry. I get it.
If you are a payday lender, guess what? If you are a payday
lender, you are back there saying, ``Thank you.'' If you are
somebody out there giving people loans that you shouldn't be,
you are clapping. If you are out there exploiting consumers,
you are clapping. Those are the only people who are really
clapping. Let us get that absolutely clear. Those that don't,
want to follow rules.
People want less scrutiny of big money companies that do
business with the average American consumer. One of the bills
before us today brings the CFPB under the authority of the
Treasury Department and makes its funding subject to
congressional appropriations.
Let us not split hairs here. This isn't about making sure
that Congress can watch the CFPB even closer than it already
does--14 hearings in 34 days. This is about making sure that
the financial industry lobbyists have access to people who make
the appropriations decisions, i.e., Members of Congress.
Instead of strengthening the Bureau or making it more
accountable to Congress, the bill would undermine the Bureau's
independence and make it more vulnerable to pressure from
powerful lobbyists. We have seen that.
Pick up the newspapers. Open them up and you see what the
lobbyists here in Washington, D.C., do. Abramoff is kind of
walking around telling everybody, ``I really didn't mean it.''
Oh no, he is repentant. It is Washington, D.C. So I would like
an independent authority, the way we have done it.
And lastly, let me just say that George Bush was President
for 8 years. And you know what? He used the system more times
than President Barack Obama has ever done in terms of
appointing recess appointments.
And you know what? Lastly, I think we should make sure that
we all understand that the Minority Leader in the Senate, the
gentleman from Kentucky, has stated that his goal is to make
Barack Obama a one-term President, and that he is going to do
everything to make sure that he fails and that he is defeated.
That is not an exaggeration. That is exactly what he said.
So you know what? They are playing politics over there.
They won't even give Mr. Cordray or anybody the time to have up
or down votes. They are obstructionist, and the American people
have had enough of it. I am happy the President appointed him,
and I hope he gets to his work and you can have a hearing every
week, because I know he doesn't care. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. I thank the gentleman.
I will have to say I am not certain--I would like to see
the 14--we certainly haven't had 14 meetings in 34 days in this
committee. And--
Mr. Gutierrez. --in this committee; in Congress.
Chairwoman Capito. In Congress--14 meetings in 34 days.
Ms. Velazquez. Fourteen hearings.
Chairwoman Capito. Fourteen hearings.
Mr. Gutierrez. Fourteen hearings.
Chairwoman Capito. You said in ``34 days?''
Mr. Gutierrez. Fourteen. They have been in existence for 34
days.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Mr. Gutierrez. Fourteen hearings in the last year.
Chairwoman Capito. Next, we have--
Mr. Gutierrez. Those are all facts. I can bring them down.
Chairwoman Capito. You said, ``14 hearings in 34 days.''
So you are correcting yourself? I am just clarifying.
No? Just clarifying.
Mr. Gutierrez. Well, I--
Chairwoman Capito. For the record. I am sure you want to be
accurate.
Mr. Gutierrez. I absolutely do.
Ms. Velazquez. He is accurate.
Chairwoman Capito. You said 14 hearings in 1 year?
Ms. Velazquez. 34 days in existence.
Mr. Gutierrez. It has been 34 days in--
Ms. Velazquez. Go to the record and check.
Mr. Gutierrez. 14 hearings in the last--
Chairwoman Capito. Right. Not in the last 34 days.
All right.
Mr. Gutierrez. We all agree there have been 14 hearings in
the last year?
Chairwoman Capito. --question about that--for a year.
Mr. Gutierrez. You will catch up quickly. I am sure we will
have more hearings on this.
Chairwoman Capito. Half a billion dollars--I think we
should. Your time has expired.
Mr. Huizenga, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And frankly, I hope there are another 14 hearings because
this is one of the most expansive steps that government has
taken. And I am sorry my colleague is leaving.
It just seems to me--I am not quite sure that I understand
whether the CFPB is a five-member board versus a single
individual, how exactly that is going to ensure the President's
reelection or non-reelection. So I think that we are seeing
obviously some heated rhetoric.
And I have seen some positive elements on my bill
specifically, H.R. 3871. We have had everybody--the Credit
Union National Association, the Consumer Bankers Association--
just recently both put letters in; appreciate your support--the
resounding endorsement of Professor Wilmarth. I think that one
sentence, ``I don't oppose''--I will take that as well.
And I know that there has been some concern. I think
somebody earlier had expressed that all three bills really chip
away at the CFPB. And I just want to make sure that my
colleagues aren't more concerned about keeping out any
amendment to Dodd-Frank versus trying to make sure that we make
it workable and do the right thing, which is exactly what H.R.
3871 is trying to do.
And frankly, I am happy to entertain the notion of a belt-
and-suspenders approach to amending both the CFPB Act and the
FDI Act. But it seems to me that, as I think--I can't remember;
I am sorry. It was Mr. Stinebert, I think, who noted on page
four of your testimony--I had it up here at one point, but
maybe you can comment a little bit on that, sort of the
background of why we do need to not just do this with FDI and
the deposit insurance side of things, but why we need to amend
the CFPB and why maybe we shouldn't be so deathly afraid of
changing a sentence or a jot or tittle in this.
It is not holy writ that has come down from the heavens.
This is the work of very fallible men and women who come in
here trying to do the right thing, but let us try to make sure
that it is workable. So, if you care to comment?
Mr. Stinebert. I think that the oversight that Congress has
shown about CFPB, I think also highlights the problems that
some of the industry has with it, and certainly we do. We have
never had a bill that is quite as large, where the scope is
basically unlimited, as we do with this piece of legislation.
They can act right now within the confines, as the ranking
member has pointed out, initially in a very finite way, which
might be a good direction. But that doesn't necessarily mean
that the Act itself as drafted, as written, is basically carte
blanche to do anything in this area that might impact consumers
in any way for their financial services.
So when we look at the Act, we look at trying to put a
little bit of belts and suspenders around it, a little bit
somewhat of insurance. When we asked our members at a recent
meeting if they could rank the biggest concerns they had, it is
always the uncertainty. And the uncertainty is because not of
what CFPB has done, but what it could do.
All of these Acts and the provisions we are talking about
today really are a way to bring some oversight, to bring some
accountability, so not because of what they have done, but what
is so wide open in the future.
Mr. Huizenga. Sorry. Thank you. And just so we are clear,
my bill, H.R. 3871, you view as one of those elements to
provide clarity?
Mr. Stinebert. Absolutely. Yes. It is an essential element.
Mr. Huizenga. All right.
Professor Wilmarth?
Mr. Wilmarth. I just wanted to point out that I think that
Mr. Stinebert was probably referring to the so-called UDAAP
authority. But I have described it at some length, and I can
describe it if the committee wishes.
There are very tight limitations and very specific findings
that have to be made before the Bureau can issue a UDAAP rule.
And also, a very detailed cost-benefit analysis. They have to
consult with Federal prudential regulators. FSOC has a
potential veto. So I don't this authority is nearly as wide
open as that statement might suggest. Thank you.
Mr. Huizenga. But you certainly don't see a problem with us
providing that clarity?
Mr. Wilmarth. Oh, no. I think the idea about protecting the
privileged materials so that the privilege is maintained when
institutions share them with their regulator, that to me seems
perfectly sensible.
Mr. Huizenga. I appreciate that. And I think that, to my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle, I know we are having
much broader conversations about whether the CFPB should or
shouldn't exist, whether Dodd-Frank was good or bad, all those
other things. But the simple fact is there is a hole, in my
opinion and in the opinion of virtually everybody who deals
with this, that has to be fixed.
Let us go do it. Let us go prove to the American people
that we can set aside bickering and go get something done that
is going to protect the consumer and protect those who are
serving the consumer. So, I appreciate that.
And the last little quick reminder--we are seeing a lot of
heated rhetoric. And I just want to remind everybody that we
are in the same boat. Banking lenders, non-banking lenders, you
name it. There is a lot of stuff that is getting thrown out
there.
I just caution everybody to make sure that you realize we
are trying to all be on the same team here to make sure that we
are protecting consumers, and also protecting businesspeople,
men and women who are in this industry who are providing that
service. So thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Hinojosa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hinojosa. I have already spoken.
Chairwoman Capito. Excuse me. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
I certainly concur with much that has been said. And my
friends on the other side of the aisle, it is important that we
all try to work to try to bring some justice and reason and
fairness and protection to the American people.
But two of these measures--particularly H.R. 1355--are
drastic overkill. H.R. 1355 goes right at the core of the
agency to remove it from the Fed, put it under Treasury, to
make it subject to lobbyist pressure. It takes away the very
vital need of independence.
Now, we talk about accountability. I think it is important
for us to set the record straight. We have accountability now.
Our ranking member, Mrs. Maloney, went through in detail with
many of these areas of accountability.
But I want to hit a couple of them so that the people will
know, because some statements have been made that they don't
report to Congress--they must report to Congress. The Director
must report to Congress, not once every year, but twice: every
6 months. And he has to appear before both committees; both
finance committees in the House and the Senate.
And at these hearings, he must not just talk. He has to
submit reports to each of our committees and to the President.
And not just any reports. These reports must include a
justification for the CFPB's budget, a list of the rules that
the CFPB has adopted, and a detailed list of public supervisory
enforcement actions in which the CFPB has been involved.
Then, there must be an audit each year. The GAO must audit
the total finances of the CFPB. It has to have access to all of
the CFPB's personnel, their data, their records, their papers.
And this audit must be submitted, and all of the other numerous
things that have been mentioned.
The accountability controls are there. So that is why you
have to be--we must fight. This effort is not designed for
greater transparency. How much more transparency and
accountability can we have than what we already have? These
efforts are here to basically gut the intent and the purpose
and the effectiveness of this agency.
And I don't mind those on the other side of the aisle
having their own opinions in their areas, but the American
people must be told the truth about this. This is not an effort
to increase accountability as if there is none there. This
agency has the most oversight of any agency, as we have just
gone through.
Professor Wilmarth, let me just ask you, particularly in
regards to this audit. As you know, the CFPB is subject to
annual GAO audits of its financial transactions, its
statements, and to the private sector, an independent audit of
its operations and budgets. Are you familiar with these audits?
Mr. Wilmarth. I am afraid that I am not an expert in that
area, except to note that they are very extensive.
Mr. Scott. All right.
Let me just ask you, in terms of this overall committee,
just for the record, our effort here is to promote
accountability and transparency. Do you feel that these bills
will achieve that goal any more than what we currently have?
Mr. Wilmarth. As we have discussed, in structuring Federal
financial regulators, there is a balance that has to be struck
between accountability and independence. I think that has been
a consistent theme for all the bank regulators, because we know
that the banking system is so critical to the success of our
economy. We also know that banks and politics have been
entwined since the very beginning of this Nation.
There is always political pressure involved where banks are
involved. And so, if regulators can't have a degree of
independence, that can be fatal.
Mr. Scott. And if H.R. 1355 were adopted, what would be the
impact on the consumers?
Mr. Wilmarth. A very severe one, in my opinion. I think
some of the provisions we haven't talked about are the direct
taking away of any policy-making independence. So, if you put
the CFPB under the Treasury, the Treasury could then veto
rules, remove officers and officials, reorganize the agency,
and interfere with enforcement proceedings. It would have none
of the autonomy that the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency has within the Treasury.
Again, my question is--the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency is an enormously powerful agency, headed by one person
who regulates all of the largest financial institutions in this
country. Many of them are also among the largest financial
institutions in the world. And yet, there are detailed
provisions giving the OCC all types of autonomy. So why are we
taking away all the autonomy from the CFPB, but preserving all
of it for the OCC?
It was interesting that when the Treasury General Counsel
criticized in a comment letter a proposed rule that the OCC put
out, Members on the other side of the aisle leaped to the OCC's
defense, and told Treasury to stop interfering with the OCC.
The Treasury was strongly criticized for allegedly interfering
with the OCC's autonomy. So why is there so much solicitude for
the OCC but none at all for the CFPB?
Chairwoman Capito. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Thanks. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Canseco, for 5 minutes?
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Today, we are talking about how the CFPB is supposed to be
an agency that protects consumers. This is an agency that on
top of so many rules and laws that are already designed to
protect both State laws and Federal laws to protect our
consumers. We have to recognize as the politicians sitting up
here and as the legislators sitting up here, that there is a
very delicate balance that needs to be maintained.
And every time that we flip that balance in any direction,
whether it is in favor of the consumer or in favor of the
financial servicers, we are always hurting the consumer.
Because of that, I really need to stress the need for all of us
as Members of this body that we understand the American economy
and its financial systems. Because otherwise, we are going to
trip into bad laws and bad rules.
So with that said, I want to ask Mr. Hunter, the CFPB has a
complaint handling process for banks with over $10 billion in
assets. And this includes the reporting of general trends to
Congress about complaints they are receiving about financial
institutions. Given that the CFPB can essentially do whatever
it wants, what concerns do you have over this complaint
process? And is there a possibility that the wrong impressions
could be given to consumers, thereby harming them?
Mr. Hunter. I am happy to answer that question,
Congressman. I guess one of the most profound concerns--and as
we say out West, ``The livestock are out of the barn,'' with
regard to the delegation of authority to the CFPB in this
area--but how this authority is exercised is what this hearing
is about. I would like to confine my remarks to that
proposition.
With this much current authority vested in one person, that
person's style, that person's approach to this job is going to
be critical. And you could have somebody whose approach would
be--as opposed to compliance and supervision--enforcement,
which not to be too melodramatic, could involve scalp-hunting.
You are punishing people to make an example.
The tradition in banking is you have a supervisory and
compliance approach. So as you say, because all this kind of
authority is reposed in one person, the whim and caprice of
that individual with regard to how he or she is going to
approach this job is troubling. And it is something we are
having a hard time getting our head around, which is why we are
participating in this hearing, and why we suggest a better
approach to how that authority is exercised would be a
commission.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you.
So, handling complaints is just one of the services that
banks provide to their customers. Yet, the CFPB has decided to
make a public display of all the complaints received from
banks, and about banks. Are you concerned that publicly, the
CFPB is only focusing on negative aspects of banks'
relationships with their customers, and not seeing the whole
big picture of all the good things and the efforts that they
do?
Mr. Hunter. If there is going to be a public inventorying
of complaints, it ought to be holistic; which is to say, if
there are complaints that are determined to show that there is
no fault of a bank, and there is a good story there, there
ought to be a holistic approach to that. And our concern is it
is going to be all of the bad and none of the good,
Congressman.
Mr. Canseco. So it is going to paint financial institutions
in a very bad light?
Mr. Hunter. Sure.
Mr. Canseco. And complaints are a natural concurrence, are
they not?
Mr. Hunter. That is a concern we would have about the
template that is in place.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Now, Mr. Pincus, I would like to ask you about the overall
structure of the Bureau and revisit something this committee
has been in favor of for a long time. This committee has been
fighting for almost a year to create a five-member commission
at the CFPB, only to be rejected by the Senate and the
President. So I would like to point out some differences
between the Board of Governors at the Federal Reserve, and the
CFPB.
The Fed's Board consists of an academic, a former community
banker, a State financial regulator, a former Fed District
President, and a former Clinton Administration official. And by
contrast, Mr. Cordray has spent his career suing banks and
other private sector participants. What does this lack of
diversity at the CFPB mean about the direction this agency will
take in its relationship with the private sector?
Mr. Pincus. I think it is a real concern, Congressman. I
think, given the very broad power that the agency has--and I
know it has been labeled a bank regulator, but as you know from
the legislation that is moving through Congress, this agency
regulates much more than banks or even the financial
institutions. It regulates really the whole economy, to a large
extent.
And so, giving that authority to one person, who by
definition is going to have limited experience, is a recipe for
disaster. And I think one interesting analogy--I do a little
antitrust law. And if you compare the Antitrust Division of the
Justice Department, which is headed by one person, to the FTC,
which is of course a commission, most people would say that
because of the input from multiple people and people from
different backgrounds, the FTC has charted in the antitrust law
a much more consistent, measured path, while the Justice
Department has sort of swung back and forth, depending on
Administrations.
And I think that is a real problem here, and it is why
every agency that you can think of, in which there are these
restrictions on appointment authority, also have multi-member
commissions for just that reason.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you very much.
My time has expired.
Mr. Renacci [presiding]. I recognize Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Mr. Pincus, I try to understand the argument as to why the
budget for the CFPB should be--instead of being by fee
assessment, it should be appropriated? And when we look at
those regulators such as the OCC, the FDIC, and the Federal
Reserve that in some ways have jurisdiction over consumer
compliance laws, they were not subjected to appropriations. So,
my question to you is, since Dodd-Frank transferred those
jurisdiction and responsibilities to the CFPB, should Congress
now defund all these Federal agencies and make them subject to
appropriations?
Mr. Pincus. I think a couple of answers, Congressman. First
of all, in terms of accountability, which is really--
appropriations is one part, in all those other agencies. There
are other accountability mechanisms.
For example, with the OCC, although it is true that it is
funded outside the appropriations process, there aren't the
restrictions on the removal of the Comptroller. The President
has blanket removal authority, the Justice Department has said
and also the Treasury Secretary has general oversight as well
as authority over appointing deputies.
So, there is a control there that doesn't exist in the
Bureau. And I think the critical problem is, with those
authorities transferred to the Bureau, it is now an agency that
has both no appropriations oversight and no policy oversight in
terms of effective governance.
And just one last point if I may, this is not any longer
just a bank regulator. And so, I think the appropriate
comparison is really other consumer regulators, as you said.
And if you look across the government, the FTC, the CSPC, the
Justice Department, all of those entities are subject to the
appropriations process.
Ms. Velazquez. As a regulator--the CFPB is a regulator. And
as long as the National Bank Charter has been in the system--in
fact, all the way back to 1864 when the OCC was established by
a Republican, under a Republican President--the budget has been
funded through assessment, not appropriation. In its wisdom,
Congress passed the law that way, to give the independence to
that agency.
Yes, sir?
Mr. Wilmarth. It seems to me that the experience of the
FHFA is also very applicable. Congress determined that we
needed a strong, independent regulator and a single regulator
who would be accountable and would be strong enough to take
effective action against these enormous, government-sponsored
enterprises. In my view, the largest banks today, which the OCC
regulates, have many similarities to the government-sponsored
enterprises. They are widely viewed as being too-big-to-fail.
And so why is a single-Director model good for the FHFA and
not for the CFPB? The single-Director model focuses
accountability and prevents the Director from saying it is
somebody else's fault if things don't go well.
Ms. Velazquez. Professor, prior to the Dodd-Frank Act, bank
regulators often had to choose whether to use limited resources
to enforce safety and soundness, or consumer protection laws.
In your opinion, do the proposed bills undermine the advantages
of having a separate regulator dedicated to each mission?
Mr. Wilmarth. Yes. Unfortunately, and I think everyone
seems to have agreed on that point today, the Federal
prudential regulators gave very short shrift to consumer
protection; they didn't seem to think it was that important.
They didn't seem to think it would have systemic effects.
We now know that a systemic failure to protect consumers
will eventually have a systemic negative effect on the
financial system. Congress created this regulator to provide
accountability and focus for consumer protection, but then if
you take away the secure budget, you end up with the problems
the SEC and the CFTC are dealing with.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Mr. Wilmarth. They have an important mandate that they
can't carry out. They have said so. They can't carry it out
because they don't have enough money.
Ms. Velazquez. Under the revised funding provided by H.R.
1355, non-bank financial institutions like mortgage companies
and check cashers could escape CFPB oversight if the agency
lacks sufficient funding to extend oversight to these entities.
What are the risks to consumers if these entities are not
brought under Federal supervision in a timely manner?
Mr. Wilmarth. I would expect the CFPB's Director to focus
on the largest institutions, for obvious reasons. They have the
largest overall impact on consumers. But then we would go back
to the same situation we had before the crisis when to some
extent, banks were regulated, but there were large groups of
non-bank providers, such as payday lenders, such as non-bank
mortgage lenders, that were very lightly regulated and very
inconsistently regulated.
And without an annual CFPB budget, I think you will see
something similar, because the Bureau will be forced to put
more of its attention on the banks, and it won't be able to put
enough attention on the non-banks. And that actually won't help
the banks. It will actually be to their disadvantage.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Duffy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duffy. I thank the Chair.
We engaged in this conversation about transparency and
accountability with the CFPB and my friends across the room
here keep indicating that the CFPB has been in 14 times over
the course of the last year. And they hold that up as a great
example of the accountability that we have over the CFPB.
But the bottom line is, they are coming in and having a
congressional conversation. There really is no oversight when
they come in and speak with us. There is no teeth that we have
when they come and have a conversation with us. And I think
that is one of our concerns. Though they come in and share in a
question-and-answer session, we really can't do anything if we
have a concern about the activity of the CFPB.
I think a great example of oversight is with the $350
million CFPB budget. How long was their disclosure? Seven
pages--seven pages for $350 million; and we are supposed to
clap our hands and say, ``This is wonderful oversight,
transparency, accountability; isn't this great?'' This is a
perfect example of how we don't have any accountability here.
There is no oversight. I think that is our concern on our side
of the aisle. And I know there is a concern that we want to
keep politics out of this.
We want to keep it immune from political activity. But
really what that means is we want it to be immune from
congressional oversight. This body is made up of the elected
Representatives in the country, and it is our responsibility to
make sure we do our job. And if we don't do our job, we are
held accountable by our constituents.
Mr. Wilmarth, would you say that you agree that we should
have a single Director and we should keep the funding outside
of Congress and just stay with the Fed? You would agree with
that?
Mr. Wilmarth. Yes, I have no problem with the current set-
up.
Mr. Duffy. And your rationale, quickly, on the Director
side is--versus a commission is what?
Mr. Wilmarth. In my opinion, a single-Director model
focuses accountability on the individual who is given the
mandate. You can tell whether that individual is carrying out
the mandate or not. When you have a commission, the
responsibility is diffused. In my longer article that cited--
administrative lawyers have gone back and forth about the
merits of single directors and multi-member commissions. You
can find both types of agencies.
Mr. Duffy. Wonderful.
And to the rest of the panel, do you think that the Federal
Reserve Board has been less effective because it is a board? To
any of the three?
Mr. Pincus. Congressman, I think that brings great benefit
in terms of bringing different experiences and different
perspectives to bear on very important decisions. And just to
respond for a minute to Mr. Wilmarth's point about
accountability, the problem is that the Director isn't
accountable to anyone.
So, under the current structure, since the President can't
fire him and neither can Congress and the appropriations are
protected, it is nice to know who the decision-maker is, but
there is nothing anyone can do about it. And so in that
situation, it is even more important to have multiple people
with input into the decision, which is why all of these
regulatory agencies that you can think of are structured that
way.
Mr. Duffy. And I guess I also haven't heard a lot of
complaints about the FDIC having a five member commission as
well; that they are pretty effective as a commission, though
power is not consolidated in one Director. Mr. Hunter, would
you disagree with that?
Mr. Hunter. I think that the current situation really,
Congressman, underscores the fallacy if you will of placing all
this responsibility on one person and deciding or arguing that
that is a good thing because one person is responsible.
If you are going to have an independent entity like this,
which I think Congress should do in only exceptional
circumstances, and this may or may not be one, but if you are
going to have an independent agency, you ought to have a
commission so that the power and authority, in this case which
is virtually unprecedented, is shared between a group of people
as opposed to one person.
So that person's--and we are all human beings--
idiosyncrasies, that person's whim and caprice, don't direct
the administration of his authority and responsibility.
Mr. Duffy. And I want to--I only have a few seconds left.
Mr. Wilmarth, did you follow the later Bush years; and did
George Bush attempt to make some judicial appointments? But was
he unable to do that because the Senate went into a pro forma
session?
Mr. Wilmarth. I am not familiar with that incident, I am
sorry.
Mr. Duffy. You are not aware of that?
Mr. Wilmarth. I am not familiar with it. It may have
happened; I am not familiar with it.
Mr. Duffy. Okay.
Mr. Stinebert. Congressman, I just wanted to point out some
other advantages to having a commission. One is I am sure there
would be staggered terms. Continuity is a big issue. Right now,
you have a single Director whose term is going to end.
You are going to start completely over again with whomever
the new Director is. If you have a commission or a panel, you
are going to ensure some continuity; you are going to have some
more balance; you are going to have some more thought-provoking
experience to a commission. And I think that can only be to the
advantage of this body.
Mr. Duffy. And one last comment, at some point there will
be a Republican President who will appoint a commissioner and
my friends across the aisle may not like that. I think it is
important to share that power so we don't have this continual
divide in a very important agency. And I yield back the time I
don't have.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Green is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. You are very
generous with the time.
Again, I thank the witnesses. I do want to look closely at
the proposition that the Consumer Protection Financial Bureau
has no oversight and this is of concern because I believe in
oversight. I think oversight is of paramount importance. I
think oversight helps to avoid arbitrary and capricious acts,
so I stand with those who stand for oversight.
So, perhaps I am incorrect. And one of the ways I try to
find out exactly where I am is to pose questions to a panel,
and I do so as lawyers do when they examine jurors--the process
known as voir dire or voir dire, depending on where you are
from. In Texas, it is voir dire. So I am a transplant, and I am
a now voir dire person.
So with this and 3 minutes and 50 seconds left, does
everyone agree that there is an entity known as the Financial
Stability Oversight Council?
If there is disagreement, kindly extend your hand into the
air. I ask that the record reflect that no hand has been
extended into the air, hence I conclude that all agree that
there is an institution known as the Financial Stability
Oversight Council.
If you agree that the Financial Stability Oversight Council
has oversight in the sense that it can review and overturn any
regulation of the CFPB, do you agree that it can review and
overturn any regulation of the CFPB?
If someone--
Mr. Hunter. They would have to prescribe, if I can,
Congressman--
Mr. Green. If you would let me have my time--
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Mr. Green. --for just a moment, I may yield to you.
But I just want you to tell me, as--by the way, as other
Congresspersons ask their questions and they get answers, I
would like to have a similar opportunity.
Do you agree that the Financial Stability Oversight Council
can overturn any regulation of the CFPB?
If you differ and say that it cannot, then you should raise
your hand.
Let the record reflect that no one differs. The Financial
Stability Oversight Council can review and overturn regulations
of the CFPB. I think it is worthy of noting who is on the
Financial Stability Oversight Council. The Treasury Secretary
chairs the Financial Oversight Council, and it is composed of:
the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board; the Comptroller of
the Currency; the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation; the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission; the Chairman of the Commodities Futures Trading
Commission; the Director of the Federal Housing Financing
Agency; the Chairman of the National Credit Union
Administration; and a Senate-confirmed independent member with
insurance expertise that will segue into something you and I
might discuss in just a second, Mr. Hunter, if I have time.
But these persons, all of whom have great expertise, sit in
judgment of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. And it is
ironic that the style of the entity that they happen to sit on
has within it the word ``oversight,'' the Financial Stability
Oversight Council. That is oversight. I don't know how we can
conclude that there is no oversight.
Now, perhaps someone could make the argument that it is not
enough to have all of these persons with all of this expertise,
but I find it difficult to make the argument that there is
none, zero, that is a difficult argument I think to make
successfully.
I wish I could go to you, Mr. Wilmarth, but I can't.
Mr. Hunter, you mentioned that you would like to see a
banker on a given entity, did you not? Which institute was
that, please? Someone representing--
Mr. Hunter. Our preference, Congressman--
Mr. Green. Yes, sir?
Mr. Hunter. --is that someone with banking experience--
Mr. Green. Yes, sir?
Mr. Hunter. --be added to the FDIC--
Mr. Green. FDIC?
Mr. Hunter. --or to the Fed.
Mr. Green. Okay, listen, I think you and I should have a
conversation about this. I am not a person who opposes bankers
having some influence and some opportunity to have their
position known.
I support banking. This country needs good banks, but we
also need good oversight for the purpose of protecting
consumers. But I would dearly like to visit with you about it
and perhaps we can find some common ground to stand on.
And, Madam Chairwoman, thank you for the time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Green. I want to yield back to you.
You have graciously accorded me the time, so I surrender it
to you. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to have the following
statements placed in the record: the Consumer Bankers'
Association; and the Credit Union National Association.
The ranking member also has a unanimous consent request.
Mrs. Maloney. I ask unanimous consent that the statement of
Americans for Financial Reform be made a part of the record.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Luetkemeyer is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Just to follow up a little bit on Mr. Green's comments, I,
too, have concerns about the CFPB Director on the FDIC and
quite frankly, I am not a big fan of the Fed Chairman going on
there.
I really like the idea of a banker being on there, and the
reason is this: We had testimony here last week with regards to
an ombudsman program and the ability to connect back with the
regulators. And there is a huge disconnect right now with what
is going on in the field and what is going on with the
regulators.
And I think putting somebody who is more in touch with what
is going on the ground would certainly enhance the ability of
the FDIC to understand some of those problems. I am not trying
to pick a fight here, but I think that it makes sense to have
somebody who can add that connection; to be somebody who would
add great value to the Board.
So, that is just my first comment.
My second comment would be, Mr. Hunter, can you tell me
something about--something we haven't talked about really is
the privacy information that Mr. Huizenga is trying to protect
here in his bill.
Can you tell me how the banks have been protected in the
past up until now; how this is going to impact not only the
banks but the customers by what is going to be available to the
public which really is probably some information that they
really shouldn't see?
Mr. Hunter. The privileges that attach to information that
is shared with bank examiners now is important because it
ensures that there is an orderly, highly facilitated flow of
information between banks and examiners so that examiners can
do their jobs and banks can participate in--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That information is very specific to the
individual customer, as well, is it not?
Mr. Hunter. It can be, very frequently.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes.
And that information then would be available to the public
if this bill doesn't go through? Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Hunter. We strongly support Congressman Huizenga's
bill. There does need to be a tweak so that information that is
shared with other Federal agencies is also provided that
privilege. But yes, Congressman, we support the bill.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So in other words, the average citizen who
is doing business with an institution, his financial records
can be open to the public for everybody to see, which is really
an invasion of his privacy with the way the current law is
structured for the CFPB, is that correct?
Mr. Hunter. Conceivably, and that is a great argument for
why the--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. --privilege needs to exist.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
Another quick question here with regards to the fines and
the penalties that are charged, is there any recourse with
regards to an institution which would be charged a fine by the
CFPB? Is there any appeals process in place?
Mr. Hunter. You have opportunities in Federal court in
certain situations, but existence of an appeals process there--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So there is an ombudsman's program in this
like there is with the Fed and those other groups that were
talked about the other day?
Mr. Hunter. I don't believe so. We can check.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Very good.
It is interesting. As we go through this process, some of
the Members on the other side of the aisle seem to think that
the entire financial debacle of a few years ago was caused by
consumer-finance problems.
And let us be straight about what consumer finance is here.
Consumer financial products here that we are talking about--
consumer financial problems are not loan quality; are not
investment-quality problems. They are problems with disclosure,
and whether an APR is correct or what the fees are for a
particular loan--it is all of this discloser stuff that we are
talking about.
And so, how that is impacting the world of finance and
causing things to go down is beyond me. I think it is a part of
Dodd-Frank legislation which was an attempt to try and solve
some problems.
But let us be clear. Consumer finance is not going to cause
the debacle of--or save us from another debacle down the road.
However, it does impact the banking institutions and the
lenders at heart.
And Mr. Pincus, I am sure--you, a minute ago, made the
comment in your testimony with regards to the regulations and
how they restrict credit.
This is another example of some of the stuff here if we
continue to push this stuff, how difficult it is for
institutions to continue to lend when their hands are
hamstrung, why the many things have happened with consumer
protections, is that not correct?
Mr. Pincus. Absolutely, Congressman, and it is a special
concern because as you know, small businesses often rely
exclusively or certainly principally on consumer lending
services or products.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Have you seen a restriction with your
members with regards to access to credit as a result of some of
these consumer finance problems or situations or regulations?
Mr. Pincus. Absolutely. Small businesses right now are
having real problems getting access to credit and a lot of it
is the general tightening up of credit for consumers and they
are sort of hit in the crossfire because they access consumer
credit and our real fear is that rules that are focused on
consumers will have this terrible effect in terms of small
businesses which, as you know, are the engines of our economy.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Very good. Thank you.
And my time is up.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Maloney. Will the gentleman yield for point of
information or the chairwoman?
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman was recognized for--
Mrs. Maloney. One of my amendments to the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau created an ombudsman. So there is
an ombudsman there and they are in the process of putting that
in place now in the 34 days they have been in operation.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry, for 5 minutes?
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I thank the Chair.
And thank you for your testimony.
I know most of the questions have been asked, but I have
not asked any questions.
In my Subcommittee on Oversight and Government Reform, we
had Mr. Cordray before us and he testified that he certainly
has a significant amount of additional willingness to be open
about his process than we have seen from other folks who held
the temporary position over the last year.
It is my opinion--but I think most folks can judge his
testimony before the Senate and before my subcommittee, and
additional testimony that he is going to give before a
Financial Services Subcommittee--that he has been willing to
answer questions. He has been willing to take in ideas. He is
willing to add additional transparency.
It still doesn't fix the problem with the CFPB that you
have one individual with an inordinate amount of power without
restriction. And the only way that FSOC can overrule anything
he or she does coming out of there, is if it poses a systemic
risk across our economy. Basically, you would have to have one
individual promulgate a rule that will bring a cataclysmic
event the likes of which we have only seen once--we see once
every half a century, in essence. So barring that, they are
pretty safe to act.
Now, I have asked in terms of transparency for the CFPB to
put forward their rulemaking agenda for the year. The SEC does
this. Other regulators do this. And that has gotten a favorable
response and they have made some action in that regard. The
additional question is the rulemaking process that they have at
the CFPB.
Mr. Pincus, I know you have studied this significantly. In
terms of how transparent that process is, from your view of
what the SEC does to promulgate rules versus what the CFPB
seems to be doing--because I don't think there is much
clarity--is there a significant difference between that
process?
Mr. Pincus. As you say, Congressman, we don't quite know
yet. And I think there is a little bit of good, but some
considerable reason for concern in how things are going. And I
think, just to take an example, I think everybody agrees that
disclosure around mortgages is a myth and has to be dealt with.
And one of the things that Dodd-Frank does is it requires it to
be dealt with.
So, before starting a formal rulemaking process, the Bureau
has engaged in lots of consultations, which is a good thing. I
think the concern is the input that it has received on its sort
of tentative ideas have not been made public. It has all been
kept private. It has not, although the statute requires the so-
called soprefa process, the process to protect small business
as a critical part of rulemaking, it hasn't been activated in
this preliminary process. It hasn't even been enacted yet, and
so being sure that small businesses are protected, which
Congress was concerned about, hasn't happened yet.
And I think the real concern is that this informal process,
which doesn't have a lot of protections in it in terms of
disclosure, could become a substitute for the formal process
and the real rulemaking process that the statute requires could
become a rubber stamp. Everyone could have made up their minds,
and so they have 30 days worth of comment and then they just
promulgate the proposal that they had at the beginning.
So, I think there is just a real importance in being sure
that there is a lot of opportunity for input. The input is
clear in how it is dealt with and responded to, is part of an
interactive process. And that ultimately, all people do, as the
Administrative Procedure Act requires, have an opportunity to
be in there and participate.
And just one more point, if I may? We are talking about
rulemaking. Enforcement, a lot of agencies, consumer protection
agencies and certainly Mr. Cordray's predecessor in the
temporary job said that it was her view that she wanted to use
enforcement to set standards, rather than rulemaking, because
that was more efficient and easier.
And so, there is a real risk and we don't know where this
Bureau will find its balance. But enforcement decisions have
none of those protections. An agency can bring an enforcement
action, either get a settlement or get a decision--obviously,
all legitimate companies--
Mr. McHenry. It is basically regulation through lawsuit,
and the Federal Government already has that authority.
So as the small business panel, I appreciate you touching
on that. It is highly important that with every major
rulemaking, you impanel small businesses.
Mr. Stinebert, harmonization among regulators to make sure
that when you have a CFPB rule promulgated, that it is uniform
across institutions and business sets and among the regulators;
that there is agreement to that--can you touch on that as my
time has expired?
Mr. Stinebert. Yes, Congressman, thank you for bringing
that up. One of our primary concerns is the decades of State
regulation and the expertise that has been built up at the
State level.
We want to make sure that there is cooperation from the
CFPB with those State regulators and that some of that talent
and that expertise is utilized and some of that history that
was with the State regulators. We want to make sure that there
is a good mix of that going forward.
We have not had an indication so far of that to a great
extent. We are very helpful as we go forward we will more of
that.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for holding this hearing.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. McCotter, for 5 minutes?
Mr. McCotter. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you
for indulging our colleague, Mr. McHenry, in his 5-minute
question.
One of the interesting things that we find in politics is
much like you learn when you grow up. Never judge a book by its
cover.
Interestingly, we are seeing the Democratic Party actually
make a vehement argument in favor of creating an entity that is
as far from the people and the democratic process as it can be.
I only note that because I find it very odd. It is odd not only
because they claim to want popular participation, people
empowerment over their own decisions.
It is actually contrary to the wave of the future. And it
is in keeping with the founding principles of this country for
us to oppose putting one person in power. After all, the first
President of the United States stepped down, because he did not
wish to be a king, because he understood Lord Acton's Dictum
that ``absolute power corrupts absolutely.''
And yet, here we find ourselves in the 21st Century saying
that despite all the changes in our world, despite all the
changes in our lives, despite all the changes in our economy,
despite the ability to use the social network to make our own
decisions to access information, to conduct our own personal
transactions based upon that information in nanoseconds around
the world, we continue to say that we need one person to save
us from ourselves.
That here in the United States of America, a country built
upon self-government, in the 21st Century, we are relying on
18th Century concepts that one individual however enlightened
and benevolent they may be are necessary for the running of the
entire American economy, for the running of every American's
life so they can make financial decisions.
Now, I would like to point out that having opposed the Wall
Street bailout as absolutely the wrong precedent to set in the
first crisis of our globalized economy, in many ways this
regulatory scheme is the bitter fruits of misdeeds that
occurred during that crisis and precipitated it. So, I have no
sympathy necessarily for those who must suffer under the yoke
of this new entity.
But I would remind everyone that the central argument that
we are really having here about this CFPB is whether or not you
can govern your own life, is what is the proper role of
government in the 21st Century? How do you match that
government with an economy that has become flat, that has
become horizontal, that empowers you every day to extents
undreamt in human history?
And unfortunately, the answer continues to be much what we
heard when President Roosevelt rejected the calls to become a
short-term dictator because only one person could get the
American economy out of the Great Depression. We have always
rejected the concept that it is a person who will save us. And
instead of worrying about the person who holds it, be it a
Democratic appointee, be it a Republican appointee, worry about
the expansion of the powers of the State.
Now, I know that back in the 1980s and 1990s when the
Soviet Union was going under, there was a school of thought
that said Communism would still work if Stalin hadn't ruined
what Lenin put in place. I only bring this up because it
continues to reinforce my point.
What we are concerned about here is the expansion of the
power of the State. And we know that when you expand the powers
of the State, regardless of who is going to be in charge of it,
you are going to have problems somewhere down the road, because
you have gotten away from the very principles which allow us to
be a free people and have this debate.
Now, there are those Members of the Congress who believe
that having their duly elected Representatives have oversight
over this entity, because we are so inherently corrupt, I would
like to ask if they only exclude themselves from that? Or, if
they are worried about their own temptation to sin and make the
situation worse?
I would ask them to go back to their constituents and say,
those bureaucrats who are always so responsive when you have a
problem, who always come through? We are going to make them
even more powerful now, but the good news is there will only be
one to tell us no or to ignore us, or to ignore you.
No, the CFPB's problem is that it is based upon an
outdated, antiquated model of government that will not work,
especially at a period of time when the wave of the future is
individual freedom. It is empowerment. And that is going to
continue whether big vertical government likes it or not. And I
assure you, regardless of the outcome of this debate or these
bills, big government is going to get flattened beneath the
power of the people.
I yield back. I have no questions.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back. I think our
final questions have been asked.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for the panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
I would like to thank all of you. And I think we have had a
very productive hearing.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:23 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

February 8, 2012


