- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO BRING CERTAINTY TO THE OVER-THE-COUNTER DERIVATIVES MARKET

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO BRING

CERTAINTY TO THE OVER-THE-COUNTER

DERIVATIVES MARKET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS AND

GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 14, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-75

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-616                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises

SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey, Chairman

DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona, Vice      MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
PETER T. KING, New York              GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              AL GREEN, Texas
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 14, 2011.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 14, 2011.............................................    43

WITNESSES
Friday, October 14, 2011

Bailey, Keith, Managing Director, Fixed Income, Currencies and
Commodities Division, Barclays Capital, on behalf of the
Institute of International Bankers.............................     8
Bernardo, Shawn, Senior Managing Director, Tullett Prebon, on
behalf of the Wholesale Market Brokers Association, Americas...    10
Boultwood, Brenda, Chief Risk Officer and Senior Vice President,
Constellation energy, on behalf of the End-User Coalition......    11
Cawley, James, CEO, Javelin Capital Markets, LLC.................    13
Mason, Kent, Davis & Harman LLP, on behalf of the American
Benefits Council and the Committee on Investment of Employee
Benefit Assets.................................................    15
Voldstad, Conrad, Chief Executive Officer, International Swaps
and Derivatives Association....................................    17

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bailey, Keith................................................    44
Bernardo, Shawn..............................................    55
Boultwood, Brenda............................................    78
Cawley, James................................................    83
Mason, Kent..................................................    86
Voldstad, Conrad.............................................    99

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Garrett, Hon. Scott:
Written statement of the American Bankers Association........   108
Written statement of BlackRock...............................   112
Written statement of Chatham Financial.......................   113
Written statement of the Commodity Markets Council...........   115
Written statement of the Coalition for Derivatives End-Users.   123
Written statement of the Investment Company Institute........   126
Written statement of the Working Group of Commercial Energy
Firms and the Commodity Markets Council....................   128
Hayworth, Hon. Nan:
Written responses to questions submitted to Conrad Voldstad..   139

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO BRING

CERTAINTY TO THE OVER-THE-COUNTER

DERIVATIVES MARKET

----------

Friday, October 14, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and
Government Sponsored Enterprises,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Scott Garrett
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Garrett, Schweikert,
Lucas, Biggert, Hensarling, Neugebauer, Pearce, Posey,
Fitzpatrick, Hayworth, Hurt, Grimm, Stivers, Dold; Waters,
Sherman, Lynch, Miller of North Carolina, Maloney, Donnelly,
Himes, Peters, Green, and Ellison.
Also present: Representative Canseco.
Chairman Garrett. Good morning. This hearing of the
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored
Enterprises is called to order.
Good morning to everyone on the panel. I think this is the
first time we started a little bit late. I try to start these
things right on time. I apologize to all of you.
But we do welcome the gentleman from Texas for being with
us here on the committee at the very beginning. This is a rare
day, too, but thank you. Thank you, everyone.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Legislative Proposals to
Bring Certainty to the Over-the-Counter Derivatives Market.''
We have a fairly large panel to hear testimony from, but
before we do that, we will have opening statements from the
Members, 10 minutes or so on each side, if we actually consume
that, and then we will look to each of you for your testimony.
So I will begin by yielding myself 3 minutes, and say, again,
welcome.
I look forward to all of your testimony. I look forward to
a good discussion on the legislation that is before us. It is
my hope that at least several of these bills will have, as we
have had with other bills, bipartisan support.
I am pleased that my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle have joined me and others in engaging in implementation
of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act. We have had several
proposals before today; and I believe it is appropriate to make
sure that Dodd-Frank is--now that it is the law--implemented by
regulators in a common-sense manner that actually works. For
this to happen: first, regulations must not impose overly
burdensome and unjustified costs on American businesses;
second, they must not drive businesses overseas; and third,
they must not unnecessarily place American businesses at a
competitive disadvantage vis-a-vis countries overseas.
While derivatives are often vilified, and have been at the
very beginning of this process, they have served as an
extremely important risk management tool for thousands of
American businesses across the country and pension funds as
well. Regulators must be mindful of this and must be mindful
about not harming the functioning of a mature market. Instead,
they should focus on a regulatory structure that allows them to
understand where the risk in the system actually resides.
In an effort to provide certainty and direction to the
rulemaking process, I recently introduced the Swap Execution
Facility Clarification Act with Mrs. Maloney, Mr. Hurt, and Mr.
Meeks. Dodd-Frank gave the SEC and the CFTC broad latitude to
get the rules right. Unfortunately, after these proposals were
released, virtually the entire market--from the buy side, asset
managers, pension funds, and commercial end-users, to the sell
side, to the dealers and even prospective swap execution
facilities, told me the regulators got it wrong.
In order to respect the congressional intent reflected in
the heavily negotiated language of the SEF definition, we
carefully drafted the bill, H.R. 2586, to direct regulators to
provide market participants with the flexibility--and this is
key--that they need to obtain price discovery in the market and
in the method of execution they use.
In addition to allowing voice execution on SEF trade, the
bill prohibits the 15-second rule, also, and includes
restrictions on the RFQ model and sweep book requirements. I
feel that the specific nature of this direction is necessary to
promote the conditions for a competitive marketplace in the
swaps area.
Mr. Canseco here has a bill, H.R. 3045, which was also
introduced, at least in part, because of concerns over
regulatory interpretation of the statute. I heard from pension
plans that the SEC and the CFTC rules would prohibit them from
using swaps to hedge against market volatility and manage the
obligations owed to their retirees. So H.R. 3045 ensures that
ERISA pension plans can engage in swap transactions without
their swap dealer counterparties incorrectly being labeled as
fiduciaries. Of course, that would make it impossible for the
transactions to take place in the first place.
We also have Mr. Stiver's bill, H.R. 2779, which seems to
be another common-sense solution to address inter-affiliate
trades, along with Ms. Hayworth's bill, H.R. 1838, which
repeals Section 716 of Dodd-Frank, otherwise known as the swap
push-out provision.
Now because there was no hearing on this issue, and as Ben
Bernanke has said, it would make the U.S. financial system less
resilient and more susceptible to systemic risk, I look forward
to having a thoughtful discussion now about Section 716, which
we have not had so far.
Once again, I thank the entire panel, and I look forward to
a healthy dialogue on this issue.
And, with that, Mr. Peters is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Chairman Garrett, for holding this
hearing.
I also would like to thank the witnesses for taking the
time to share their testimony with us today.
I certainly understand the important role that derivatives
play in our economy. They are safely used every day by
companies that are managing risk. As a member of the Dodd-Frank
Conference Committee, I worked to ensure that Title VII struck
the appropriate balance between creating a safer, more
transparent market for derivatives, and ensuring that these
products were still widely available and affordable for those
who choose to use them.
In the year-and-a-half since the law was enacted, I have
tried to work constructively with regulatory agencies to ensure
that their rules make sense and are consistent with
congressional intent. The issues that are being addressed in
this hearing are very important. I think that many of them
could probably be addressed by better coordination between the
agencies and by greater feedback from the agencies to those who
have submitted comments. Unfortunately, both the SEC and the
CFTC are under a great deal of pressure, both in terms of time
and in terms of the volume of work they are being asked to
undertake. Adding to this pressure is the fact that they have
so far not been given the resources commensurate with their
increased workload.
In any event, I think there are Members on both sides of
the aisle who are committed to making sure the agencies get
this right, and I look forward to working with my colleagues to
make sure that happens.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back. We will be
turning to Mrs. Biggert next for 1 minute, but before we do
that, I ask for unanimous consent that Mr. Canseco can
participate in this hearing.
Without objection, we welcome you.
Mrs. Biggert, for 1 minute.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning to all
of you, and thank you for being here.
I am concerned that Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act is
shaping up to be one of the worst provisions in a bill loaded
with provisions that stifle economic growth. This derivatives
provision is poised to place our financial systems at a severe
disadvantage with its global competitors and could actually
increase risk in our system by forcing many derivatives into
the unregulated shadow banking system.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Bernanke noted, as the
chairman said, that Section 716 would make the U.S. financial
system less resilient and more susceptible to systemic risk
because forcing hedging activities out of insured depository
institutions would weaken both financial stability and strong
prudential regulation.
Section 716 will also place U.S. financial institutions at
a competitive disadvantage because non-U.S. jurisdictions have
not implemented similar regulations. Despite being promised
that U.S. regulators would coordinate with their international
counterparts, Dodd-Frank is in the final stages of
implementation, while other countries have completely failed to
take action.
While I support bringing better transparency to our
derivatives market, it is absolutely critical that we do not
inhibit the competitiveness of our U.S. institutions. With the
struggling economy, we simply cannot afford it.
Thank you again for being here, and I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hensarling, for 1\1/2\
minutes.
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A week ago, we awoke to the bad news that once again we had
an unemployment rate above 9 percent. I believe it has been so
for 27 of the past 29 months.
As I talk to investors, Fortune 50 CEOs, and small business
owners in my district, it is evident that the lack of our job
creation is resulting from, number one, a debt crisis. As one
put it to me, I know one day I am going to have to pay for
this. I am not going to go out and invest in a bunch of new
equipment or hire people.
It has do with our level of taxation and uncertainty.
People don't know what their tax rate is going to be 16 months
from now, but they know it will go up as part of the
President's health care plan, as part of the snapback of tax
rates that have been in place since 2001 and 2003, and it
certainly is derived from a regulatory onslaught.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for calling this hearing, because
it is far past time that this Congress starts to look at the
jobs impact of each and every regulation. When it comes to our
over-the-counter derivatives market, whether we are talking
about Section 716 of Dodd-Frank, whether we are looking at the
affiliate swap roles, whether we are looking at the special
entity designation for ERISA plans, there is either: one, way
too much uncertainty; or two, certainly bad regulations that I
believe are going to harm capital formation and job creation.
The legislation that we are talking about today goes to the
heart of the matter, and I appreciate you calling this hearing.
Hopefully, we can move these common-sense pieces of
legislation.
I thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Hurt is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
today's hearing on these important legislative proposals. I
appreciate the opportunity to work with you as well as
Representatives Maloney and Meeks on the Swap Execution
Facility Clarification Act.
This legislation is necessary because the Federal
regulators, particularly the CFTC, strayed outside of
congressional intent in their SEF rulemaking and are attempting
to impose a market structure that would be detrimental to the
swaps market and its participants. These proposed rules would
limit market efficiency and lead to negative consequences for
farmers, manufacturers, small businesses, financial
institutions, and pension funds.
H.R. 2586 will ensure that Federal regulators do not
implement a Washington-style market structure for SEFs. This
bill will provide flexibility to the market and give
prospective SEFs and SEF participants the ability to interact
without constricting liquidity or limiting price discovery.
The importance of getting the SEF rulemaking correct cannot
be understated. A misstep could lead to significant increased
costs for risk management and for capital formation for all
Americans, and these increased costs jeopardize jobs. H.R. 2586
ensures that future rulemaking by regulators will be consistent
and will help maintain a functional and liquid swaps market so
that businesses can mitigate risk and uncertainty in their
operations.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing;
and I want to thank each of the witnesses for being here today.
I look forward to your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much.
Now, I will recognize the gentlelady from California for 3
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
holding this hearing on these legislative proposals related to
the over-the-counter derivatives market.
Last July, we passed the Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act and gave the SEC and the CFTC the authority to
regulate the use of derivatives. We created transparency in
markets by requiring that most derivatives be traded on
exchanges and that the details of these transactions, including
price, be reported.
The reason for this regulation was because we saw the
systemic panic caused when AIG failed. We saw that Jefferson
County, Alabama, was sold derivatives with hefty fees and
complex terms that they didn't even understand. And now, we are
seeing the uncertainty caused by a lack of transparency as it
relates to credit default swaps on European debt.
So I would like to underline just how important it is that
our regulation of derivatives moves forward in a timely manner.
I am very concerned by attempts to delay implementation of the
derivatives provisions in Dodd-Frank, particularly the 2-year
delay that passed this committee earlier this year under
unanimous objection of Democrats on this committee. Given both
the European crisis and the continued problems with speculation
in the oil market, I think that this 2-year delay will be
tremendously dangerous.
I would also like to state my concern with back-door
attempts to delay regulation by restricting funding to the SEC
and the CFTC. Current House Republicans' proposals would hold
SEC funding flat and would cut CFTC funding by 15 percent
relative to Fiscal Year 2011. Such funding restrictions are
simply unacceptable, given the new responsibilities provided to
these agencies after the historic financial crisis of 2008.
As for the four bills being considered today, I am, of
course, open to refining what we did in Dodd-Frank to ensure
that rules can be implemented effectively, but I am not certain
that legislation is necessarily needed, given the tremendous
flexibility we afforded to regulators.
I would also add that on the issue of H.R. 1838, which is
being considered today and would repeal Section 716 of Dodd-
Frank, I am very concerned about a step backwards in terms of
ending the casino-style betting that got us into the 2008
crisis. I think it makes good sense that banks with Federal
backing, either through a discount window or through deposit
insurance, be restricted from using that backstop to fund their
derivatives business subject to some bona fide exception.
I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Garrett. And the gentlelady yields back. Thank you
for that.
Mr. Dold is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly want to
thank you for holding the hearing, and I want to thank our
witnesses for your time and for being here today.
We do have an unemployment rate of 9.1 percent, and it has
been extraordinarily high. It is the number one issue I think
we face in this Congress, to try to jump-start the economy and
put people back to work. It is going to be done, I think, in
the private sector, and when I talk to people about
uncertainty, that seems to be one of the major things people
have in this.
Whenever Congress passes legislation, especially a 2,000-
page bill like Dodd-Frank, I think we have an obligation to
continually review and reevaluate the real-world results of the
legislation. We must identify and correct unintended negative
consequences that apply to a general cost-benefit analysis of
the legislation's effects. Whether or not we voted for Dodd-
Frank, we are not eternally bound to support every single
provision regardless of whether we were for the original bill
itself. Instead, we are here to do the best we can for our
constituents and for our country; and sometimes that means
making corrections to bills that were previously supported when
circumstances change or when new information arises.
Today, we are here to consider doing that with respect to
some of Dodd-Frank's derivatives provisions. Derivatives are
very important for our international competitiveness, for
American jobs, and for our economic prosperity. We can't afford
to persist with these mistakes on these issues. So I look
forward to hearing from each and every one of you and to
working with my colleagues on the other side of the aisle for
some common-sense reform.
Chairman Garrett. That is what we are always looking for,
the common-sense reform, thank you.
And now, we look to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Grimm,
for 1 minute.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank the witnesses for being here
today. I appreciate your time.
And the timing of this hearing could not be more
appropriate. Just this week, the New York State Comptroller
announced that New York City, the best portion of which I
represent, stands to lose another 10,000 financial services
jobs by the end of 2012. I believe it is clear that many of the
regulations put into place by Dodd-Frank and Title VII in
particular are playing a part in these job losses.
In order to maintain the competitiveness of the U.S.
financial markets, we must ensure that our regulatory structure
does not put us at a disadvantage relative to the rest of the
world. Therefore, I am encouraged by this committee considering
these four pieces of legislation, two of which, I might add,
were put together on a bipartisan basis. I look forward to our
witnesses' views on these bills and how they can further ensure
that our burdensome regulation does not put U.S. financial
sector jobs needlessly at risk.
I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
Did the gentleman wish to be recognized for 1 minute?
Mr. Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we forget that hundreds of thousands of jobs in
Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and other places were all lost due
to the extraordinary destruction caused on Wall Street, due to
the extraordinary destruction caused by derivatives and their
failures.
And, Mr. Grimm, I sympathize with the loss of those jobs,
as I know you do, of the hundreds of thousands of jobs that
went before that caused by the destruction from the derivatives
and the conduct that occurred on Wall Street and with a number
of these actions. And I look forward to getting these
derivatives right as well, but I also want everyone to
understand why we are here today, because of the actions that
took place before.
Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Canseco for 1\1/2\ minutes and the final word.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you for
having me here in your subcommittee.
Millions of Americans rely on income from employer pension
plans during retirement, and managers of pension plans have a
duty to prudently manage their portfolios in order to meet
their long-term obligations to employees and retirees. A
crucial part of managing investment risk, especially in a large
and diversified pension portfolio, is having the ability to use
swaps in order to hedge risk, notably interest rate risks.
However, a provision included in the Dodd-Frank bill, and
proposed rules from regulatory agencies, could seriously
curtail the ability of pension plans to hedge these risks.
On the proposed rules from the SEC, the CFTC, and the
Department of Labor, a swap dealer that seeks to enter into a
transaction with a pension plan could trigger a fiduciary
obligation under ERISA, thereby precluding the dealer from
engaging in such transactions. However, neither swap dealers
nor pension plans have ever considered the dealer to be acting
as a fiduciary in such a scenario.
H.R. 3045, which I have introduced along with Chairman
Garrett, would remove pension plans from the special-entity
status conferred upon them in Dodd-Frank and allow them to
continue to be able to use swap dealers in order to manage risk
responsibly in their portfolios, regardless of how regulators
implement the rules. This bill is an important step towards
protecting the retirement income of millions of Americans, and
I look forward to hearing from witnesses today on this matter.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Since there are no other opening statements, we look then
to the panel.
Again, we welcome the panel here today; and we thank you
very much for the testimony you are about to give us. As
always, your full written statements will be made a part of the
record. You will each be recognized for 5 minutes.
So, we will begin with Mr. Bailey. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF KEITH BAILEY, MANAGING DIRECTOR, FIXED INCOME,
CURRENCIES AND COMMODITIES DIVISION, BARCLAYS CAPITAL, ON
BEHALF OF THE INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL BANKERS

Mr. Bailey. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Keith Bailey. I am
managing director in the Fixed Income, Currencies and
Commodities division of Barclays Capital.
I am pleased to be here to testify on behalf of the
Institute of International Bankers (IIB) regarding four
discrete legislative proposals to amend Title VII. Many of
these issues sought to be addressed by these bills are very
important to the members of the IIB. The IIB represents
internationally headquartered financial institutions from over
35 countries around the world that have operations in the
United States.
International banks provide an important source of credit
for U.S. borrowers and enhance the depth and liquidity of U.S.
financial markets. Our U.S. operations contribute billions of
dollars each year to the economies of major cities across the
country by employing over 250,000 U.S. citizens and permanent
residents.
The IIB members support Title VII's objectives of reducing
systemic risk and increasing transparency, and many of our home
countries are working to implement similar reforms.
As Title VII is implemented, it is important to note that
foreign banks and U.S. banks alike seek to minimize the number
of legal entities through which they conduct swap dealing
business. This benefits both the banks and their customers by
increasing efficiencies and decreasing risk through netting and
offsetting of exposures. It also allows customers to transact
with a more creditworthy entity.
It is equally important to recognize that, as the swap
market is a global one, it is imperative that derivatives
reforms maintain a level global playing field.
We believe that these two objectives will be better
achieved if the legislative proposals before the subcommittee
today are enacted into law. In particular, I would like to
focus on H.R. 1838 and H.R. 2779.
H.R. 1838, sponsored by Representative Hayworth, would
repeal Section 716 of Dodd-Frank, also known as the swaps push-
out provision. Section 716's exclusions, grandfathering, and
transitioning provisions apply only to insured depository
institutions. Thus, our principal concern with Section 716 is
its impact on uninsured U.S. branches and agencies of foreign
banks which will not benefit from these exclusions.
When Section 716 was enacted, Members of Congress
acknowledged that the lack of parity between foreign bank
branches and U.S.-insured depository institutions was
unintended and inconsistent with the U.S. policy of national
treatment. These same members acknowledge the need to ensure
that foreign bank branches are treated the same as insured
depository institutions. However, in the rush to complete the
conference and finalize Section 716, there was no opportunity
to rectify this significant oversight.
Less than 2 years remain before the foreign bank branches
will be forced to push out all of their swaps dealing business.
In some cases, even existing positions will need to be pushed
out. The implications of this impending deadline are serious.
Swap dealing is typically conducted as an integrated part
of a bank's overall business. Swap positions often hedge loans
and other non-swap positions. Winding down or restructuring
swap-dealing activities could have a material impact on foreign
bank lending in this country. Customer agreements will be
required to be modified, possibly resulting in significant tax
consequences and possibly in litigation. These renegotiations
of agreements will lead to delays in affording customers access
to liquidity that is offered by foreign banks. The customers
will lose their ability to net and set off collateral and
payment obligations.
The IIB strongly supports H.R. 1838 as it would effectively
accord equal treatment to foreign banks. It also would
eliminate the significant negative impacts on capital, netting,
and risk management which would result from conducting
derivative trading through multiple U.S. entities. In its
current form, Section 716 will result in higher execution costs
for our customers.
The IIB also supports H.R. 2779 cosponsored by
Representatives Stivers and Fudge. H.R. 2779 makes clear that
many burdensome Title VII requirements do not apply to inter-
affiliate swaps. This is important because inter-affiliate
swaps promote execution flexibility for clients and superior
risk management by swap dealers.
At the same time, H.R. 2779 preserves necessary regulatory
oversight. Prudential regulators would continue through their
supervisory role to have oversight of these transactions and to
impose capital and other requirements as appropriate, both at
the holding company and the subsidiary levels.
The CFTC and the SEC as market regulators will continue to
have access to inter-affiliate transaction data. To the extent
that the Commissions uncover specific evasive conduct involving
inter-affiliate transactions, they would retain their authority
to address that conduct.
We believe that H.R. 2779 strikes the right balance by:
first, ensuring that the prudential supervisors and the market
regulators have the requisite tools to perform their regulatory
responsibilities; and second, ensuring that Dodd-Frank
objectives of reducing systemic risk and increasing
transparency are not undermined.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf
of the Institute of International Bankers. I would be happy to
answer any questions you might have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bailey can be found on page
44 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you.
Mr. Bernardo, welcome to the panel and to the committee.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHAWN BERNARDO, SENIOR MANAGING DIRECTOR, TULLETT
PREBON, ON BEHALF OF THE WHOLESALE MARKET BROKERS ASSOCIATION,
AMERICAS

Mr. Bernardo. Thank you.
My name is Shawn Bernardo. I am a senior managing director
for Tullett Prebon, a leading global inter-dealer broker of
over-the-counter financial products. I am also the chairman of
the Wholesale Market Brokers Association, Americas (WMBAA), an
independent industry body whose membership includes the largest
North American inter-dealer brokers.
I am testifying today on behalf of the WMBAA. Our trading
systems are the prototypes for swap execution facilities under
Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Chairman, we thank you and your colleagues,
Representatives Maloney, Meeks, and Hurt, for your leadership
in introducing H.R. 2586, the SEF Clarification Act. The WMBAA
supports the bipartisan effort to ensure the congressional
intent is followed in the SEF rulemaking process.
For example, before John Deere enters into a contract to
sell tractors to an Argentinean farm co-op, it generally finds
a hedge for the foreign exchange risk. That hedge is often
provided by a dealer firm or a bank that undertakes the balance
sheet risk knowing it can offset that exposure on one of the
hybrid platforms we operate.
So how is this done? Imagine a large room filled with long
desks not just in New York City but also in Kentucky, New
Jersey, and Texas. Each desk has a group of professionals with
several computer screens and telephone squawk boxes that
transmit prices to our customers. There are thousands of these
professionals in the United States who use a wide array of
trading technologies to meet the demands of the marketplace and
their customers.
It is what CFTC Commissioner Bart Chilton described in a
press interview as ``big dynamic operations, not just a couple
of guys in a back room with a phone.'' Each method we use is
geared to the specific dynamics of financial products we
broker. We call this range of training methods hybrid
brokerage.
Swap markets have unique characteristics. They are full of
institutional and not retail participants. There is a much
larger number of complex products compared to the highly
commoditized futures markets. And while the product range is
wider, the trading volume is quite variable. The most active
single-name credit default swap contracts trade a little over
20 times per day, and the majority trade once per day.
It is because of these unique trading and liquidity
characteristics of swaps that our firms develop the hybrid
brokerage methods I have described. In my 15 years in the
industry, I have seen many products transition from voice or
hybrid to electronic platforms as the liquidity increases. For
others, however, hybrid trading systems are necessary to create
the liquidity needed for businesses to adequately hedge risk.
Developing and operating hoses hybrid systems creates thousands
of American jobs.
The SEF provision of Dodd-Frank requires post-trade
reporting and promotes pre-trade transparency as an
aspirational goal. In fact, Dodd-Frank requires reporting to be
balanced against the impact on liquidity.
Today, the members of the WMBAA create active price
discovery by providing their platforms prepaid transparency
regardless of the method of trade execution. As registered
SEFs, WMBAA members will provide fully electronic reporting of
the transaction to the regulators and the swap data
repositories.
While my written testimony addresses the SEF rulemaking in
more detail, I would like to discuss one key issue this
morning.
Congress made clear in Dodd-Frank that SEFs may conduct
business using ``any means of interstate commerce.'' Congress'
words are clear: ``Any means of interstate commerce.'' And that
includes the full range of hybrid brokerage methods I have
described.
We are concerned with the CFTC's proposed SEF rules
restricting trading methods to only electronic central limit
order book or RFQ systems for non-block clear trades. This
approach is inconsistent with a plain reading of the statute
and its legislative history. Imagine if Apple were told by
Congress that they could sell their products through any means
of interstate commerce, but then a regulator told them that
they had to fire their sales associates, close their retail
stores, shut down their toll-free sales line, and customers
could only purchase Apple products online without human
interaction at apple.com. That would obviously be an
overreaching restriction on the clear statutory language.
Here, the CFTC is interpreting Dodd-Frank to say that for
many trades, SEFs can use any means of interstate consumers as
long as it is only purely electronic systems.
Getting the rules wrong will impact American businesses
that use swaps to hedge risk and better manage their capital
for growth and reinvestment into the economy. As Commissioner
Chilton said in a recent interview, ``It is important that we
don't mess up platforms that are currently working well.'' This
is a delicate balancing act.
Mr. Chairman, consideration and passage of the bipartisan
SEF Clarification Act will provide regulators with a clear
expression of Congress' intent to permit SEFs to use any means
of interstate commerce to execute swap transactions.
Thank you for your time today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bernardo can be found on
page 55 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I thank you and thank you for drawing
that picture for us of what the market actually looks like.
Ms. Boultwood is recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF BRENDA BOULTWOOD, CHIEF RISK OFFICER AND SENIOR
VICE PRESIDENT, CONSTELLATION ENERGY, ON BEHALF OF THE END-USER
COALITION

Ms. Boultwood. Good morning, Chairman Garrett, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the subcommittee. It is a
pleasure to appear before you this morning. My name is Brenda
Boultwood, and I serve as chief risk officer and senior vice
president of Constellation Energy.
On behalf of Constellation, and the Coalition of End-Users,
I am privileged to talk to you today about steps Congress
should take to fix three problems with the proposed regulations
implementing Dodd-Frank legislation: first, inter-affiliate
swaps should not be subjected to margin requirements in order
to transact; second, swap execution facility (SEF) rules should
not place end-users at a competitive disadvantage by limiting
our choice of counterparty options and modes of execution; and
third, we need a proper swap dealer definition and a de minimis
exception to ensure that end-users are not regulated as swap
dealers.
The End-User Coalition includes a diverse group of
companies that provide goods and services, including
agriculture, manufacturing, vehicles, electricity, and natural
gas. From the outset, our Coalition has supported greater
transparency, but we think end-users like us create jobs, not
systemic risk, and should not be further burdened by
regulations that Congress intended for financial dealers who
caused the crisis.
I have been involved in risk management for more than 25
years in a variety of settings from academia to financial
institutions to commercial entities and as a consultant. I
serve on the boards of the Committee of Chief Risk Officers,
and the Global Association of Risk Professionals, and I am a
member of the CFTC's Technology Advisory Committee.
Constellation Energy is a Fortune 200 company located in
Baltimore, Maryland, and is the largest competitive supplier of
electricity in the country, with more than 36,000 commercial
and industrial customers in 44 States. We are the largest due
to a variety of risk-management tools we employ to the benefit
of our customers. Physical energy markets are volatile and
unpredictable, but derivatives allow us to stabilize this
volatility. We pass these benefits on to our customers in the
form of low fixed prices for the energy they need to run their
businesses and power their homes.
Now, I would like to specifically address some of the
proposed pieces of legislation. First, we strongly support H.R.
2779, the Stivers-Fudge bill, because it recognizes that inter-
affiliate swaps do not create systemic risks and should not be
subject to burdensome margin costs. Like many other companies,
Constellation uses inter-affiliate swaps because it is more
efficient to manage our corporate risk in total, rather than on
an affiliate-by-affiliate basis. And we can get better prices
by buying our derivatives in bulk through one part of our
organization. Inter-affiliate swaps are used to allocate these
derivatives and are largely bookkeeping in nature and do not
create systemic risk.
I would also like to speak briefly in support of H.R. 2586,
the Swap Execution Facility Clarification Act. This measure
provides clarity for existing voice broker markets so that they
can qualify as SEFs. Preserving these markets is important as
voice brokers are often the primary means to facilitate
transactions for many illiquid products. Limiting the methods
market participants may use to execute trades may result in
unintended consequences, a reduced market liquidity, price
discovery, and access to markets that are simply not developed
enough to justify the cost of mandatory screen-based trading.
Congress intended for swap trading on SEFs to develop over
time in a transparent way that maximizes competition through
multiple methods of interstate commerce and consistent
regulation. That is why we support the goals of H.R. 2586,
which seek to ensure that end-users will continue to have a
variety of options for hedging their risks.
Finally, legislation will soon be introduced to fix the
swap dealer definition. A proper definition of swap dealer is
crucial to ensure that burdensome requirements, such as
mandatory margin, capital, and clearing are not improperly
forced upon non-financial end-users. The de minimis exception
much be large enough that it does not capture firms like ours
that had nothing to do with the financial crisis. We would
never rise to the level of too-big-to-fail and are not
interconnected to the broader market in a way that would create
systemic risk.
The CFTC's proposed exemptions are too narrow and would
catch many other end-users in swap dealer rules, like margin,
clearing, real-time reporting, and capital requirements. Even
the Administration's proposal and the testimony of regulatory
officials during the Dodd-Frank legislative process spoke of
regulating financial institutions, not energy providers or end-
users like ourselves.
In conclusion, I want to thank Chairman Garrett, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the subcommittee for convening
this hearing. Ensuring the CFTC follows congressional intent is
critically important to the entire end-user community. However,
if legislation is not passed to clarify the statute's intent,
end-users risk being captured as swap dealers, and the end-user
exemptions included in the bill will be null and void. It is
important to remember that end-users rely on derivatives to
reduce risk, bring certainty and stability to our businesses,
and ultimately to benefit our customers. We create jobs, not
systemic risk, and we should not be further burdened by
regulations Congress intended for financial dealers. Thank for
your time, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Boultwood can be found on
page 78 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Cawley, you are recognized and welcome to the
committee.

STATEMENT OF JAMES CAWLEY, CEO, JAVELIN CAPITAL MARKETS, LLC

Mr. Cawley. Thank you. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the subcommittee, my name is James
Cawley. I am chief executive officer of Javelin Capital
Markets, an electronic execution venue of OTC derivatives that
will register as a swaps execution facility under the Dodd-
Frank Act.
I am also here today to represent the interest of the Swaps
Derivatives Market Association (SDMA), which is comprised of
several independent derivatives dealers and clearing brokers,
some of whom are the largest in the world.
Thank you for inviting me here today to testify. Let me
first address H.R. 1838, that calls for repeal of Section 716
of the Dodd-Frank Act. Section 716 requires that the U.S.
Government can no longer bail out swap dealers that do not hold
deposits from the American public.
The SDMA respectfully opposes H.R. 1838 because it would
allow for future bailouts of Wall Street by Main Street. We
oppose 1838 because it is not the role of government to
intervene in private business by picking winners or losers.
Government bailouts of private business run contrary to the
fundamental tenants of free enterprise in this country. Swap
dealers, like all other private businesses, must be allowed to
succeed or fail on their own merits. Swap dealers serve no
prudential role to the economy. To be sure, as we have seen
from the financial crisis of 2008, systemic risk borne at the
bilateral construct of an uncleared swap increases the systemic
risk of these firms. But the swap-clearing mandate under Dodd-
Frank substantially mitigates such risk, and thus, in the
future, these firms will be allowed to fail without threatening
our economy.
We oppose 1838 because of the moral hazard implications.
For swap traders to know that somehow their firms and their
jobs would be protected by the U.S. taxpayer would only
encourage further high-risk behavior and drastically increase
the likelihood of another bailout.
Lastly, the SDMA opposes such a bill because even if the
U.S. taxpayer wanted to bail out Wall Street it simply can't
afford it. With budget deficits running close to 100 percent of
GDP, the U.S. taxpayer doesn't have the funds. Moreover, one
need only look to the paralyzed economies of Ireland, Portugal,
and Greece to appreciate the ills of taking bailouts a bridge
too far. As unfortunate as it is, bad actors in finance should
be rewarded as bad actors in other industries, not with
bailouts but with bankruptcy.
With regard to the Swap Execution Clarification Act that
calls for an override of various pre-trade transparency
provisions under the Dodd-Frank Act, the SDMA respectfully
opposes that, too. To not require SEFs to show live firm bids
and offers to the entire market so that participants can
transact on them would dangerously limit fair dealing, restrict
competition, and increase systemic risk.
As empirical evidence and academic research show, the
dissemination of live actionable prices to all market
participants simultaneously increases market integrity,
promotes a level playing field, and increases liquidity. Fair
and open markets attract more dealers and buy-side
participants, which, in turn, foster even greater liquidity. As
evidenced by the financial crisis of 2008, the credit default
swap and interest rate swap markets can never have enough
liquidity.
The SDMA opposes H.R. 2586 because it would increase
transaction costs. With regard to transaction costs in the swap
markets today, it is estimated that market participants pay $50
billion annually. By fostering greater pre- and post-trade
transparency, it is estimated that such transaction costs would
fall by 30 percent, or $15 billion, annually in the first few
years after Dodd-Frank. That is $15 billion that corporations
can use on their own balance sheets to invest in research and
development or hire more American workers. That is $15 billion
that loan portfolios can pass back to consumers in the form of
cheaper small business loans or mortgages for American
families. To be clear, the current SEF rules promote
transparency fair dealing and lower transaction costs. The SEC
and the CFTC have mindfully permitted different execution
methods, such as exchange-like anonymous central limit order
books and requests for quote methodologies.
Moreover the Commissions do not restrict voice hybrid
broking methodologies; they merely require that they operate
with certain pre-trade transparency precepts. The Commissions
have wisely allowed the markets to decide which method works
best in each market context. The SDMA, too, has several voice
brokering constituent firms, with many hundreds, if not
thousands, of voice brokers. And after our careful review, we
support the Dodd-Frank Act as passed.
To be sure, to change the rules now would be expensive to
roll back. Clearinghouses dealers, buy-side, and trading venues
have already invested hundreds of millions of dollars in
anticipation of such rules. To reverse these rules now would be
costly, inhibit capital formation, cost jobs, and sacrifice
economic growth.
To conclude, the SDMA calls on the members of this
subcommittee to forego proposed bills H.R. 1838 and 2586 and
instead request an immediate finalization of clearing,
execution, and trade reporting rules by the regulators. As we
enter now our second global financial crisis in 3 years, we
should be mindful that the swap markets are no better protected
today than they were back in 2008. The sooner we implement
Dodd-Frank, the safer the American economy will be. I thank you
for your time. And I am glad to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cawley can be found on page
83 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Cawley.
Mr. Mason, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome to
the panel.

STATEMENT OF KENT MASON, DAVIS & HARMAN LLP, ON BEHALF OF THE
AMERICAN BENEFITS COUNCIL AND THE COMMITTEE ON INVESTMENT OF
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT ASSETS

Mr. Mason. Thank you.
My name is Kent Mason. I am a partner in the law firm of
Davis & Harman. I have been working in the pension area for
almost 30 years. And I can assure you that time flies in the
pension area.
I am testifying today on behalf of the American Benefits
Council and the Committee on Investment of Employee Benefit
Assets. Those two organizations together represent the vast
majority of this country's private retirement plans. I want to
thank you very much for holding this hearing and for inviting
us to testify.
ERISA pension plans use swaps to manage investment risk and
liability risk. Without swaps, pension funding obligations for
companies would become much more volatile. That volatility
would have two main effects: one, it would undermine the
security of employees retirement benefits; and two, it would
cause the company sponsoring these plans to have to reserve in
the aggregate billions of additional dollars to hold for
funding obligations. Those reserves would divert assets away
from job creation and investments in the economy.
I am going to focus today on three issues: one, the
business conduct standards, which are our highest priority;
two, the SEF rules; and three, the margin rules. I am going to
start with the business conduct rules. In the business conduct
issue, we have three issues there. The first is the fiduciary
issue, as Mr. Canseco explained better than I am going to here.
Under the business conduct rule, proposed business conduct
rules, a swap dealer has the obligation to review the
qualifications of a plan's advisor. That review, under current
ERISA law would make the swap dealer a fiduciary. As a
fiduciary, the swap dealer could not enter into a swap with a
plan; it would be a prohibited transaction, and thus, all swaps
with plans would have to cease. The answer here is actually
very straightforward. We need a simple rule that says no action
required by the business conduct standards will make a swap
dealer a fiduciary. That is exactly what H.R. 3045 would do,
and we support it.
The second issue, the advisor issue, under Dodd-Frank, if a
swap dealer acts as an advisor to a special entity, such as a
retirement plan, the swap dealer must act in the best interest
of that special entity. Unfortunately, the CFTC's proposed
regulations would define advisors so broadly that all swap
dealers would be required to be advisors. This sets up an
unworkable conflict of interest. That would mean that swap
dealers would be required to act in the best interest of
themselves, do their fiduciary duty to their shareholders, and
in the best interest of their counterpart. That is unworkable.
If that were to hold, again, all swaps with plans would cease.
Again, H.R. 3045 addresses this very well by removing ERISA
plans from the definition of a special entity.
The third issue under the business conduct rules is what I
call the dealer veto issue. Under the proposed regulations, the
swap dealer would have the ability to veto the advisor of a
special entity, such as a pension plan, based on the swap
dealers opinion of the advisor's qualifications. This would
give the swap dealer enormous leverage over the plan and over
the advisor.
Again, H.R. 3045 would deal with this very effectively by
removing ERISA plans from the definition of a special entity
and remove this counterproductive veto power, which hurts plans
rather than products them.
The SEF bill, the CFTC's proposed rules would raise costs
very substantially for all counterparties, including ERISA
plans. For example, by requiring that plans and other
counterparties expose at least five RFQs to other market
participants--this would cause the market to know too much
about a trade before it happens and sort of mean that the
ultimate counterparty would have much more trouble hedging that
trade after it happens. That will obviously--the ultimate
counterparty will pass on that cost to the plan or other end-
user, raising costs significantly.
H.R. 2586 would solve this problem and the other issues
arising under the SEF rules.
Lastly, very quickly, I just want to mention the margin
requirements. The proposed margin requirements issued by the
CFTC and the prudential regulators would treat ERISA plans as
high-risk financial end-users and would classify them in the
same category as hedge funds, imposing very onerous margin
requirements. This is simply a mistake and a very costly one.
ERISA plans are among the safest counterparties. We need
corrective legislation. I thank you for your time, and I would
be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mason can be found on page
86 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Mason.
Mr. Voldstad, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome
to the committee.

STATEMENT OF CONRAD VOLDSTAD, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
INTERNATIONAL SWAPS AND DERIVATIVES ASSOCIATION

Mr. Voldstad. Thank you, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Conrad Voldstad. I am CEO of the International
Swaps and Derivatives Association, a 25-year old institution
that has over 800 members in over 50 countries, including in
our membership over 60 government and supranational bodies.
I myself started in the derivatives business back in 1983
before ISDA was around. I managed global swaps and fixed-income
operations for two large American firms, helped unwind long-
term capital, and later managed my own hedge fund.
In my brief testimony today, I will briefly comment on H.R.
3045. We agreed both with Congressman Canseco's statement and
Mr. Mason's testimony. We support this bill because it would
correct an unintended consequence of the Dodd-Frank Act, one
that would preclude retirement plans from using derivatives to
manage their assets and liabilities.
Regarding the other bills, H.R. 2586 would rectify a number
of the serious issues related in particular to the CFTC's
proposals for how swap execution facilities, or SEFs, must
operate. We strongly support its passage.
OTC interest rate and credit default swaps, the products
that will be the first to be executed on SEFs, are the most
common and liquid products with very competitive pricing.
However, while they are common and liquid, they trade very
infrequently, and they trade in very large size. The interest
rate swap market in particular is similar to the U.S.
Government bond market, where many investors rely on dealer
prices for certain types of trades. U.S. Government bond
investors have the ability to execute electronically or through
market makers. They have a choice of venues in which to trade.
It appears the CFTC would like to reduce the choice of end-
users. They would do so by specifying that SEFs require the
requests-for-quotes process to include at least five market
participants. What dealer will put capital at risk in very
large size if at least four others see the trade? The result
will be reduced liquidity and higher prices for end-users.
We also believe that end-users would have to execute large
trades in a piecemeal fashion, taking execution risks they do
not have to take today.
It is interesting to see that the SEC does not require RFQs
to be sent to more than one participant and has not reduced
choice of execution to the extent the CFTC has.
It is very important to note that unlike the requirements
for clearing and trade repositories, SEF execution is not an
element of Dodd-Frank that reduces systemic risk. It does not
touch the AIG-type issues that cause losses in the financial
markets. It is a structural change that should, in my opinion,
be subject to a more careful cost-benefit analysis and safety
and soundness provisions. This, of course, has not been done.
With respect to H.R. 2779, ISDA also believes that inter-
affiliate swaps play an important part in the risk-management
practices of end-users and dealer firms. For a variety of
reasons, they may choose to book transactions in a centralized
risk-management subsidiary and then book that risk internally
to another subsidiary via inter-affiliate transactions. Dealer
firms of course might do the opposite, have a local entity be
the booking firm and manage the risk centrally.
We do not believe that transactions within a corporate
family should be subject to Dodd-Frank clearing and execution
requirements. Treating inter-affiliate transactions as if they
are third-party swaps will not reduce risk to the financial
system. They will not increase transparency in a meaningful
way, nor will they improve market integrity.
My last subject will be H.R. 1838, which would repeal
Section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Act. We see four issues
associated with Section 716. First, dealers will deal through
one entity for one set of products and through a second entity
for another set of products. As a result, netting benefits
could be lost and risk would increase throughout the system.
Second, dealers in jurisdictions without a 716 requirement
will have an advantage relative to their U.S. peers that may
result in a loss of jobs and business in the United States.
Third, the non-bank subsidiary required by Section 716 will
need to be separately capitalized. These capital requirements
will be greater than the capital savings at the bank that will
result from the 716 pushout. This extra capital and the capital
needed to offset lost netting benefits would be far better used
to create jobs and economic growth in the United States.
Finally, the non-bank companies set up as a result of 716
will have to duplicate functions that are also carried out in
the bank. This, of course, will create costs that will be
passed on to derivative users. What Section 716 will ultimately
do is put risk into an entity that is owned by the same parent
that owns the bank that would otherwise house the business. Is
risk in the financial system reduced at all? Will the risk be
as transparent if it is moved from a bank to a bank affiliate?
And more importantly, might it move to entirely different non-
bank entities?
This concludes my testimony. ISDA appreciates the
opportunity to testify on these important bills. And I look
forward to answering any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Voldstad can be found on
page 99 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And likewise, Mr. Voldstad, thank you for
your testimony.
Since everyone here said they look forward to our
questioning, let's go to some questioning.
I will begin with my questioning.
I will throw this out, I guess, to Mr. Cawley for a brief
answer, and then maybe I will throw it out to Ms. Boultwood to
follow up on an answer, same sort of thing.
Mr. Cawley, your testimony was it might be a little
different with regard to how things would play out as far as
whether everything would be forced onto a central order book or
not. And even if it was not all forced on there, whether or
not--since your testimony seemed to indicate that there would
be some flexibility out there whether--the question that comes
up in my mind is whether, even if there is some flexibility
there, whether you still would have to first go to a central
order book to check that, so to speak, for the pricing over
there. If it were the case that everything had to go there,
then some of us would disagree that that was the intention of
Congress, that Congress was not intending to micromanage the
operation of the markets in that place. And even if it is not,
the effect of the rules, that everything goes there per se, but
things have to go there indirectly as far as to having to at
least check the central order book, still I would say that is
not the intention of Congress. I would like your comments on
that.
And Ms. Boultwood, I would like your comments on that as
well.
Before that, though, I will just share with you what some
other folks who are not on the panel, from the ICI in general,
wrote in support of the legislation, the SEF legislation. I am
not going to read all of it, but they say, the appropriate
regulation of SEFs will be of critical importance to the
success of Title VII of regulation rulemaking. ICI believes
that the proposed trading restrictions and the Commission SEFs
related proposals--the current rules, which you say, let go
into affect--do not strike the right balance of proposed
restrictions, enhance transparency at the expense of liquidity
and efficient pricing, which could discourage the use of SEFs.
It jumps down and says to another piece of it, the fund is
required to go to five swap dealers prior to executing swap
transactions; to that point, it would likely suffer from
information leakage and signaling, so they have concerns there.
Just two other ones really quick, from Chatham Financial.
These are advisors to the end-user folks, right? Again, they
speak in general support of the legislation that we are talking
about, the Swap Execution Facility Clarification Act. Here is
the interesting--in a comment letter to regulators, the
Coalition for Derivatives End-Users highlighted the
communicating of the details of these language transactions to
more than one or two parties could adversely affect end-users'
ability to execute trade efficiency. The Coalition further
emphasized that this would frustrate rather than fulfill the
goals of promoting SEF usage; it could work against the goals
of price transparency and price efficiency, right?
Then they go on, interesting also; it says the New Democrat
Coalition expressed similar concerns in its letter to
regulators. They noted that Congress also recognized, however,
that there is not always sufficient liquidity in exchanges in
support of all types of swaps. So you have those people who
sort of side with where we are standing on this.
And then last would be, well, last but not least,
BlackRock--and we are all familiar with them--Asset Management
fully supports the objectives of the legislation. We believe
the Swap Execution Facility Clarification Act is consistent
with these objectives as put in Dodd-Frank but not as--I am
paraphrasing them--as being implemented.
So I will give you just quick time, Mr. Cawley, because my
time is limited, and then Ms. Boultwood on this.
Mr. Cawley. So by our read, Mr. Chairman, of the rules as
proposed, we see two or three different methods, so central
limit order books, as you probably know, allow customers to see
live real-time prices, bids and orders, bids and offers,
exchange like.
Chairman Garrett. But would it have to go--my time is
limited.
Mr. Cawley. No, it would not.
Chairman Garrett. But would it have to go there first for a
check?
Mr. Cawley. By our read, the rules offer either the choice
of going to a central limit order book or to go to an RFQ. Now,
voice hybrid brokering works today, as Shawn Bernardo talked
about, very well in the interdealer markets today. But one
thing that also works well today in those voice hybrid markets
is the fact that it itself is a central limit order book.
Dealers today trade with each other using a wholesale central
limit order book. They do so with the assistance of voice when
the market is not as liquid as it might be. With interest rate
swaps, they are highly liquid.
Chairman Garrett. That I understand. Ms. Boultwood, then?
Ms. Boultwood. I will respond in two ways: one is just
practical concerns; and the other is, I guess, more conceptual.
In our business, hedging output from generation plants as well
as supply that we provide around the country, there are many
locations and types of products that we transact in for hedging
purposes that either you have a very limited number of market
participants, you may not get to five, for example, or the
volumes are very low in those transactions. So the point is,
for physical transactions where you are hedging financially,
your mode of communication with parties on the other side of
the transaction is very critical. You can't--you don't want to
restrict those modes of communication.
And then second, and more conceptual I think, aligned with
ICI and Chatham is that this is about interstate commerce and
the importance of not having rules and having legislation that
would prohibit certain types of interstate commerce just is
very important. And that is why your legislation is critical
and provides clarity that isn't being provided by the current
set of rules.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. I appreciate both of your
testimonies. The ranking member is recognized.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cawley, section 716 of Dodd-Frank requires banks that
have access to Federal assistance, such as deposit insurance
and access to the discount window, to push out their
derivatives business subject to some exceptions. Many of the
witnesses here likely think that this proposal is unworkable or
impossible to implement. I guess I can conclude from your
testimony that you don't believe that it is necessary to repeal
section 716, or do you think that the industry can collaborate
with regulators to make it workable?
And in answering that--and this may be a little bit
unfair--our first witness, Mr. Bailey, comes from a company
that received about a billion dollars in bailout from the
discount window. Are you saying that the American taxpayers
should not be responsible for bailing out under the same kind
of circumstances that they received their bailout? Please help
me understand this.
Mr. Cawley. That is exactly what we are saying. We are
saying that swap dealers serve no prudential need in the
economy, and notwithstanding the fact that a bailout was
necessary because of the bilateral nature of the swaps
contract--and we saw that with AIG, and we saw that then with
TARP, and we saw that then with subsidies of guaranteeing bonds
issued by various broker-dealers. That is not a good--although
we got through that, it is not a good way to do business.
Fundamentally it is not, from the SDMA standpoint and from
several other standpoints in the American public. Swap dealers
should be treated the same way as any other business, whether
it is Javelin Capital Markets or a restaurant on the corner.
You live and die by the decisions that you make, and if the
collection of decisions that you make are so catastrophic that
it results in the demise of the company, that is really
unfortunate, but so be it. And that is how the capitalist
system works.
So what 716 asks for is merely that for those institutions
who are swap dealers that don't hold deposits, there is really
no prudential need to protect them, and we really need to get
away from protecting entities or giving them special status
when they really serve no prudential need in the economy.
Banks, to the extent that they allow the flow of funds to
flow through our economy, have a prudential or serve a
prudential need within the economy. That being said, it is well
established that with that prudential responsibility comes
regulation, that they themselves can't get over their skis and
bring the economy to its knees.
When we look back at 2008, Congresswoman, I think it is
fair to say we came very close to the cash machines not working
on Main Street, and it scared a lot of us on Wall Street,
because it was getting out of control. We can't go back there
again, and one only needs to look across the Atlantic to see
what is happening with the paralyzed economies with Ireland,
Greece, and Portugal. We can't bail them out. Dexia last week
was the first bank victim of the financial crisis, part 2. It
was liquidated. It has now become the charge of the Belgian and
French taxpayer. So what you see is the second notion, which is
that the U.S. taxpayer simply can't afford it. We can't afford
to bail out companies that serve no prudential interest.
Dodd-Frank goes to solving this issue by bringing in
clearing. What it does is, it says something very, very simple.
It says if you are going to trade swaps, they are going to
trade in a clearinghouse. So if you go down, if you file for
bankruptcy, you are not going to pull four or five firms with
it.
Back in the late 1980s, when I was in college in
Philadelphia, I remember one day I had an interview at a
company called Drexel Burnham, and my interview was scheduled
for the day after they filed for bankruptcy. It was unfortunate
for me. It was also unfortunate mostly for the workers of
Drexel and for the bondholders and shareholders of Drexel, but
by Friday of that week; the market had moved on. It was
unfortunate that Drexel saw its own demise, but it didn't
create a systemic risk in the system. And this was something
that was highlighted that is unique to derivatives, which is
the bilateral nature of a swap. If AIG was allowed to go down,
they had written, I believe, $300 billion of protection that
they had taken no reserve against. So it is necessary that we
recognize that today, and it is necessary that we don't
encourage it in the future.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. You make a very good case.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Bailey. May I respond?
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentlelady. The gentleman
from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bailey. I beg your pardon; may I respond?
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As one who
participated in the legislative process for Dodd-Frank and
served on the conference committee, I was consistently told
that the whole reason for being for the legislation was to
reduce and minimize systemic risk. And now in the testimony
that I hear today, if I understood properly, Mr. Voldstad, you
testified that, ``Some parts of the proposed regulatory
application of this legislation, however, work against the goal
of systemic risk reduction.''
Mr. Mason, I believe in your testimony you said, ``Treating
ERISA plans as high-risk financial end-users will actually
create risk rather than reduce it, thereby adversely affecting
plan participants.''
Ms. Boultwood, I believe I heard you say, ``We create jobs,
not systemic risk. There may be others who for whatever reason
disagree with that assessment.''
So my first question is, I would really like, Mr. Voldstad,
for you to elaborate on how the aspects of Dodd-Frank that we
are discussing today actually could work against the goal of
systemic risk reduction.
Mr. Voldstad. Thank you, Congressman. Number one, ISDA is
very much in favor of safety and efficiency of the markets in
which we operate or our members operate, and I think there has
been an awful lot of progress. The main things that actually
improve the safety and soundness of the markets that are in
Dodd-Frank relate to clearing and the trade repositories. Trade
repositories have been set up largely through our guidance, and
are being set up in the asset classes that haven't been done.
Clearing is a very good process. It does reduce systemic risk.
Our issues relate to the processes where through a
proliferation of clearinghouses, you start introducing risk in
the clearinghouses themselves. You also find that as you move
transactions into clearinghouses, you often find that those
transactions themselves were hedging other transactions which
can't be cleared and which will now create risk. I mentioned in
my oral testimony that as you push certain swap activities into
a 716 subsidiary, you will also reduce netting benefits. I
should point out--
Mr. Hensarling. I am sorry, let me interrupt. My time is
limited here.
I would like to move to Mr. Mason and get your views. I am
particularly concerned, at least the latest figures I have seen
on the PBGC say that we have a debt of $23.03 billion, and we
have a potential exposure from underfunding of plan sponsors of
perhaps $190 billion. So when one tells me that a potential
interpretation of Dodd-Frank could create even greater risk
with ERISA plans, you certainly get my attention. Could you
elaborate, please?
Mr. Mason. Absolutely. Because of the way the funding rules
work, it is absolutely essential that pension plans be able to
use swaps to manage risk, such as investment risk, but
primarily interest rate risk. I was sitting with someone
recently who said that an interest rate swing in 2009 created
for them almost overnight a $2 billion additional liability,
and that was almost overnight, and the only way they can
effectively manage that possibility is through the use of
swaps. Swaps are a very effective tool to say, I can prevent
that sudden emergence of $2 billion of liability. Without
swaps, we couldn't do it. And the proposed business conduct
regulations would take swaps out of the hands of the pension
plans and expose them to that sort of enormous volatility and
risk, so this is a creation of risk. This is not a diminution.
Mr. Hensarling. In the very brief time I have remaining, I
am curious about what level of concern people on the panel have
regarding if the SEC and the CFTC do not harmonize their SEF
rules and whether one sees any particular harmonization between
U.S. rules and international rules, and what impact could that
have on moving these swaps offshore. Anyone who would care to--
Mr. Bernardo. I think if the SEC and the CFTC don't
harmonize their rules, just to give you a real-world
experience, you could have a credit default swap desk in our
corporate area, where a single broker who brokers both credit
default swaps and indices following, two sets of rules. So he
could be doing a trade, trying to follow the rules for indices
of the CFTC and doing a single-name credit default swap
following rules of the SEC. So it is quite burdensome.
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
Chairman Garrett. We are going now to the gentleman from
Massachusetts, but before--just to indicate to the committee,
after you, we are going to take a 10-minute recess. We have 2
votes on the Floor, so we can all go and vote for the 15-minute
vote, and the 5-minute vote, and then come back and reconvene,
so that gives the panel a 10-minute recess as well.
The gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the chairman and the ranking member for
holding this hearing. I also want to thank the witnesses for
coming before us and helping us with this very important issue.
I would like to talk about H.R. 3045, which we were just
speaking of, Mr. Mason was, regarding the ERISA plans. I am a
former trustee of a union ERISA plan for the ironworkers, and I
understand--first of all, the mission of preserving those
resources in retirement for the beneficiaries, in this case
ironworkers, is more conservative--with a lowercase ``c''--with
the eye towards steady growth, and lack of risk. And I don't
dispute the appeal and the effectiveness of the use of some
swaps in terms of balancing risk within the plan, especially
with respect to interest rate swaps, currency swaps where the
underlying actually changes hands, there's no leverage there,
but you have to admit with the AIG example back in 2008, we had
many ERISA plans that had billions of dollars in credit default
swaps, in more speculative swaps that, but for the taxpayers'
rescue and pumping $700 billion to satisfy the calls of Goldman
Sachs and a lot of these pension funds, there would have been
some--a fair number of ERISA plans that would have been put at
risk, possibly even failed because the swaps, the counterparty
there, AIG, would not have been able to meet the obligations,
so there would have been some failure.
Apart from the swaps that you have talked about, interest
rate swaps, I guess what we are getting at, and I think what
the goal of Dodd-Frank was, is to get away from the speculative
swap activity that might create some risk within those plans
and really provide a greater stability within those plans.
Is there a balance that we could strike here that would
lend the advantages that interest rate swaps for your example
provide, yet stay away from some of the more speculative
activities that unfortunately some pension funds--and you have
folks who, like me, when I was an ironworker, you would go to a
couple of meetings a month as a trustee and you would be asked
to vote on investment strategy and things like that. So I am
sure there are a lot of smaller ERISA pension funds where
perhaps all the trustees are not fully up to speed on complex
derivatives and the different type of swap arrangements.
Mr. Mason. I think, really, I find myself really agreeing
with much of what you just said. The overwhelming portion of
swaps by pension plans are hedges. They are not speculative.
Interest rate hedging, currency hedging, just as you mentioned,
some equity hedging. Credit default swaps have historically not
been a major element. And in our discussions with regulators,
with the legislators during Dodd-Frank, we have never defended
the use of widespread credit default swaps.
What we have done, for example--last spring or the spring
when Dodd-Frank was being considered--was come in to say, for
example, on the major swap participant definition, we want
exemptions when we are hedging. When we are speculating, we are
not looking for that same kind of protection.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Mason. So I think we have common ground, and I guess
what we are saying here today is, let's not throw out the vast
majority of sound swaps by these rules, which is what these
rules would do.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Mason. And let's look for other tools to be effective
in sort of accomplishing the objectives, the worthy objectives
that you just articulated. So I don't think there is a lot of
space here.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Mason, to your point, I could see where the
steelworkers' pension fund might want to enter into some type
of commodity swap dealing with the price of steel, because that
is going to affect their work hours, contributions in there,
the health of their plan in general. They may want to balance
that off with a swap so that it doesn't adversely affect the
pension fund. So I certainly understand that instance. But
there were some cases where pension funds got involved in swaps
where it was completely gratuitous, it was real estate halfway
across the country, there was no real physical connection,
collateral connection between the--it wasn't a hedge is what I
am saying; it was more gratuitous or speculative. And, I just
think it might help us greatly if we could get away from that
type of swap activity.
Mr. Mason. And I think we would love to sort of follow up
afterwards because our objective here is to be able to hedge
our risk, and there may be some minuscule sort of speculation,
but I think we should talk about it in terms of what we can do
together to preserve our ability to hedge without crossing
lines, and we look forward to that discussion.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back. We are going
to reconvene at exactly 20 minutes of--that will give us enough
time to go over, vote, and come back, and take a break. So we
will see you at 20 of.
[recess]
Chairman Garrett. We are pretty close to 20 of. The
committee reconvenes, and I think we are ready for the next
series of questions from the gentleman from Arizona, and he is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, proving once again
you will just let anyone ask questions here.
Mr. Bailey, one of the questions I have been somewhat
interested in is the threat of sort of a regulatory arbitrage
around the world. I know you are not necessarily speaking for
Barclays, but that does provide you quite a world view and
expertise. How much of a threat are we in if we made no
changes, if we left the Dodd-Frank law as it is; that I wake up
one day and someone like Barclays is moving employees or their
trading to London or Singapore or somewhere else around the
world? And I would love also some insight from everyone else on
the panel on that.
Mr. Bailey. Thank you. I think in relation to the global
harmonization point, we do think it is terribly important that
in certain particular regards, the regulators across the world
land in more or less--and it doesn't have to be exactly the
same--the same as to particular facets of the legislation that
is being adopted globally. In one respect, I think we think
that clearing is likely to be a fairly universal and reasonably
harmonized activity globally, provided there is mutual
recognition of clearinghouses by the respective regulators
globally, and so that aspect of it, I think will likely be all
right.
The issue around execution styles and execution venues and
what the European MiFID regulations will eventually require in
terms of the protocols for derivative trading is still somewhat
unknown. We do expect some information from the European Union,
I think next week, which will give us more definition as to
what their intentions are in that regard. But we really would
depend on where those liquidity pools go, which in turn I think
depends largely on where our customers go. And if customers
have a preference for transacting on a certain location or
certain environment, then that is where we would want to be
reciprocating with our own liquidity in order to service the
needs of our customers.
I actually think one has to recognize that there are many
products that--where the underlying elements are traded in the
United States, will remain traded in the United States,
particularly so in credit products and certain other interest
rate products and commodities. It actually seems unlikely that
there would be a massive exodus from our trading population out
of the United States. But one has to respect that there are
other markets, like FX, where it is very much a key stroke, it
is a click of a button that will take your transaction almost
anywhere you want to trade it in the world, and so I think we
would--
Mr. Schweikert. Forgive me, but the 5 minutes goes by very,
very fast when we are doing some of these. Our concern for us
as policymakers often is how far ahead of the curve we are. Mr.
Cawley?
Mr. Cawley. Yes.
Mr. Schweikert. Your specialty is you actually provide a
platform?
Mr. Cawley. Yes.
Mr. Schweikert. From what you are seeing around the world,
are we coming in to--is the world sort of heading towards a
common regulatory scheme?
Mr. Cawley. Yes, from what we see. And Mr. Bailey is
totally correct, there is definitely a global consensus that
clearing is good, and execution then is up to debate as to how
products trade. The notion that--and we agree with Mr. Bailey's
thought that the domestics, certainly credit default swaps
trading U.S. credits would stay here, and dollar credits would
stay here as well for interest rate swaps. So, investors look
for good execution. They also look to trade in fair markets
where they know that they are going to--
Mr. Schweikert. One of my concerns is I have actually seen
a number of articles talking about the hunger of some of the
Singapore Exchange to try to find a regulatory edge, and very
stable, so I am constantly concerned that we are going to see
that regulatory arbitrage.
My last 30 seconds, is it Mr. Mason, forgive me, I am not
wearing my glasses so I can't even read something that is a
little esoteric, but I am trying to get my head around it.
Would a pension plan ever do a very custom hedge--and I was
actually thinking before the previous discussion with our
friend from Massachusetts--I am in a steelworkers' union and in
our pension plan, we actually take some ownership as part of
our salary negotiations. Would a pension plan do a custom hedge
on default of that particular entity?
Mr. Mason. The defaults, default swaps are really the
exception in our world. In terms of your question, are there
customized swaps in our world? Absolutely, because actually the
interest rate swaps, the currency swaps, the equity swaps are
all very customized.
Mr. Schweikert. But my fear is with the way the rules are
working, if you are doing something with that level of
customization, is the platform we are heading towards or the
requirements, is that going to make it much more difficult to
do those highly customized swaps?
Mr. Mason. No. I think--and this is something we are
working a tremendous amount with the agencies on because we are
completely on board with sort of the clearing structure. But a
lot of the clearing structure, the sort of customization, is
inconsistent with the fact that every pension plan has very
different demographics, and you need to coordinate with the
precise demographics to create the right hedge, and so we are--
I am sorry.
Mr. Schweikert. I hope you will forgive me. I am just way
over my time. Thank you for your tolerance, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. Sure. The gentlelady from New York is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. I regret that I had a conflict
with another hearing. I would like to ask a question that is
affecting really the district I represent, the fact that the
SEC rule and the CFTC rule have come out different. And I would
like to in a general sense ask what is it about the SEC rule
that is better or worse, in your opinion, and what is it about
the CFTC rule--compare the two rules and what is better and
worse. And I guess, Mr. Voldstad, since you are the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association, can you
explain what it will mean for brokers who are engaged in
business in the equities market and in the commodities market
to have two different sets of rules for swap execution
facilities? And then, if people could comment on the two rules,
and what it means to commerce in the industry competitiveness.
Mr. Voldstad. I will start, I think, just by comparing the
two rules. We talked before about the RFQ process that the CFTC
has, and they say that any request for a ``transaction'' has to
be put in front of five participants. The SEC does not require
that. They are not out to change significantly the structure of
the marketplace. And Mr. Bernardo said earlier that the CFTC
will apply to credit default swap indices and the SEC will
apply to single-name reference entities. So if you are a
dealer, you will have to transact your single-name default
swaps under one set of rules, and you will then have to use--
then if you are hedging through an index, you will have to do
that through another set of rules. And you will also have
different reporting requirements, and this is very important.
The SEC has pretty reasonable reporting requirements that can
go out as long as essentially 20-some-odd hours, whereas the
CFTC will require near instantaneous reporting requirements,
except if it is a block. Then you will have a 15-minute delay,
but the block thresholds are very, very high in the CFTC rules,
so the SEC rules look quite a bit more reasonable from that
standpoint. We don't yet know how the SEC will apply rules with
respect to equity derivatives, but I would imagine that they
will be a bit more reasonable than what we have seen from the
CFTC.
Mrs. Maloney. It sounds complicated. Does anyone else want
to--
Mr. Bernardo. Just to add on to that, the SEC rules are
much more flexible as far as the execution of these trades.
They allow for voice, electronic, and hybrid means of
execution. They allow for the wholesale market brokers and my
competitors to be innovative and come up with new ways to trade
certain products, whether it be a matching engine or an auction
platform. The CFTC rules are really based off the futures
market, and they are relying on an exchange model that doesn't
necessarily work in all the products that we are looking to
regulate.
Mrs. Maloney. Just getting to voice, so the SEC allows
voice and the CFTC does not allow voice; is that correct?
Mr. Bernardo. That is correct. To tie that back actually to
what the Congressman was asking before, even in Europe, the
rules are much, much less flexible--or much, much more flexible
on the modes of execution. They are not dictating how trades
should happen. They are allowing for the market to have the
ability to trade electronically, via voice or hybrid. Our
companies--
Mrs. Maloney. Now, NASDAQ trades in voice, right?
Mr. Bernardo. NASDAQ, they have voice brokers, but yes.
Mrs. Maloney. Can anyone tell me any reason why you
shouldn't have voice? I, for one, like talking to people when I
am making decisions.
Mr. Cawley. Congresswoman, maybe I can help. James Cawley
from the SDMA. We, too, have several firms who have voice
brokers who operate quite well today in the City and State of
New York. By our read of the CFTC rules, we do not see that
they restrict voice hybrid trading. They merely request that
trades occur on a screen, on a hybrid basis with voice, which
is consistent with many OTC markets today in the bond context,
certainly within the wholesale market context. Voice, we should
be clear, voice hybrid works within the central limit order
book context, and so from our read of the rules, we do not see
that there is an explicit restriction on people trading and
using voice brokers in concert with screens so long as they
meet their pre-trade trading objectives.
I would also say you can trade without a screen where you
have two individuals purely voice broke a trade. Even in that
context on a broker desk, there is a prohibition against what
is known as ``armpitting,'' so the notion is that me as a
broker will see both inquiry from one customer and another,
cross the trade myself without showing it to my own desk; so we
see that on a broader context, this is what the rules that have
been suggested or promulgated by the CFTC to be an extension
of. So even within interdealer brokers, there is a prohibition
on armpitting, which is not showing the rest of the market that
a trade is about to occur.
Mrs. Maloney. How have companies in your industry improved
your risk management practices?
Chairman Garrett. Gentlelady, this will be the last
question since you are over by a minute-and-a-half.
Mrs. Maloney. I am over? I will wait for the second round
then.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. Then, Mr. Stivers is recognized.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
the chairman for holding this hearing. I would like to thank
the witnesses for sharing their time and expertise on many
issues. And I am going to focus in on H.R. 2779. Not a lot of
questions have been asked about that one. I would like to start
with Ms. Boultwood. You represent an end-user, Constellation
Energy; is that correct?
Ms. Boultwood. That is correct; yes, sir.
Mr. Stivers. Can you tell me without H.R. 2779, what would
happen to the cost of risk management for companies that choose
to perform their risk management function by using a central
entity with experts and then using an accounting swap, for lack
of a better term, to assign ownership to that internally? What
would happen to your costs if this bill is not passed, and what
could potentially happen to you?
Ms. Boultwood. Congressman Stivers, our costs would rise.
We would be forced to execute hedges for generation that we
might have in Alberta, Canada, hedges that we might--or
generation that we have in the United States. And with an
inability to consolidate that risk and hedge centrally, we
would be charged transaction fees as well as be forced to
transact in markets that may in their location not be as liquid
as other markets where we could potentially more efficiently
execute that hedge.
Mr. Stivers. And you could potentially be caused to raise
your expense 3 times for collateralizing those swaps because
you would have to collateralize the one side with an external
entity and both sides of a second transaction, which is merely
an accounting transaction that does not increase your risk; is
that correct?
Ms. Boultwood. That is correct. Mr. Bailey pointed that out
in his testimony.
Mr. Stivers. Right, and I heard him say that, but I wanted
to make sure we were clear.
Ms. Boultwood. Same impact.
Mr. Stivers. Tell me what would happen if you had an
incentive to do that, then, and your costs went up 3 times; do
you think you would continue to have an external facing entity
to execute your swaps or would you probably push it into your
subsidiaries; and in doing so, would you have the same amount
of expertise in each subsidiary that you are able to have in an
external entity?
Ms. Boultwood. So, two questions. We believe on the first,
we would have higher costs of hedging that we would pass on to
our wholesale and retail customers. That is the first item. And
then second, the process that we undertake to hedge would be a
lot less efficient and we would in many markets be forced to
what might be called ``dirty hedge'' because we couldn't find
an appropriate hedge for that specific location, that
particular product in that location, that we might more
efficiently find through a centralized transaction.
Mr. Stivers. Great. Thank you. I know Mr. Bailey brought up
some great points earlier on the cost as well, and I think Mr.
Voldstad quickly mentioned that he supports this bill because
he thinks it will make things more efficient. Do either of you
have anything that you want to add to why you believe this bill
makes sense that Ms. Boultwood didn't already cover?
Mr. Voldstad. I might add something, if I may, Keith. I
think if you have a plethora of individuals around the world
executing swaps, there is an issue of expertise but there is
also an issue of control. I have managed worldwide businesses,
and I found that as you dispersed risk and authority around the
world, it was difficult to control that, and typically, you
would have much tighter risk controls in terms of how far
somebody was from you and in terms of what kind of market they
were operating in.
Mr. Stivers. Anything to add, Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. No.
Mr. Stivers. Great. I yield back the balance of my time,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you to all of you.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Grimm.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask Mr. Cawley,
do you think that ERISA plans, those subject to ERISA, should
be able to engage in swaps transactions?
Mr. Cawley. I am no expert on ERISA. We are more on the
execution side, so I really don't have a view on that.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Mr. Mason? My understanding is that even
at a most basic level of understanding, it is almost essential
to properly managing such a portfolio. Is that correct? Could
you expand on that?
Mr. Mason. Absolutely. Particularly interest rate risk.
Interest rate risk can create enormous volatility and
liabilities almost overnight, and the way that pension plans
manage that liability, by far the most efficient, the most
inexpensive is through swaps, and so--
Mr. Grimm. But am I correct that under Dodd-Frank, as it is
now, they would be precluded from those transactions?
Mr. Mason. Under the proposed regulations, they would be
precluded, yes.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Mr. Bailey, you spoke very briefly about
regulatory arbitrage, and one example would be the FX markets.
Do you have any concern that traditional end-users--we spoke
about some here--but even American companies like John Deere or
Caterpillar, end-users in the most traditional sense, would be
forced to send their business offshore where they don't have to
post margin, things like that? Does that weigh into the
regulatory arbitrage equation?
Mr. Bailey. It does, absolutely, as to margin. We are
hopeful, I think, that the margin treatments and the collateral
and what has to clear will be sufficiently harmonious between
the European and the U.S. environments to not have that be an
issue. But absolutely, that would be a concern.
Mr. Grimm. And whoever wants to weigh in, one of my--I
would like to be as optimistic--but after Basel 2, I think we
can definitely be concerned that the international markets may
not move as quickly to promulgate the rules. I think it would
also be safe to say that even if they promulgate the rules,
there will be certain markets that will probably not implement
nor enforce the rules to the standards that the United States
would, and there would be a disparity. Am I completely off the
mark? Maybe Mr. Bernardo could talk about that?
Mr. Bernardo. I think you are spot-on. I think that, as I
said before, the EU's rules on modes of execution are much more
flexible than ours, so if we don't accept the clarification
act, we are going to have an issue. Our companies are global
companies. It is very, very easy for my company to move its
employees literally at the click of a button over to Europe,
over to Singapore, as you suggested. It doesn't take much,
given that if the rules are too prescriptive and it is going to
inevitably impact firms, they are not going to look to execute
here; they are going to look to execute someplace else.
Mr. Grimm. And lastly, Mr. Cawley, as you look at--I think
your testimony, and correct me if I am wrong, but overall I
think you said that the proposed rules for Dodd-Frank are close
to spot-on, and it is what we need to prevent the systemic risk
and future bailouts. Within your analysis, does U.S.
competitiveness weigh in there, and if so, to what degree?
Mr. Cawley. Without a doubt, U.S. competitiveness weighs
in, Congressman. And speaking directly to competitiveness, we
only need to look at the hit that our GDP took and the
unemployment rate skyrocketing as a result of the financial
crisis back in 2008. So the notion of American competitiveness,
specifically within the financial markets, is an area where the
United States has led the charge.
Mr. Grimm. If I could, because I am running out of time,
would you say that the extremely high unemployment rate is
solely due to the financial breakdown? It has nothing to do
with the crash of the housing market, has nothing to do with
the policies coming out of Washington from both sides of the
aisle, maybe some overregulation and the lack of uncertainty in
the marketplace overall?
Mr. Cawley. I wish the world worked in black and white. It
doesn't. It works in gray, so I wouldn't use the term
``solely,'' but I would say that the financial crisis and the
role that derivatives played with the bilateral construct that
is baked into an interest rate or credit default swap certainly
brought about unnecessary bailouts of companies that shouldn't
have existed.
Mr. Grimm. My time has expired. I just want to make note, I
think when you really analyze it at its core, derivatives
definitely played a major role, but it was mostly the firms
that were speculating as a business speculation. And Dodd-
Frank, when you really look at it, goes way beyond speculation
of derivatives and more into the end-users and legitimate users
such as pensions, which you admitted you don't know very much
about. But thank you, and my time has expired.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Pearce, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Boultwood, Mr.
Cawley mentions on page 2 of his testimony that transaction
costs would fall by 30 percent under the current provisions
that are being implemented; yet, you come out in support of the
provision, and he opposes it. Can you help me harmonize those
two positions? You are an end-user. It seems like you would
want to be getting these 30 percent cost reductions.
Mr. Cawley. Indeed. So--
Mr. Pearce. No, I was asking Ms. Boultwood.
Ms. Boultwood. I would say--I am not familiar with the
study that Mr. Cawley refers to, but in our markets we transact
in very often illiquid markets. In the products we require to
hedge, there aren't many market participants willing to offer
bids or offers on sale or purchase of a particular commodity in
that location. Our transaction costs in terms of both the bid-
ask spread and the level of market liquidity would clearly rise
as a result of, say, for example, a broad definition of a swap
dealer and the fallout of certain of our market participants
from those markets; but also the fact that the SEF rules, if
they, as Mr. Cawley supports, require either that we submit an
RFQ or we only transact on a live screen, we will either be
forced to hedge in very dirty ways in liquid markets and not
match the underlying asset volatility that we are trying to
hedge, or we would be posting information in a very public way
about an intent to hedge often very large amounts of generation
in a particular region and in such a way that our intentions
would be known so early in the market that getting a fair price
would be near impossible.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Mason, you might address the same thing. It
looks like you all would be interested in reducing your costs
by 30 percent.
Mr. Mason. Yes. Again, I have not had the opportunity to
study the numbers from Mr. Cawley. The input we have gotten
from the pension plans is that the SEF rules proposed by the
CFTC would drive costs up dramatically, and the one thing that
was most identified was the requirement that you expose your
RFQs to at least five market participants, which would make it
immensely difficult for your eventual counterparty to hedge the
trade, and that anticipated difficulty would be passed on in
terms of higher costs. So that is the issue that at least the
pension plans have identified.
I think some of my colleagues here are certainly more
qualified to talk in more detail about the SEF mechanics, but
for the pension plans, that was the issue which gave us by far
the most heartburn.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Voldstad, is that volunteering that I see
there? You might want to be hesitant of volunteering in front
of Congress.
Mr. Voldstad. I am volunteering, Congressman, and thank you
for letting me weigh in. I saw the $50 billion transaction cost
number last night, and I was surprised about it, which is what
was in Mr. Cawley's testimony, and I ran some numbers. I am an
old derivatives guy, so I do this. Let's assume that interest
rate products represent 80 percent of the market, so they
represent 80 percent of the $50 billion. That is $40 billion.
And so he is going to eventually--that was $40 billion to exist
in the marketplace. Let's look at the bid-offer spread on
interest rate swaps. We did a study last year that showed there
is essentially a two-tenths of a basis point bid/offer spread.
Bring it down to zero, you save a tenth of a basis point per
annum. If you take the $40 billion and divide it by the savings
or create the total amount of notionals that you were required
to do, you get an amount of $800 trillion a year of interest
rate products. That compares with probably $25 trillion a year
that is actually done. So I would like to see Mr. Cawley's
source for that information.
Mr. Cawley. If I may respond?
Mr. Pearce. Okay, thank you. Mr. Cawley, you have 20
seconds if you want to--
Mr. Cawley. I would be more than happy to share the numbers
with Mr. Voldstad and anyone else who would care to see them.
What we looked at specifically was CDS, credit default swaps,
being approximately $25 billion, and interest rate swaps being
$25 billion. We saw the study that the ISDA had done last year.
We don't think that it is--we thought it was a good study.
There are other studies out there, but we would be more than
happy to walk the ISDA and anybody else through the numbers by
using essentially the same math that Mr. Voldstad is using.
Mr. Pearce. Do you have that study available if our staff
were to check with you after the hearing?
Mr. Cawley. Yes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you. I appreciate that, and I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. The gentlelady, also from New
York, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It strikes me as I
am listening, what we are endeavoring to do, Dodd-Frank is the
equivalent of sending out a net to catch tuna and catching a
lot of innocent species like dolphins, those being the dollars
and the entities that we would like to devote to job creation.
I want to address for a moment, I did speak with the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters, about H.R. 1838, and
there are provisions in Section 716 which we are seeking to
repeal with H.R. 1838 that are redundant with other provisions
of Dodd-Frank, I believe, that would prohibit a bailout. So I
have offered to Ms. Waters that I will be happy to work with
her and her staff to reassure that essential protections
against taxpayer risk are in place. That is an important
concern for all of us.
Mr. Bailey, could you address a bit further the whole issue
of--vis-a-vis what we were just talking about--the whole issue
of access to the discount window and its equivalency or
nonequivalency to a bailout concept?
Mr. Bailey. Thank you. The foreign banks have access to the
discount window on the very same terms that the U.S. banks do.
They have the same rate, they have to post the same quality of
collateral at the same discount. It is understood to be a part
of a foreign bank's prudential risk management liquidity
process to have that access.
We also understand that the Federal Reserve has for a long
time regarded it as a prudential tool, it is a monetary policy
tool, and that it is a valuable means by which the Federal
Reserve can maintain a sound financial system. The foreign
banks in the United States lend about 18 percent of the
commercial loans that are made in the United States, so they
are part of a system, and they do benefit from the access to
the window on those terms, but those terms are the same as the
U.S. banks do.
Dr. Hayworth. So essentially, what we are saying is it is a
mechanism--I am a physician, so it is a mechanism for
maintaining a certain amount of what we would call homeostasis,
if you will; it is a way of keeping things on an even keel as
opposed to then having to go in and exert extraordinary
resources to correct a large risk, if you will. Is that a fair
way to think about it?
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Dr. Hayworth. Okay. Thank you--
Mr. Bailey. I should just qualify that. My earlier response
refers to the U.S. branches, of course, of the foreign banks.
Dr. Hayworth. Yes, and I appreciate that clarification.
Mr. Voldstad, we have been talking about Section 716. The
formation of subsidiaries under a swaps pushout provision
would, of course, require a certain allocation of capital that
I think we would agree is better spent in other ways or better
deployed in other ways. Could you talk a bit more about the
potential cost of this kind of activity?
Mr. Voldstad. I think one first must recognize that the
interest rate swap market will remain in the bank, that the
credit default swap market with respect to investment grade
securities will remain in the bank, as will the costs, the
transactions involving precious metals and so on, so a large
majority of the business will stay in the bank and continue to
be regulated by the bank regulators.
The costs, I don't think we have quantified the costs, but
the costs would arise out of doing transactions where you might
be dealing with a hedge fund who wants to take a spread risk
between a high-yield transaction and an investment grade
transaction, so he is buying protection on one side, selling
protection on the other side. If those two transactions are
within the same legal entity, they could be netted for purposes
of managing the counterparty risk. If you split them apart, you
end up having risk in both of those entities. I don't know how
much that would actually create in terms of a loss of netting,
but it would be a reasonably good-size amount.
If you also then look at how much money will you have to
put into a new standalone entity to make it creditworthy
enough, that to me would be a very, very large number. And if
anybody wants to be a significant swap dealer for high-yield
and equity transactions, you would have to, I would think, have
a swap dealer with multiple billion dollars' worth of capital
that wouldn't otherwise be needed.
Dr. Hayworth. So there are issues of ballasting, if you
will, and stability when we talk about this, and that requires
the deployment or the deferral, if you will, to other entities
and a lot of capital that otherwise would be used in better
ways by these banks?
Mr. Voldstad. Because you are capitalizing a separate
entity, you are creating extra capital that is needed. That
extra capital could be used otherwise in the operations of the
bank.
Ms. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Voldstad, and all of our
panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Are there any parties to these over-the-counter derivatives
which are too-big-to-fail or too-interconnected-to-fail as AIG
was? Is there any entity in the market today which, if they
went completely bankrupt and paid zero dollars and zero cents
to all creditors, would pose a systemic threat to the United
States economy? I don't see a volunteer, so I will go with Mr.
Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. I believe that Dodd-Frank is, through the means
of living wills and a variety of other provisions, recognizing
that there are still risks in the system for interconnectivity
across banks--
Mr. Sherman. So until we either limit the size of the
entities involved or we limit their participation in over-the-
counter derivatives, we, every day could come into this
Congress and be told, oh, my God, we need another $7 billion in
unmarked bills; is that the current situation?
Mr. Bailey. I think part of--Dodd-Frank is attempting to
make certain--
Mr. Sherman. I know what it is attempting to do. I am
asking, is it successful? Is there any entity in the market
whose destruction tomorrow would imperil the U.S. or world
economy? Is there anyone else with a firmer answer?
Mr. Cawley. Let me just--one other way, Congressman, is to
actually not limit participation or limit the--there is
activity. One way which I think the Dodd-Frank Act does
cleverly is to restructure the derivative itself. So, by making
it--taking the leverage out of it and making it a little safer
to trade--
Mr. Sherman. So that makes it less likely that this
problem--is anyone on this panel going to guarantee the United
States Congress that is there is no one in the derivative
markets today that we are going have to bail out tomorrow come
hell or high water, no matter what? I don't see any hands.
Let's go on to the next question.
How do you anticipate the Department of Labor's withdrawal
of their role on fiduciary duty under ERISA will impact the
final role on business conduct standards for swap deals?
Mr. Mason?
Mr. Mason. I think there has been a perception that the
fiduciary conflict between the Department of Labor rules and
the business conduct rules has gone away with the withdrawal of
the proposed fiduciary rules, and that is not the case. Under
current law, current DOL law, if a swap dealer is required, as
the proposed business conduct rules would do, is required to
review the qualifications of a swap--of a plan's advisor, that
would, under current ERISA law, make the swap dealer a
fiduciary, which would mean all swaps with plans would have to
cease.
So the withdrawal took away other bases on which the swap
dealer would become a fiduciary, but it left one under current
law, and you don't need to die 3 times. It is enough to die
once, and we, unfortunately would, not be able to enter into
swaps.
Mr. Sherman. I thank you for your answer.
I thank the gentlelady from New York for her indulgence. I
have to rush back to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Chairman Garrett. Does the gentleman yield to the
gentlelady from New York?
Mr. Sherman. I do yield to the gentlelady from New York so
that she will have more than the 5 minutes that she would be
entitled to otherwise.
Mrs. Maloney. That is kind of you. Thank you for your
question. It was an important one.
I would like to ask all of you or anyone who would like to
comment, how have companies in your industry improved their
risk management practices since the financial crisis? What is
different? What is improved in risk management specifically?
Nothing?
Mr. Bernardo. I can speak for the Wholesale Markets Brokers
Association. We act as intermediaries, so we do not take risks.
We are just matching buyers and sellers. We help facilitate
trades, and we generate liquidity for the markets that we are
speaking about, but all of our companies have invested
previously and continue to invest hundreds of millions of
dollars in technology to make these markets more efficient. So
if certain products can be electronic, we make them electronic.
We provide efficiencies for straight through processing, so
once a trade is executed, we will send that trade
electronically to the counterparties of the trade or send it
off to a clearing. We even at this point in time send it to a
swap--what you would consider a swap data repository in the
future.
Ms. Boultwood. May I make a comment? I think there has been
significant advancement. I think there has been a natural
movement in the market toward more clearing of products as
cleared products have become available on exchanges. I think,
to the point Mr. Bernardo made, there have been massive IT
investments, and many companies have invested more in the
analysis of their own liquidity risk in understanding the
boundaries of their own balance sheet and how large their
businesses can be become before they would be vulnerable to a
large price swing.
I want to make the point also that risk doesn't go away
because we change the structure of the market; it simply
changes form. So in saying that we want to move toward
clearing, we may be reducing the amount of counterparty credit
risk in a system, but we are increasing the amount of liquidity
risk because we are increasing the amount of capital that would
be posted and held aside in separate accounts as collateral or
margin.
We are increasing the amount of potential operational risk
because we are centralizing where transactions occur in
clearinghouses and exchanges. So the point is, unless we
significantly curtail or eliminate business activity, you are
not reducing--or you are not eliminating risk; you are simply
changing its form.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
Mrs. Maloney. Could Mr. Bailey answer this, too, from his
perspective? I am going into my next 5 minutes, right?
Chairman Garrett. No.
Mrs. Maloney. I am finished? Okay.
Chairman Garrett. You are not finished, but you are a
little bit over. And we have a few other Members who have yet
to ask a question.
So we will go to Mr. Hurt.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you all for your testimony today and your
appearance.
Mr. Cawley, I wanted to explore with you what I thought was
a very rousing defense of the taxpayer and of free markets. And
so I am surprised to hear you also in the same breath talk
about having the government come in and define these exchanges
in such a way that, according to the other witnesses, will not
lead to efficiency, will not lead to true price discovery; you
have the government coming in saying, this is the way we want
you to do it.
At the same time, when you have, from my understanding,
derivatives markets that have been migrating to clearing, which
I think everybody seems to say is necessary to secure the
marketplace, and then also reporting, these are things that
seem to me there is universal agreement on. So why is it you
think that the government is better positioned to be able to
impose an exchange structure that somehow makes the market more
efficient when we hear from both sides, buy and sell, that we
don't want this? After you are finished, I would love to hear
from Mr. Bernardo and Ms. Boultwood, as well.
Mr. Cawley. We don't see a conflict between both points of
view, but speaking specifically to government interaction in
private markets, there is certainly precedence where those
markets serve a systemic need or a prudential need. So we
disagree, obviously, with most everybody here on the panel, but
when we go out to speak to customers, who are the end-users of
derivatives, when we speak to them, they tell us that they want
to have a choice of execution. Now, we don't see a conflict
with the rules that have been promulgated by the CFTC. We
frankly don't see that. We see a choice there between central
limit order books, which are anonymous. We see a choice there
that if you want to use an RFQ, you can. You can use anonymous
RFQ, and you can use regular RFQ. If you want to shield your
identity to get a better price, you can execute on a central
limit order book anonymously. We don't see a conflict with our
restriction on voice hybrid broking because as I understand it
and as we understand it and after having been a broker and a
trader and being a hybrid broker and using its services, it is
in context a central limit or wholesale market construct--let
me explain that--where buyer and seller have the ability to
cross the bid offer spread and thereby make savings.
So, with regard to government interaction there, let me
just say we see there is a systemic need because of liquidity--
Mr. Hurt. Thank you. That is very helpful.
Because my time is limited, I would like to allow Ms.
Boultwood and Mr. Bernardo speak to the question of, okay, if
you don't want this imposed on you because there are real
consequences, real costs to having to have the exchange, the
execution facility operate this way, please, what are those
costs? I would like for us to--what are the costs of going with
Dodd-Frank the way it is currently constructed and setting up
these execution facilities that way?
Mr. Bernardo. The CFTC rules are too prescriptive.
Mr. Hurt. Could you speak into the microphone?
Mr. Bernardo. The CFTC rules are too prescriptive. Again,
if we use a real-world analogy, when we are talking about the
RFQ, request for quote, and you are asking five people to send
in a quote, if five of you indicated that you wanted to buy
something at a certain price, that is going to indicate to the
entire market, it is probably going higher, and you are going
to give people the ability or the opportunity to get in front
and push those markets higher.
Now, if you were with someone who was willing to sell at
that time, would you actually be willing to sell knowing that
the market is going to immediately go against you? It wouldn't
make sense; you wouldn't do that. Even if we talk about the 15-
second rule, which is also in there, why would somebody take
risk and create uncertainty in the market when you are asking a
buyer and the seller that we have matched up, we already have
an executed trade, so you are allowing someone to offset risk,
why would you then allow the market to view that price that
something is going to trade at, again, to jump ahead of them
and move the market in a direction?
Mr. Hurt. Again, my time is running out.
Ms. Boultwood, if you have any comment on that, I would
appreciate it.
Ms. Boultwood. Sure, with respect to the specific rule
around SEFs, there are practical implications that really make
the rules as currently drafted very impractical for an energy
end-user in our market. Often, we are hedging in markets with
less than five potential buyers or sellers. And that market is
very--once they know you are selling, they will be on the other
side of that sale looking for the price to go down and can wait
or time your sale. We do not believe we will get the fair price
for, as we do in today's market, for what we are selling the
physical asset.
And beyond SEF rules, I think what we are seeing is
regulatory overreach, way beyond congressional intent. We all
want the goal of transparency to be a point. That can be
achieved through clearing and reporting, not by forcing all
entities in the United States to become swap dealers.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank you for
your answers.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Canseco for 5 minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Mr. Mason, the Dodd-Frank Act classified ERISA
plans as a special entity, which could end up triggering
fiduciary liability for swap dealer that wishes to enter into a
transaction with such a plan. Given the historical role of swap
dealers as near counterparties in transactions with ERISA
plans, and the fact that the law already requires ERISA plans
to hire fiduciary that has expertise in the area they are
advising, does the new standard make sense for the swap dealer/
ERISA plan relationship?
Mr. Mason. Absolutely not. I would say one point is that
the creation of the concept of a special entity was supposed to
identify entities that were not as capable as the swap dealer
and thus needed more assistance with respect to entering into a
swap. That has by law no application to ERISA plans. ERISA
plans by law are required to hire a prudent expert in the field
before they can enter into the swap world. So the idea that
they need help from their counterparties, just simply doesn't
make any sense. And that has been the consistent theme. We have
talked to pension plans around the country, and the idea that
they would ever look to their dealer for advice just is sort of
beyond the pale. And by law, it really makes no sense.
Mr. Canseco. So if a swap dealer were to be considered a
fiduciary to an ERISA plan, that would preclude them from
transacting any business with them, is that correct?
Mr. Mason. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Canseco. So under Dodd-Frank law, and subsequent agency
rulewriting, pension plans now would be unlikely to have the
ability to use swap dealers to hedge risk in their portfolios;
is that correct?
Mr. Mason. That is correct.
Mr. Canseco. And for millions of Americans who rely on
income from pension plans, you would say that the special
entity status conferred by ERISA plans in Dodd-Frank is not a
good deal for them; is that correct?
Mr. Mason. That is absolutely right.
Mr. Canseco. Could you walk us again through a scenario
where a pension plan is unable to use swaps to hedge their
interest rate risk? And how would this affect their portfolio?
And what alternative methods would they be forced to use?
Mr. Mason. I was actually in a meeting, and I started
giving a hypothetical. One of the people next to me was a chief
investment officer for a company and jumped in and gave a real-
life example, so I will give her example. She was in a
situation where her pension plan had $15 billion of assets, and
$15 billion of liabilities. Interest rates dropped rather
quickly 100 basis points. What that did to her liability is it
took her liabilities from $15 billion to $17 billion. That
created a $2 billion shortfall almost overnight. That would
have required her and her company to fund approximately $250
million a year for 7 years.
The way that people use swaps is they use a swap to hedge
against that possibility. In other words, by creating an asset,
the swap, that in a perfectly hedged transaction, the swap
would go up by the same $2 billion, so they would stay at 100
percent funded. That is an enormously useful and popular tool
to manage risk in a pension plan. If we didn't have it, you
would have two choices. One is, you would have to reserve that
$2 billion; take $2 billion out of operating assets and say, I
am not using this to create jobs; I am not using this to invest
in a company, but I am putting this aside because I might have
a $2 billion liability over the next few years. That would
obviously be disastrous.
The other thing to do is to invest in bonds. The problem
with investing in bonds--there are several problems. One, there
are not enough of them to hedge these risks. They are not of
the right duration. They have a lower yield. And if pension
plans poured tens and hundreds of billion dollars into bonds,
the bond yield would go down, further exacerbating this
problem. So there is not currently an effective way to prevent
that very frightening scenario, that $2 billion shortfall,
under current law.
Mr. Canseco. So the result would be that the pension plans
would invest in less risk-averse assets and reducing future
returns; is that correct?
Mr. Mason. Absolutely.
Mr. Canseco. I see that my time has expired, and I thank
you very much.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman's time has expired.
We have a question here from one of our Members who is out,
so I ask unanimous consent to allow 2 more minutes from each
side for questions, so, without objection, 2 more minutes to
the other side, and then 2 minutes to answer this question that
one of the other chairs of the other subcommittee asked that we
ask and be done.
Mrs. Maloney. I would like to ask the panelists to respond
to the CFTC's 15-second rule. I have been getting comments on
it. Can you describe what it is and why it is important?
Mr. Bernardo. The 15-second rule is derived from the
futures market, and it really isn't conducive with the OTC
markets. In the OTC markets, again, you are talking about
liquidity that is episodic; it is not liquid if trades are not
happening every second. So 15 seconds in our markets is an
eternity. Once you have a buyer and a seller that are matched
at a certain price, you are then saying, 15 seconds, let's take
a pause and let's let the rest of the market see where that is
about to trade, which would allow other people, again, to front
run or move the market in a certain direction, which would
inevitably impact companies like Constellation when they are
trying to do a trade. Again, it doesn't fit in with the OTC
markets; it is being cut and pasted from the CFTC rules.
Mrs. Maloney. And you are saying that 15 seconds is an
eternity in the markets. Could you just explain to me how a
company actually executes transactions? Why is 15 seconds an
eternity in the markets? I think a day is an eternity in
politics, but if 15 seconds is an eternity, I want to
understand why it is an eternity.
Mr. Bernardo. In these markets, you don't want to create
unwanted uncertainty. There is no reason for it. So if you have
a customer who rings in--so let's hypothetically say they ring
in to me as a voice broker, and I have Barclays Bank on one
side, and I have Goldman Sachs on the other side. And I am
willing to execute--they are willing to execute at a certain
price. Once they are willing to execute that trade, it has
probably taken a long time to get us to that price they are
willing to execute at. For us to then say, all right, guys,
hold on, we are not going to execute at this price--we are
going to execute at this price--we are going to let the rest of
the market see what you want to do. If it is a big size trade,
if it is a $1 billion trade or a $2 billion trade, if other
people see that somebody is willing to buy at that level, it is
going to go higher. So you would entice people to come in and
front run and move the market up or move the market down. And
again, us as intermediaries, we are not taking the risk, but it
is going to impact the end-users, which is exactly what you
don't want to do.
Mrs. Maloney. In the proposed SEF Clarification Act, which
would allow voice to clarify that there is voice, would you see
that as an improvement or a rollback of the trading
requirements of Dodd-Frank, or is it the same?
Mr. Bernardo. Voice is part of any means of interstate
commerce. Congress had the opportunity to say we wanted to be
fully electronic in an exchange like trading, but they realized
a lot of these products don't necessarily trade fully
electronic. You need multiple modes of execution. You need to
be able to trade by voice. You need to be able to trade via a
hybrid platform. So you are allowing flexibility. And along
with the flexibility, you are allowing innovation. My company,
Tullett Prebon, as well as the other members of the Wholesale
Markets Brokers Association innovate in these markets. We
created other systems before legislation even came about. So we
have auction platforms. We have risk-mitigation tools. We have
a lot of things that would be ruled out if we kept the
legislation as it currently is.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I think I just started something here. By
allowing that now to go over about a minute and 30 seconds, I
have another request on the other side. So I will yield my--I
will be brief on my 2 minutes and maybe just wrap this up.
Mrs. Biggert asks, there has been discussion about the need
for swaps definition to exclude instruments and products, such
as those used by the insurance industry, for example, those
that mitigate risk of life insurance products, which did not
cause a financial crisis. Why are narrow swap definitions
important? What can the impact of a broad definition have on
insurance consumers, pension plans, and other low-risk
financial end-users?
Mr. Mason?
Mr. Mason. I can speak to one. Probably the most popular
investment in a 401(k) plan is a stable value fund, which is
really--it is similar in some ways to a money market fund,
capital preservation, but with a higher rate of return. Because
of the sort of extreme breadth of the definition of a swap and
sort of lack of clarity, there is a concern the stable value
contracts would be treated as swaps. The SEC and the CFTC are
studying that. If they are classified as swaps, the regulatory
structure doesn't fit. It would drive costs so far up that this
investment, which is the most popular investment in 401(k)
plans, would simply be wiped out.
Chairman Garrett. Got it.
I yield the remainder of my time to the gentleman from New
Mexico.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will use all 40
seconds wisely.
Mr. Cawley, I find myself nodding in agreement with a lot
of what you say; no more bailouts, government shouldn't be
picking winners and losers. I would like to drill down a little
bit on the intervention of the government should not intervene.
Yet, at the end of your testimony, you say that we should get
out of the intervening business from Congress, throw the two
bills out, and immediately request the finalization of
clearing, execution, and trade reports done by the regulators.
Now, the regulators are saying that we can't use the telephone
trades, but we can use electronic trades. So you don't favor
intervention in the first party or anything, or favor the
intervention to not allow the competitors to your business. Is
that--am I misreading?
Mr. Cawley. It is a good question. Let me be clear, we
don't favor intervention, but we recognize that there is a need
under certain circumstances for intervention. We would love as
free marketeers to have no government intervention. We
recognize that in certain instances, the government is required
to step in to maintain the stability of the economy. And we
certainly saw that, whether some of us liked it or disliked it,
we certainly saw that back in 2008, and hopefully, we won't see
that again.
We recognize that government intervention is sometimes
necessary, and the test then is, is the systemic test that goes
into that is, what would require the government through its
agencies to intervene either directly or indirectly?
Within the context of execution, and I think this debate
has really fallen down to one thing, if I can be blunt, and
that is the RFQ for five. We see that within--we don't see a
conflict, first of all, when we see government coming in
through the CFTC or the SEC to say, we view this as
systemically important to the execution of contracts, not just
the clearing of contracts, but the execution of contracts and
the notion of transparency, pre-trade transparency and post-
trade transparency.
Now, ideally, it is my own personal opinion that pre-trade
transparency is not met by the RFQ scenario, simply put
because, as Shawn has mentioned, you cannot have several people
once that bidder offer is exposed, only one person can hit it.
With that said, we do recognize that in certain market
contexts, certainly credit default swaps--less so indices and
less so interest rate swaps--but certainly credit default
swaps, the idea of having RFQ certainly works.
We do say that we see no tension and no discord between
either rule sets promulgated that deny a voice broker from
interacting with a trade, so long as that trade has some
modicum of pre-trade transparency. That operates, Congressman,
with lots of OTC markets, with lots of products that tell it
and other firms that his organization trade and also that they
may trade today.
Chairman Garrett. Since these answers are going much longer
than we thought, is there any objection to giving the final
word to Mr. Canseco for 1 minute?
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to go back to Mr. Mason. Some have labeled
ERISA employee benefit plans as high-risk financial entities
that should be subject to initial margin and daily variation
margins. What is your opinion of that classification?
Mr. Mason. It was, in our mind, simply a mistake. We are
being classified with hedge funds. ERISA plans cannot go
bankrupt. Even if the plan sponsor goes bankrupt, the PBGC
steps in and honors our swap liabilities. We are not operating
companies. In fact, in all the discussions we have had, with
dealers and companies, and we sort of talked to a wide range of
folks who are integral to this business, we have never heard of
any pension plan ever failing to pay off its swap liabilities.
So for us to be treated as high-risk financial end-users, we
think, and based on conversations with some of the regulators,
was simply an oversight. But it is a very dangerous oversight
and needs to be corrected because it would create enormous
costs and real risk for pension plans. Our folks are telling us
they would have to cut back their risk mitigation strategies,
and that is not what we want.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you very much, Mr. Mason.
Chairman Garrett. I thank you for yielding back. I thank
all the members of the panel.
And I thank everyone here on the committee.
Before you leave, I ask unanimous consent to insert into
the record the following statements: the Commodity Market
Council; the Coalition for Derivatives End-Users; and the
American Bankers Association.
Also, there were letters I referenced earlier today in
support of the legislation: Chatham Financial; ICI Investment
Company Institute; and last but not least, BlackRock. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
And again, I thank the members of the panel.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for these witnesses which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the record will remain open for 30
days for members to submit written questions to these witnesse
and to place their responses in the record. And if it is done,
as always, we appreciate your response to those.
With that, the committee is adjourned. Good day.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 14, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72616.101


