- THE ROLE OF THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK IN U.S. COMPETITIVENESS AND JOB CREATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ROLE OF THE EXPORT-IMPORT

BANK IN U.S. COMPETITIVENESS

AND JOB CREATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 10, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-15

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-673                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade

GARY G. MILLER, California, Chairman

ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois, Vice       CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
RON PAUL, Texas                      GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 10, 2011...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 10, 2011...............................................    29

WITNESSES
Thursday, March 10, 2011

Bhatia, Karan, Vice President and Senior Counsel, General
Electric.......................................................     5
Ickert, David, Vice President of Finance, Air Tractor, Inc.......     9
Law, Kevin S., President and Chief Executive Officer, Long Island
Association (LIA)..............................................    10
Scherer, Scott, Senior Vice President, Boeing Capital Corporation     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Miller, Hon. Gary G..........................................    30
Bhatia, Karan................................................    32
Ickert, David................................................    37
Law, Kevin...................................................    42
Scherer, Scott...............................................    45

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Miller, Hon. Gary G.:
Written statement of the Coalition for Employment through
Exports (CEE)..............................................    50
Written statement of the National Association of
Manufacturers (NAM)........................................    56
Written statement of USA Maritime............................    60

THE ROLE OF THE EXPORT-IMPORT

BANK IN U.S. COMPETITIVENESS

AND JOB CREATION

----------

Thursday, March 10, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on International
Monetary Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gary Miller
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Miller of California,
Dold, Campbell, McCotter, Huizenga; McCarthy of New York,
Moore, and Perlmutter.
Chairman Miller of California. The hearing will come to
order. Without objection, all members' opening statements will
be made a part of the record.
We have agreed to 10 minutes on each side, appropriately
yielded if anybody else shows up; and if nobody does, panel,
that is not unusual. We have Floor debate occurring right now,
and many members have meetings in their offices. So when you
are having a hearing like this it is not uncommon to have a low
presence. Members will come in and out as need be.
We would like to welcome you here today. This is the first
hearing in the 112th Congress for the Subcommittee on
International Monetary Policy and Trade. This is, I believe, a
very important hearing. We are going to be talking about the
Export-Import Bank reauthorization. Even Federal Reserve
Chairman Bernanke said that we need to sustain a period of
strong job creation to establish true economic recovery, and I
believe this is a place we need to look to. How do we increase
imports in this country and become competitive globally?
The Export-Import Bank effectively deals with about 175
countries. We have to ask, how can the banks better compete
with foreign export credit agencies to ensure U.S. companies
are not operating at a disadvantage against their foreign
competitors.
And if you look at the guidelines we use on how we loan,
U.S. loans are made, has 15 percent or less foreign content to
receive full financial transaction funding. The U.K. has 80
percent or less foreign content. Canada will make a loan if it
benefits the country in some way. Australia has 50 percent or
less foreign content. France has 40 percent or less EU content
or 30 percent or less non-EU content. Germany has 40 percent or
less EU content or 30 percent or less Japan, Switzerland, or
Norway content. Italy, they will make a loan if it benefits
them in some way. And Japan has 50 percent or less content.
So when you look at what the Export-Import Bank does, they
have the most stringent requirement as far as content of any
bank that applies these standards. Yet, we need to look at what
the Bank does and how they can operate in a better way. Fiscal
soundness has always been a priority for the Export-Import
Bank. Can the Bank policies and programs ensure that the Bank
continues to fund in a fiscally sound fashion?
Since 1934, the Bank has had a default rate of about 1.5
percent. In the last 10 years, though, it has had a default
rate of less than 1 percent, which is significant in this
economy. Last year alone, they returned $351 million back to
the Federal Treasury. So this is an organization that actually
makes money for the Federal Government, rather than costing the
Federal Government money.
The Bank does not compete against private capital. If
private capital is available, they are the first to utilize
that. If it is not available, then the Bank provides liquidity
when other sources of capital are not available.
Currently, they fund about 1.8 percent of all U.S. exports,
not a tremendous percent, but it is a significant percent if
you are the one wanting to export products and you need the
money. Small businesses benefit tremendously from this. Eighty-
seven percent of all the loans made by the Export-Import Bank
are to small businesses. It only represents 20 percent of the
funding level, but it is the majority of the type of loans they
make.
Is the Bank equipped to handle increased volumes in terms
of staff and administration capability is a question we need to
deal with and have answers to. Can direct selling, automated
underwriting, or wholesale instead of retail expedite the
process? Does the Bank need to reserve some of its excess
receipts to make technology and other investments?
Now, currently, about--of the $100 billion allowed to be
lent by Ex-IM Bank, only $57 billion has been lent. A 5 percent
reserve has been set up for those. What is the Bank's level of
support for specific infrastructures, industries, science
technologies, IT firms, and the service industries? And how
does the Bank content requirements hinder such support?
I think we need to look specifically at, does the
retirement of 85 percent impact the ability of the Bank to
lend? Does it have an impact on industry and companies who want
to participate in the program, yet don't have the ability to
participate in the program because of the content requirement?
There are a significant amount of issues we do need to look
at. There are issues that we want to have answers that are
going to be needed to be provided and many questions that you
might have for us and we might have for you. But we need to
look at the goals of the Export-Import Bank, the opportunity to
provide more jobs in this country, the opportunity to become
more competitive globally, how we go about doing that, and we
need to dispel some of the concerns that some feel that the
process of the Export-Import Bank is similar to a GSE and such.
The portfolio of the Export-Import Bank is tremendously
diverse. Their default rate is minimal compared to what you see
in the private sector. And had the Export-Import Bank not have
been there in the last few years, it would have been
problematic for many businesses to be able to continue in
business and to be able to export goods, because liquidity was
not there in the banking industry.
So those are issues I would like to have addressed today in
the hearing, and I will now yield to the ranking member.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you, Chairman Miller; and
I appreciate your words.
Let me first begin by saying I look forward to serving with
my colleagues and working in a bipartisan manner on the issues
before us today, as well as other important issues this
subcommittee will be addressing in the future.
The last several reauthorizations of the Export-Import Bank
that this committee addressed were the result of hard work done
by members on both sides of the aisle with a degree of
cooperation that allowed us to send a bipartisan bill to the
House Floor. I am confident this subcommittee will once again
produce a collective reauthorization bill that allows the
Export-Import Bank to continue being a vital tool that moves
the economy forward and does create jobs for our country.
The global financial crisis has resulted in strained access
to credit and fewer trade financing opportunities for American
exporters. Through the financial crisis, the Export-Import Bank
played a crucial role in assuring that export companies were
able to continue operating, which maintained U.S. competition
in the global economy. The work of the Bank was done at no cost
to American taxpayers as the Bank is self-sustaining, funding
its programs and administration costs from the fees paid by the
returns of its investments.
The Bank is also a key contributor to the implementation of
the President's national export initiative to double exports by
the year 2015. A key way to achieve that goal is to support
small businesses, which are the engine of job and economic
growth, in their efforts to broaden their consumer base through
exports. To that point, the Export-Import Bank has made
progress in outreach to small businesses. Just this year, they
developed new products and improved existing products to better
serve the needs of our small businesses.
The Bank has made progress in other areas that were
addressed through the 2006 reauthorization legislation.
However, there is more work to be done; and, as Chairman Miller
has said, there are questions to be answered. We want to make
sure that whatever work that has to be done is done to ensure
that the Bank continues to support economical growth and job
creation, as well as the U.S. global export market.
I look forward to hearing the testimony from each of
today's witnesses. I thank the witnesses for being here,
especially on such a gloomy, rainy day. Hopefully, you all made
it here all right; and I thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Vice Chairman Dold is recognized for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I want to welcome
and thank all of our witness for your time and attention to
this, what is a very important issue, the Export-Import Bank.
The Export-Import Bank is a very important institution that
ensures a more level playing field in a global marketplace. It
helps create jobs in a country based on exports to other
countries, which is an important national objective that both
parties and the Administration can agree on. And the Export-
Import Bank does this at zero cost to the American taxpayer. In
fact, the American taxpayer clearly benefits by the Export-
Import Bank returning billions of dollars directly to the
United States Treasury and by ensuring that more Americans are
working in the private sector.
I hope that we can all agree that a prompt reauthorization
is both beneficial and necessary. We also need to consider
several other issues, including credit limits, context rules,
and how we might encourage the Administration to appoint new
directors to fill imminent board vacancies as they come up.
I look forward to each of your testimonies, and I look
forward to working with you. I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. McCotter is recognized
for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Pass? Okay.
I would now like to introduce the witnesses:
Ambassador Karan Bhatia joined General Electric Company in
2007 as vice president and senior counsel for international law
and policy. At GE, he oversees the company's engagement in
public policy issues with government around the world and works
to expand its presence in global markets. In November 2005, he
was confirmed by the Senate to serve as Deputy U.S. Trade
Representative overseeing U.S. trade policy in Asia and Africa.
It is good to have you here today.
Mr. David Ickert is vice president of finance of Air
Tractor, a small business located in Olney, Texas, population
3,500, that manufactures agricultural and forestry firefighting
aircraft. Mr. Ickert is a graduate of Olney High School and
Midwestern State University. He has a bachelor's degree in
accounting and is a certified public accountant.
Welcome.
Mr. Kevin Law. In 2010, Mr. Law became president and CEO of
Long Island Associates, which is New York State's largest
business organization. Previously, Mr. Law was president and
CEO of Long Island Power Authority, the second-largest public
utility in the country with over 1.1 million customers. Prior
to approval as president and CEO, Mr. Law served as LIPA
trustee and was appointed by Governor Eliot Spitzer as chairman
of the board beginning in 2007.
Mr. Scott Scherer is senior vice president of Strategic
Regulation Policy at Boeing Capital Corporation. He is also a
member of the Aviation Working Group, a not-for-profit legal
entity which proactively engages with the U.S. Export-Import
Bank and other export credit agencies to ensure availability of
adequate and reasonably priced financing for developed
customers and regions.
Welcome. Each of you will have 5 minutes.
Mr. Ambassador, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KARAN BHATIA, VICE PRESIDENT AND SENIOR COUNSEL,
GENERAL ELECTRIC

Mr. Bhatia. Thank you very much, Chairman Miller, Ranking
Member McCarthy, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
convening the hearing today on this very important topic.
Sovereign-backed export finance has a fundamental and
growing impact on international commerce and U.S. exports. In
the competition for global markets, American companies and
workers are increasingly competing with foreign companies armed
with substantial, attractive government-backed export finance
packages.
In this highly competitive world, the U.S. Ex-Im Bank plays
a critical role in supporting American exports and American
jobs. GE, my company, provides a case in point. In 2010, Ex-Im
helped finance $2.7 billion in GE sales to international
markets, supporting more than $3.3 billion in U.S. exports.
These were products ranging from heavy duty gas turbines to
Saudi Arabia, to aircraft engines going to India, to MRI
machines going to Brazil and Ghana. These export sales have
helped support thousands of U.S. jobs in GE facilities from
California to Michigan, from New York to Illinois, and from
thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises and other
suppliers in every State of the United States.
Ex-Im is ably led and staffed by a team of dedicated,
hardworking, and creative public servants. Their contributions
go beyond merely supporting U.S. exports and jobs. Ex-Im, in
fact, contributes to the U.S. Treasury, as the chairman noted,
generating a surplus of several billion dollars over the past
decade.
But notwithstanding these efforts, Ex-Im unfortunately
remains among the world's least competitive export credit
agencies. Ex-Im dramatically trails other ECAs in total funds
authorized. Canada, for instance, a country less than a tenth
the size of the United States, has more than triple the amount
of export financing as the Ex-Im Bank. Japan has more than 5
times the amount, and China has an estimated 11 times.
Moreover, Ex-Im is forced to labor under restrictions and
processes that lessen its attractiveness and discourage many
U.S. companies from accessing it. Ultimately, these constraints
cost American exports and American jobs.
To improve the effectiveness of the U.S. export finance
system, we urge the Congress to focus on four priorities:
first, reauthorization of Ex-Im with greater lending authority
and streamlined congressional notification process; second,
eliminating regulatory restrictions that weaken Ex-Im's
competitiveness, vis-a-vis other ECAs; third, vesting Ex-IM
with a mandate to defend strategic markets for the United
States; and fourth, improving Ex-Im's accessibility. With your
permission, I will talk briefly about each of these.
First and foremost, we urge that Congress fully reauthorize
Ex-Im for a period of 6 years. In addition, we would urge that
Ex-Im's total liability cap be increased from $100 billion to
$200 billion. And it bears emphasizing that this increase in
liability authority does not mean a $100 billion increase in
total government spending. In fact, if history holds true,
greater lending authority will, in fact, only result in an
increase in their surplus, their return to the U.S. Treasury.
Second, for U.S. exporters to be globally competitive, we
need Ex-Im to be as flexible and nimble as its global
competitors. To that end, we would urge reform of three Ex-Im
policies that diminish Ex-Im's flexibility and weaken its
competitiveness:
Cargo preference requirements, Ex-Im's national content
requirements that the chairman alluded to in his openings
remarks and the economic impact test. I have addressed all
three of these bureaucratic obstacles to American business in
my written statement, but in the interest of time, I will limit
my oral comments just to the first point, cargo preference
requirements.
Under a long-standing requirement, almost any long-term
export financed by Ex-Im must be transported on a U.S.-
registered vessel. Congress imposed this requirement in the
pre-World War II era to help build a U.S. merchant marine
fleet. But both U.S. strategic requirements and the global
shipping market have dramatically changed since that period,
and today, there is an extremely limited number of U.S.-flag
``break bulk'' vessels in operation, and the result is
transportation costs that are so high for transporting on those
vessels as to nullify the benefits of Ex-Im financing.
So, accordingly, we would urge that those cargo preference
requirements be eliminated or, at the very least, that the
additional costs imposed by those requirements be offset by the
government.
That was point number two.
Point number three is, since the financial crisis, other
governments have become far more aggressive and creative in
using government-supported financing to win market share around
the world. They are deploying more resources, using more forms
of financing, and operating in areas where Ex-Im traditionally
has had very little activity. Moreover, such foreign government
financing is increasingly destined for projects in the United
States.
Historically, Ex-Im has matched foreign ECA financing
offers that are outside the OECD framework only in rare
situations and has refrained from financing projects in the
United States all together. It has made very sparse use of its
Tied Aid War Chest, and Ex-Im traditionally has had relatively
little activity in regions of the world that may pose
commercial risk but also present significant commercial and
strategic opportunities, including portions of the Middle East
and Africa.
So, accordingly, we would urge that Ex-Im be directed to
match financing offered by foreign governments competing abroad
or in the U.S. home market where such financing is inconsistent
with the OECD arrangement or where investment financing is
being offered to win market share from U.S. competitors; that
it make increased use of its Tied Aid War Chest; and that it
facilitate specialized programs in countries or regions where
the United States has a strong national interest, like Iraq,
Afghanistan, and sub-Saharan Africa.
Fourth and finally, Ex-Im remains underutilized by key
sectors of the U.S. economy, including SMEs, manufacturing
companies that have repeated exports of smaller value items--
so-called flow businesses--and services providers. There are
multiple reasons for this, including Ex-Im's largely
undifferentiated processes for both large and small
transactions, its rules governing U.S. content, and its
reluctance to take less than dominant positions--
Chairman Miller of California. The gentleman will need to
conclude.
Mr. Bhatia. Thank you.
To facilitate access by SMEs and flow businesses, Ex-Im
should deputize more commercial banks, community and State
banks and others, while setting appropriate transaction costs
and fee-sharing arrangements to facilitate cooperation.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bhatia can be found on page
32 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Scott Scherer.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT SCHERER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, BOEING
CAPITAL CORPORATION

Mr. Scherer. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member McCarthy, and
members of the subcommittee, I am Scott Scherer, senior vice
president, Boeing Capital Corporation, the financing arm of
Boeing company. Thank you for this opportunity to testify on
this important topic.
I have an opening statement and request that my full
written testimony be placed in the record.
Chairman Miller of California. It will all be placed in the
record, without objection. Thank you.
Mr. Scherer. On behalf of Boeing's 160,000 employees,
22,000 small, medium and large U.S. suppliers to Boeing
throughout all 50 States, and the 1.2 million people working in
our domestic supply chain, I am here to voice our strong
support for the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank of
the United States.
At a time of great debate over the role of government in
our society, Ex-Im Bank stands out as the government
institution that works and that provides real value to our
Nation. The Bank's financial instruments help American
companies, their workers, and their suppliers compete in the
global economy and, in so doing, increase American exports,
create and preserve export-related jobs, help stabilize our
economy during periods of tight credit, like the one we just
experienced, and otherwise contribute to economic growth across
the United States. And because the Bank charges exposure fees
to its borrowers, it is not only self-sustaining but
consistently earns a profit for U.S. taxpayers. It is a
government program that helps lower the deficit, something I am
sure you don't hear all that often.
On the issue of global competitiveness, the Bank plays a
critical role. In the aerospace business, our chief competitor,
Airbus, has three European export credit agencies supporting
its sales. What's more, the competitive landscape for our
industry is about to get a lot more crowded. Companies in
Canada, Brazil, China, and Russia are developing large
commercial airplanes to compete against Boeing; and all of them
have government export credit agencies to support them. Without
Ex-Im, Boeing and its extensive U.S. supply chain would be at a
significant disadvantage in a market we forecast to be worth
$3.6 trillion over the next 20 years.
On the issue of U.S. exports and the jobs they support,
there is no question that Ex-Im helps drive U.S. exports. In
Fiscal Year 2010, Ex-Im financing supported a record $34.4
billion in U.S. exports; and in calendar year 2010, Ex-Im
financial guarantees supported sales of 161 Boeing commercial
airplanes, roughly a third of all Boeing deliveries that year.
Commerce Department figures show that aerospace exports
support more than 770,000 U.S. jobs; and the aerospace sector
each year produces a trade surplus, $53 billion in 2010,
according to the Aerospace Industries Association. Those job
and trade surplus figures are the highest of any U.S.
manufacturing industry.
I mentioned that Ex-Im supported one-third of our airplane
deliveries last year. That was a higher percentage than we have
seen historically because of abnormally tight commercial credit
markets, which brings me to my next point, and that is the
Bank's vital role in helping to stabilize our economy in such
economic conditions.
Ex-Im Bank helped stem at least some of the bleeding
brought on by the financial crisis by shoring up exports in
very tough economic times, just as it was designed to do. Since
1992, according to the Bank, Ex-Im has returned roughly $5
billion to the U.S. Treasury.
The Bank has a strong, diverse loan portfolio that presents
little risk to the U.S. government and American taxpayers,
particularly true for its portfolio of airplane loan
guarantees. To date, the Bank rated default on commercial
airplane loan guarantees as de minimus.
Mr. Chairman, and members of the subcommittee, we have
several recommendations for your consideration but will focus
briefly on three of them.
First, we recommend that you consider raising the cap on
allowable financing by the Bank from the current level of $100
billion.
Second, we recommend you consider lowering the 85 percent
domestic content requirement for Ex-Im loans and loan
guarantees. This foreign content rule does not adequately take
into account 21st Century supply chains, which are global in
nature. This is an important competitive issue for U.S.
exporters because U.S. domestic content is, far and away, the
highest requirement among the world's export credit agencies.
Finally, we urge the subcommittee to press for resolution
of a looming issue, and that is the vacancies on the Bank's
current board. Ex-Im Bank needs a quorum of three members to
approve transactions; and unless these vacancies are filled
soon, the Bank will not have a quorum come July, when only the
chairman will remain in office.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate how well the Bank serves
the American public, helping U.S. companies, large and small,
compete in the global economy, driving U.S. exports, creating
good-paying jobs and economic growth and doing so with a net
return to U.S. taxpayers.
Boeing, the Coalition for Employment Through Exports, and
many other companies look forward to working with the Congress
to reauthorize the Bank.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scherer can be found on page
45 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you for your
presentation.
Mr. Ickert, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID ICKERT, VICE PRESIDENT OF FINANCE, AIR
TRACTOR, INC.

Mr. Ickert. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member McCarthy, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for allowing me to
participate today.
I am David Ickert, vice president of finance with Air
Tractor. We are the other aircraft manufacturer on today's
panel; and we are located in Olney, Texas.
I have submitted written testimony which responds to the
questions that we had, so I won't be redundant and go over a
lot of those points.
I would like to speak today about the experiences Air
Tractor has had with Ex-Im and job creation, and these are
experiences of a small business. I will emphasize that what I
am about to say has nothing to do specifically with Air Tractor
but more to do with what is being replicated by small
businesses all over this country and the potential of small
business exporters in exporting and working with Ex-Im. I think
there is tremendous potential and Ex-Im Bank is vital to that
community to realize the job creation potential that exists
there.
Air Tractor is a small business engaged in the manufacture
and sale of agricultural airplanes--crop dusters, if you will--
and forestry firefighting planes. We have been in business
since 1972, and we are now 100 percent ESOP-owned. We have one
location, in Olney, Texas. We employ approximately 225 people.
Olney is a small rural town 100 miles west of Ft. Worth, and
200 miles east of Lubbock, with an approximate population of
3,000.
In 1994, we decided that we needed to look beyond the U.S.
borders for our market. At that time, we had about 10 percent
of our sales moving in the export market. We knew we needed a
medium-term product--loan product to sell our airplanes on the
international market. So after much searching and research, we
discovered a couple of key partners. One is a commercial bank
that we are still working with today--the same officers who
have been wonderful to help us and been patient with us to
bring us along in this--and the Export-Import Bank of the
United States. Those two partners have helped us move forward
in our quest to try and expand our international market.
Since 1995, we have now completed over 80 medium-term
transactions with the Bank. That first transaction in 1995 was
two firefighting planes in Spain. For the calendar year 2010,
we have completed 20 medium-term transactions with the Bank;
and during this same period, from 1995 to 2010, we have seen
our percentage of annual new plane sales and units move from 10
percent in 1995 to 56 percent in 2010. And this included 14
different countries.
As I said, we have done business with Ex-Im for 15 years
and have completed those 80 medium-term transactions, 80-plus.
To date, we have never submitted a medium-term claim to Ex-Im.
They are there for that, but we have never done that. So Ex-Im
has received our medium-term credit premiums through the years,
but they have never had to pay a claim. That is good business
for Ex-Im, and it is good business for Air Tractor.
I want to speak just a little bit about Olney, Texas. It is
my hometown. It is a great place to live, and it is a great
place to work, and it is a great place to raise your kids.
However, when one thinks of originating export transactions, a
small west Texas town doesn't really come to mind. But I will
remind you we have 225 employees; and at 56 percent, we have
over 100 people in Olney, Texas, who today owe their jobs to
exporting.
As I have described it before, Olney is three red lights
and a Dairy Queen; and the significance of this is that if we
can create jobs on Main Street Olney through small business
exporting, it can be done in small businesses from California
to New York. If we can do it in Olney, Texas, we can do it all
over this country.
So what I would have to say to you today is, just for small
business exporting, for job creation through exports, which has
a tremendous potential in this country, we need Ex-Im, and we
urge the reauthorization of Ex-Im.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ickert can be found on page
37 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
It appears that you employ a large percentage of the adult
population in your community. That is very impressive.
Mr. Ickert. That is a true statement, yes, sir.
Chairman Miller of California. I like that. My dad was from
Sweet Home, Oregon, population 4,200.
Mr. Law, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN S. LAW, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, LONG ISLAND ASSOCIATION (LIA)

Mr. Law. Thank you, Chairman Miller, Vice Chairman Dold,
Ranking Member Carolyn McCarthy, and subcommittee members for
the opportunity today to come and speak to you regarding the
Export-Import Bank of the United States.
My name is Kevin Law, and I am the president and CEO of the
Long Island Association. The LIA is the largest business
organization in the State of New York. Our membership includes
thousands of businesses, both large and small; and we employ
hundreds of thousands of employees. The LIA has been in
existence for over 80 years; and our mission is to lead and
unify the region and strengthen Long Island as a place to live,
work, and do business.
Long Island, like the rest of the Nation, has suffered
through the recent recession and has been plagued by falling
home values, high unemployment, and businesses closing their
doors. The Long Island economy is very much a small-business-
driven economy. We have over 3 million people. If Nassau and
Suffolk counties were a State, we would be bigger than 18
States; and we are located right outside the City of New York.
But 90 percent of our businesses are companies that employ
20 people or less, and it is estimated that our exports from
Long Island are valued at over $10 billion. Increasing the
export capabilities of the manufacturing sector of our economy
would certainly be a boost to companies exploring new markets.
The LIA supports the reauthorization of the Export-Import
Bank. I would like to thank Fred Hochberg, the chairman and the
president of the Export-Import Bank, for helping many Long
Island companies over the past few years.
But, unfortunately, and despite the assistance from the
good folks at the Bank to date, many smaller companies are
still not aware of the Ex-Im or the services that they provide.
Too often, small business owners are too caught up in the day-
to-day aspects of running their businesses to take the time to
explore new opportunities to grow their business; and simply
they are just not aware of all the various programs that are
offered. And then when they do become aware, they get inundated
with the overwhelming amount of paperwork required by some of
these programs.
So as the committee considers the reauthorization for the
Bank, we feel it is important for you to not only consider ways
for the Bank to be made more accessible to small businesses but
to also streamline the application process so more small
businesses can take advantage of the opportunities to expand
into international markets.
Additionally, we feel there needs to be better cooperation
between the various Federal agencies that play a role in the
export economy. This includes the U.S. Department of Commerce,
the Small Business Administration, and the Department of State;
and perhaps you can better utilize the services of
organizations like the Long Island Association to get that
message out for the Federal Government. The government doesn't
always have to do everything, and so utilize organizations like
us to get the word out about the good programs like the
programs that Ex-Im administers.
We also think that technology might be better used for
small businesses in the application process. We have seen a
rapid movement towards the digital economy, and we ask that the
application process for small businesses be streamlined.
Because, if we do that, I think we make it easier for small
businesses, and that will generate greater participation.
The Ex-Im Bank's global access for small business forums
are prime examples of how to start that process. The goal of
this program is to reach 5,000 small businesses across the
country, with 20 such forums being held this year alone. I am
happy to be working with Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy for a
forum to be held on Long Island on April 11th, and we are
marketing that event to our membership so they can take
advantage of what the Ex-Im has to offer.
The recent announcement of Ex-Im Bank for the Supply Chain
Financing Initiative is going to be very helpful to small
businesses that supply U.S.-based corporate operations. By
supplying competitively priced working capital finance to
suppliers of U.S. exporters, this program will lower the cost
to these suppliers and thereby strengthen the supply chain.
An additional benefit of the supply is that it allows
suppliers to get paid faster and decreases the receivables on
their balance sheets. This is another tool in the Federal tool
kit that we feel can be helpful to many Long Island small
businesses, as well as small businesses across the country, and
we look forward to working with Ex-Im to take advantage of
this.
Another area that we feel the committee should take a
closer look at is military and defense items. A large number of
smaller businesses on Long Island are involved in the defense
industry. As many of you know, Long Island is the cradle of
aviation and has a proud history in the air and space industry.
Many of the goods and services produced by the defense industry
sector can have better export applications, and we feel that
any exclusion from the programs for defense-related industries
should be revisited and amended.
The Long Island Association and Ex-Im have similar goals of
trying to create jobs and to grow the economy. To this end, we
look forward to working with the Bank and bringing its valuable
services to the small businesses on Long Island. And we look
forward to working with you as well so we can all improve the
business climate for not only Long Island and the State of New
York, but for our country.
So, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to make
some of these suggestions to the committee; and I thank our
Congresswoman, Carolyn McCarthy, for the opportunity to be here
today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Law can be found on page 42
of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. That is three plugs you got.
That is pretty good.
Some great issues were raised. One was cargo preference.
The Bank's charter does not specifically mandate the U.S.-flag
vessels in connection with Ex-Im. That jurisdiction is with the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. It is not our
jurisdiction. I have talked to Chairman Mica regarding this
issue, so it is not something we would debate or discuss in
this committee because we have no purview over that issue. That
is a separate committee altogether.
But you have brought some great issues up. You said that
Ex-Im is the least competitive--or we are--with our global
competitors. You talked about regulatory restrictions that are
placed over your requirements that you have to comply with with
them. And you talked about raising the lending authority from
$100 billion to $200 billion. And content was another concern.
One question I had was on the lending authority. They have
authority for $100 billion, but they are only at about $75
billion right now. So there is an additional $25 billion in
lending authority available for them to use.
The other content requirement is we require 15 percent not
to exceed in foreign involvement. What changes would you like
to see made in the content, for example? If that was modified
in some fashion, would it change the way you are doing business
as it applies to Ex-Im? Would you then modify the structure of
your product where it did include a greater foreign content if
we restructured that in some fashion?
Mr. Bhatia. Mr. Chairman, I guess one way to think about
the content issue is, how does it currently hurt us? Okay? How
does it currently hurt American jobs? And I think it hurts us
in probably three ways.
So the first is there are some products that we manufacture
that simply by the nature of the way the inputs come in we
can't get up to that threshold. We are at maybe 65, 68 percent
U.S. content. And as a result of that, Ex-Im financing,
complete financing, is just not available to us. So we will not
even apply in those cases.
Chairman Miller of California. But it wouldn't change your
normal product that had 85 percent. It wouldn't change that
matrix for us, would it?
Mr. Bhatia. No. On that point, no.
But the second point to be made, I think, is, by virtue of
having a very high U.S. content requirement, much higher than
our foreign competitors, for instance, they are able to both
produce goods at a--they are able to be more efficient in terms
of how they manufacture the goods.
And then the other issue is, remember, they are able to get
full financing. Take the U.K., for example. Twenty-five
percent, let's say, U.K. content. They are able to get 85
percent financing for that. If we were to manufacture something
with 60, 68 percent, we would only be able to get up to 68
percent financing on that. So there is a cost difference, there
is a financing difference, there is a pricing difference, and
there is an availability difference.
To get to your point about what would we recommend, I think
what we would recommend, first and foremost, is that the U.S.
content requirement be reduced to the OECD average, which, at
the moment, the next highest to the United States is 50
percent, and many are below that.
Chairman Miller of California. So by us changing the
standards, it wouldn't put you in a position where you would
lower your percentage automatically?
Mr. Bhatia. No. No. To the contrary. I think what it would
allow us to do is seek export financing from the United States,
be more competitive, be able to compete abroad, and retain the
production out of the United States.
Right now, to be competitive, we are having to manufacture
and seek export financing from other institutions around the
world. So, for instance, we could export--there is a wind
turbine opportunity, let's say, to sell to Kenya. We can export
from two places. We can export out of the United States, out of
our Greenville, South Carolina, facility or we can export out
of Germany and utilize German export financing.
Chairman Miller of California. So if we changed them, you
think it would increase American jobs.
Mr. Bhatia. I can tell you it would increase American jobs.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Scherer, how would you
apply that to Boeing?
Mr. Scherer. We believe--Boeing believes that the content
requirement of 85 percent is too high. We believe that we could
probably live with a number in the 70 range--70 percent range,
probably, as we currently produce our airplanes.
But, to Karan's point, he is right to the extent that we
have increases in foreign content, we have to go outside. We
have to obtain co-financing from other export credit agencies
to ensure that we can fill the gap.
But, again, this is a competitive world that we are in. We
have--oftentimes, in order to be able to sell airplanes, we are
required to make offset requirements. We have cases where we
just don't--we just can't get to that 85 percent number.
Having said that, 82 percent of all the jobs and our
procurement is here in the United States. But we have some
aircraft that are below the 85, and it is kind of an awkward
situation that we have with our customers who, for example, are
acquiring Boeing 737 aircraft which maybe has an 82 percent
content and we say, sorry, we can only give you 82 percent, not
85 percent. But when they buy their Airbus airplane, which has,
frankly, a lot of U.S. content in it, they can still get 85
percent financing.
Chairman Miller of California. So it is putting you at a
disadvantage with competitors.
Mr. Scherer. It is putting us at a disadvantage, yes.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Ickert, I would like to
hear if the small guy you said you are has an opinion on that.
Mr. Ickert. We have a unique situation. It impacts us,
also.
Now there is a work-around, if you will, in our situation.
Most everything that we have is U.S. content and materials in
our aircraft, except for the engine. The engine comes out of
Canada. Luckily, Ex-Im and EDC have a co-finance agreement that
allows us--they process--we process through Ex-Im, Ex-Im sends
it on to EDC, and EDC picks up their part of the coverage.
Chairman Miller of California. So you have an out that they
don't.
Mr. Ickert. That is exactly right. Yes, sir. We have an
out.
Chairman Miller of California. If it wasn't for that, how
would it impact you?
Mr. Ickert. If I did not have the out, it would impact us
dramatically. We couldn't use Ex-Im financing because that
engine--
Chairman Miller of California. It would have a dramatic
impact on your business personally.
Mr. Ickert. That engine runs about 35 to 40 percent of our
value. So I couldn't access Ex-Im without the co-finance
agreement.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Law, do you have a
comment on that?
Okay. I have gone over my time. Mrs. McCarthy is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and,
again, I thank everybody for their testimony.
Mr. Law, we understand and we know that the Long Island
Association is the largest association for small businesses and
medium-sized businesses on Long Island and New York State. When
you talk about how to expand it, is that something that should
be put into the reauthorization? Is that something that we
should be encouraging associations to basically say that we
should be growing the advertisement part?
I went to you about--what, 2 months ago, I guess--because I
wanted to have an educational event for our small businesses on
exporting. So I knew to go to you mainly because of the work
that we have worked together on through the association. But
how do you get that message out into other areas? Mr. Ickert
basically found a small lender. How would you see something
like that being set up?
Mr. Law. I think organizations like the Long Island
Association that exist throughout the country could be helpful
to the Federal Government in promoting your programs. I think
sometimes--and I have been in and out of the public sector and
the private sector and sometimes--I remember my tours with the
public sector. You get so close to it and you think everybody
is aware of everything that you are doing, and they are not.
Because people are out there working really hard and long to
run their businesses, and they don't see everything or perhaps
they don't pay attention to everything.
So I think organizations like ours, where we are maybe on
the street with them more often, we could be educating them
about the opportunities for these programs. And so I think
there are roles for organizations like ours to play with Ex-Im,
the Small Business Administration, and the Department of
Commerce to help get the good programs that you and this
committee authorized and to help get that word out there. So I
think organizations like ours could help the Federal Government
get that word out.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Mr. Ickert, when you were speaking, you said you get your
engines from Canada. And I am just curious. Is that because
that is the best engine for the particular planes that you
make, or was it a better price or--
Mr. Ickert. For the engine, for the plane that we produce,
it is the best engine to match up with the airframe that we
produce.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Okay. That is fair. I was just
curious about that.
We talk about large corporations, but yet we are still
talking about small businesses here, and certainly we have
probably two of the largest corporations in this country, and
yet small businesses are a very large part of your success in
business. And I was just wondering if you could explain that
and go a little bit deeper on the 85 percent content. Would
that have any adverse effect on any of our businesses here in
this country?
Either one of you or both of you?
Mr. Bhatia. I will go first, Congresswoman.
To your first point, small businesses are absolutely
essential. Small American businesses, small and medium-sized
businesses are absolutely essential to our ability to produce
the goods that we need to be able to compete around the world.
We have a supply chain of tens of thousands of American
SMEs, and one way we like to think of ourselves at GE is
actually as the platform for SMEs to export around the world.
Many of our suppliers only can access these far-flung markets
around the world by basically supplying goods and services into
an entity like GE and being able to sell around the world. So
we see ourselves as very much tied to SMEs, small businesses,
our suppliers.
As to your second point, again, I go back to my comments to
the chairman. I think that high content requirements at the
levels that we have them preclude us from being able to access
critical Ex-Im financing to allow us to compete in
international markets and thereby are preventing us, slowing us
down from creating more jobs for SMEs for our own employees. So
I guess that is my response.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Scherer?
Mr. Scherer. I would echo much of what Mr. Bhatia
indicated.
We have some brochures here that we would be happy to leave
with you that we refer to as our invisible exporters.
But as I had indicated in my oral testimony, we have 22,000
suppliers in the Boeing company and 2,200 of those are small
business suppliers to the Boeing commercial airplane company.
Clearly, while we are a ``large'' company, we need to be
mindful of the fact that we are 160,000 individuals, a lot of
different types of people--scientists, engineers, mechanics,
machinists, and our suppliers who help build these very
technologically advanced airplanes.
But, we have to have export credit support that is
competitive; and to the extent that we don't, it is going to
inhibit our ability to compete effectively.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Vice Chairman Dold is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and, again, I want to
thank you all for coming this afternoon and for coming with
some suggestions.
And if I can just go right to Ambassador Bhatia, in a
recent GE transaction to sell, I think, locomotives to
Pakistan, the Ex-Im Bank matched financing terms that was
provided, I think, by China. And I was just wondering, how did
the transaction actually play out? Can you give me an idea of
whether you think this is a model for future transactions going
forward?
Mr. Bhatia. Thanks, Congressman.
Yes, this is an opportunity that actually remains still
playing out. So Pakistan is in desperate need of new
locomotives.
I would note, as an aside, it is not only an export
opportunity for us, but it is also an opportunity to strengthen
Pakistan's economy, allow goods and cargo to flow more
effectively, thereby strengthening the economy and hopefully
addressing some of the other challenges that exist in that
country.
We went in to bid on it. A Chinese company came in, backed
by extremely aggressive concessionary financing; and the
Pakistani government effectively said to us, if you can't match
that, you are not going to be selected; you are not going to be
competing.
We went to Ex-Im, and Ex-Im--and I should note that China
is outside of the OECD which prescribes certain rules. So we
went to Ex-Im. Ex-Im stepped forward with an offer to match
what China was doing. As a result of that, we were selected.
Now, there are some legal processes going on in Pakistan
today. The tender is going to be reissued, and we trust and
hope that Ex-Im will step back up with support again. We are
confident that at the end of the day, with Ex-Im's support, we
will win that bid.
Mr. Dold. If I can just follow up, also, you talked before
about the content requirement and how if that was dropped down,
you would like to see it down to be an average, I am guessing,
probably around 50 percent. We see Mr. Scherer saying that they
would be able to live with something around 70 percent. Is
there some sort of a marrying in between, or is that something
we are just going to have to kind of take a better look at?
Mr. Bhatia. I think we would say we would like to see Ex-Im
become globally competitive. To be globally competitive, we
think we need to get those contents requirements down to
roughly what the OECD average is. If it were to be done in
certain steps, perhaps going down to 70 and then moving forward
to an OECD average, I think that would be something that we
would be grateful for.
Mr. Dold. And obviously making Ex-Im more globally
competitive you said absolutely was going to be able to create
American jobs which, obviously, from your corporation, that
would be one way to do it.
You also highlighted some other regulatory burdens that
were going to be impacting you and I assume the rest of you as
well. Can you talk to me for a second about the economic impact
test? Is that costing you jobs here in the United States right
now or can you shed a little bit more light on that?
Mr. Bhatia. Sure. The economic impact test, Congressman, is
a basic principle, is a requirement that Ex-Im puts in place
which basically results in Ex-Im being unwilling to lend to
projects where the export, the U.S. export, could result in
augmenting or strengthening the production of a foreign product
that may come back into the United States in some form and
potentially compete with a U.S. product.
The problem with this is what it ends up doing is creating
a very complex, very politicized, and ultimately, we think,
unproductive equation whereby large exports, potential exports
that would potentially support thousands of U.S. jobs abroad
end up not happening because Ex-Im financing is unavailable
because there may be a very small number of foreign products
that would come back into the United States. So, from our
perspective, that is simply a balance of the benefits test, and
we think it should weigh in favor of the maximum number of U.S.
jobs.
Mr. Dold. Thank you.
Mr. Ickert, if I can--I just have a very short period of
time. How many countries do you currently export to right now?
Mr. Ickert. In 2010, we exported to 14 different countries
during that calendar year. If you add--I have not sat down and
added them together, but 20 plus. But 14 in 2010.
Mr. Dold. And were any private entities, private financing
options available to you, or was Ex-Im basically your only
financing option?
Mr. Ickert. Some of those countries were cash deals, so we
didn't have to access financing. Our customers in those
countries did. Where we have accessed Ex-Im, in most of those
cases we had no private opportunity for financing; and without
Ex-Im participation those sales would not have been made.
Mr. Dold. Great. Thank you.
And I didn't want to let the time go without at least
bringing the hometown company Boeing into this. You have
outlined a couple of items here in terms of your priorities.
And I see my time is up. Can you just give me, out of your list
of three here, what is your top priority? What is the one thing
if we could get it done that you would want to see happen here
from the committee?
Mr. Scherer. The main thing is to get the Bank
reauthorized, obviously.
There is an emerging issue I would like to raise, because
Ex-Im Bank does a phenomenal job on the international front.
The transportation division team there, the work they have
done, what they have been able to do with respect to the surge
in demand to support transactions during the financial crisis
has been unparalleled. But what I am concerned about is a
situation now.
We just negotiated a new aircraft sector understanding
under the auspices of the OECD which governs the rules of
export credit, and there is a provision in there dealing with
the home market. And there is a home market restriction that
has operated pretty well between Boeing and Airbus whereby the
U.S., France, Germany, and the U.K. don't finance in each
others' markets or in their own markets. However, with Brazil
and Canada coming into the new aircraft sector understanding,
and now with Canada producing the new C series aircraft, which
competes head to head against the Boeing 737 family of
aircraft, as well as the Airbus A320 family, the Export
Development Corporation of Canada will be providing export
credit financing support into the United States.
Our understanding is that, when agreement has been made,
the United States could have C series matching. However, we do
not currently have a policy response to match. And that is
something I think that is critical, that we find a way to
ensure that should happen.
Chairman Miller of California. We are having discussions
with Treasury right now on that issue for you.
Mr. Scherer. Thank you.
Mr. Dold. Thank you all.
Chairman Miller of California. Also, vacancies on the board
were mentioned. We are working with our colleagues on
appropriate letters encouraging that those vacancies be filled.
Mr. Perlmutter is recognized for 5 minutes.
Is he gone?
Gwen Moore, you are recognized for 5 minutes. You moved up.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much. I am so sorry that I missed a
lot of the testimony of this distinguished panel. So if I ask
questions that have already been addressed in your testimony or
other places, please forgive me for that.
I was really interested in a further discussion of the
national content requirements. What might you all say about the
revision of the national content requirements perhaps
contributing to a greater trade imbalance if we were to revise
this? Not only with content in terms of those percentages but
in terms of products and services and to provide services to
some of the CAFTA countries. What argument would we be able to
make that this wouldn't contribute to an already onerous trade
imbalance?
Mr. Bhatia. Congresswoman, I am happy to take a stab at
that.
Let me sort of give you a very concrete, tangible example
perhaps. We produce steam turbines out of our facility in
Schenectady, New York. These are substantial exports for the
United States when we can export them, multi-million dollar
exports. Each turbine supports hundreds of U.S. jobs.
Right now, those steam turbines, by virtue of the nature of
the inputs into it, even if we maximize our U.S. content into
it, we probably get up to 68, 69 percent. So the maximum
financing we can get from Ex-Im Bank for that would be 68, 69
percent. The remainder of that either has to be found in the
private markets or has to be found from the buyer themselves.
Ms. Moore. I am sorry, just because the other 31 percent of
the components are from other countries?
Mr. Bhatia. They could be raw materials that we don't have
in this country. They can be things that are specialized,
produced somewhere else. This is highly sophisticated
production, so it involves a global supply chain.
Ms. Moore. Why would you also object to the economic impact
test? Maybe we could revise that so there could be an
explanation that rubber or whatever is not available in this
country, nobody grows it, and that is why the content is lower.
Why do you then object to the economic impact test, say let
those levels rise? Just simply explain why it doesn't meet
those thresholds.
Mr. Bhatia. I think, in some ways, they are comparable. In
both cases, by virtue of the requirements that are put into
place, we discourage--we preclude U.S. companies from accessing
Ex-Im financing. It is vital for us to be competitive abroad.
Because our competitors, be they from China or from other
countries around the world, have their government export
financing come into play.
So whether it is content requirements that only limit our
ability to access a certain amount of financing or make it
unqualified altogether, or economic impact tests that may
prevent us from accessing the financing altogether, that is the
reason.
Ms. Moore. I wouldn't want to get into a race to the bottom
on that.
Can I ask you one other question and maybe the other folks?
It is hard not to notice that we have the largest
corporations here, Boeing and GE, and I am really happy about
the economic activity in Wisconsin with GE. But how do you meet
the small business requirements? How do small businesses, say
in Wisconsin or anywhere else, really import from the Export-
Import Bank, small businesses, and to what extent do any of the
credit unions or small banks get an opportunity to facilitate
export-import banking, identifying customers and so on?
Mr. Ickert. Congresswoman, I will take a shot at that from
the standpoint, as I pointed out, I am from Olney, Texas,
population 3,000. We use the Export-Import Bank extensively for
medium-term transactions. I have probably used it for over 80
transactions over our history, and that supports--in 2010, we
had over 56 percent of our product being sold outside of the
United States. So that supports 100 jobs in Olney, Texas. That
may not sound like a lot, but when you replicate that across
this country, the potential is tremendous. And through the
Export-Import Bank small businesses can do that, and we can
replicate that. I think that is why it is very important that
we look to the small business activity of the Bank. It
contributes in Olney, Texas.
Ms. Moore. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Just to clarify, the banks--
Export-Import does not compete against private banks. They are
not allowed to. If there is a private bank available, they have
to use their funds first. They only step in if those private
dollars are not available. That is why we had the small
business guy here to testify to that.
Mr. McCotter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCotter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I just want to make sure it is the jurisdiction of
the Transportation Committee to deal with cargo preference. Was
that your statement earlier? Just nod.
Chairman Miller of California. I was conversing.
Mr. McCotter. You made the statement earlier that the
Transportation Committee would deal with the issue of cargo
preference, not us.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Mica and I talked about
that. It is their jurisdiction, not our jurisdiction.
Mr. McCotter. I appreciate that. I just wanted to be clear.
I suppose, Mr. Bhatia, let me ask you, or perhaps Mr.
Scherer from Boeing, if you lowered the domestic content
requirement--let's just be theoretical about this. If lowering
is good, isn't eliminating it altogether even better? Wouldn't
you make even more money doing that?
Mr. Scherer. It is an interesting question. I certainly
wouldn't propose that. It would sort of give rise to the
reason--what is the purpose? What is the reason? There has to
be a content reason. There has to be something that is going to
support the industry domiciled in a particular country. It
would seem to make the most sense.
I think what we have here is a situation of unintended
consequences, though, of having content levels so high that in
fact it causes us to be uncompetitive.
Mr. McCotter. And then the number, the percentage that you
believe is the optimal percentage for the next 6 years, or
however long it may be reauthorized. You are asking for the
change from ``X'' to ``Y.'' The ``Y'' that you are proposing is
now the optimal number for domestic content percentage.
Mr. Scherer. This is something we can discuss in terms of
what the appropriate number would be. I do recall in my history
of working at the Boeing company that one time back in the
early and mid-1980s, the content requirement was 97 percent;
and it was--trust me--a huge problem.
Mr. McCotter. If I can, on that point, I can understand
that. Because growing up around Detroit in the 1980s, we used
to have a whole lot more manufacturing than we do now, and the
number was put down, I suppose, as a result of that. I am sure
it had no contributory effect to that.
My question then is not when you take not the major company
but, say, the small-scale suppliers and the contract for those
inputs into the eventual product are outsourced, is that not a
cost-benefit determination by the corporation to do that?
Mr. Scherer. Absolutely.
Mr. McCotter. Then would not the decision whether to have
the right domestic content in your product you seek Export-
Import financing for be a cost-benefit analysis as well that
would be put into I think a consideration of whether the
smaller suppliers are outsourced or not for the higher figure?
Mr. Scherer. Certainly.
Mr. McCotter. But if we lower it, that would lower the
cost-benefit analysis and potentially lead it to a greater
favor on the scale towards more offshore sources of components
for our products.
Mr. Scherer. Not necessarily.
Mr. McCotter. It would. Whether you decide to follow it or
whether it has a maximal impact on the decision, it will have
some relationship to the cost-benefit analysis, because it will
be easier to do it with a lower requirement.
Mr. Scherer. I would submit that the--look, the Chinese
right now are building a new airplane.
Mr. McCotter. The Communist Chinese, yes, I know.
Mr. Scherer. And they are sourcing a lot of their
components for that aircraft in the United States. But the U.S.
Ex-Im Bank isn't going to be supporting the financing of that
aircraft. It is going to be the Chinese Export-Import Bank.
Mr. McCotter. It is a mercantilist predatory trading
partner with which we run a massive deficit. I am aware of
that.
I am concerned now with what is in front of us. Would it
not make it easier to seek outside components from offshore if
we lower that requirement, or at least within the cost-benefit
analysis?
Mr. Scherer. As far as the Boeing company is concerned, I
don't think so, and the reason for that is because of the terms
of the aircraft sector understanding. Under the issue from a
pure cost perspective, the Ex-Im Bank financing is not
subsidized. It is very close to market terms. So, from a cost
perspective, no.
The issue for us is availability of the financing and
ensuring that we have a comprehensive and competitive financing
package to ensure that we have a level playing field. We are
competing against Airbus. We are going to be competing against
the CSeries aircraft, the Bombardier, and so on.
Mr. McCotter. I appreciate that from Boeing, anyway.
I know my time is up. I have just one last question.
Mr. Bhatia, under your number one recommendations--I want
to see if I have this in a nutshell, because this place is a
nuthouse--you want more liability, you want to be able to incur
more liability by raising the cap, and you want to report less,
which will be less congressional oversight, right?
Mr. Bhatia. I think what I would say, on your first point,
yes. I think there should be more liability authorized, because
the Bank is running up against the cap. As far as less
congressional oversight, no, I would not say that, Congressman.
I would say that at the moment that number has not been revised
for years, potentially decades, to adjust for inflation.
Mr. McCotter. With the chairman's indulgence, without
objection, let me follow up.
It says, in addition, we are raising the statutory
threshold for congressional notification from $100 million to
$400 million and adjust for inflation, so that you would be
required less--
Mr. Bhatia. For notifications, yes, absolutely. What I
meant was the committee would obviously continue to have
jurisdiction, just less notification. Yes.
Chairman Miller of California. We will have a second round
of questions now. We have plenty of time.
Just so I clearly understand, there is nothing in Ex-Im
Bank's charter that restricts them to 85 percent. This is a
self-imposed number that they use, so it is their discretion if
they choose to use it. But they don't choose to use it.
What would your opinion be if we encouraged some form of a
waiver application you could use to Ex-Im, that under
circumstances where there was no other course than to use ``X''
amount of foreign materials or whatever within a product, that
you could receive a waiver for that? How would that work?
Like you said on the 737, you can't get it above 82
percent. If you could justify that. Or going to 60 percent.
Would that be workable for you in your industries?
Mr. Bhatia. I think I would say, Mr. Chairman, I think it
would depend heavily on what the pattern of dealing was, right,
what the expectation was.
The reality is, we go into deals sort of having a sense of
what the financing package may be, and if our competitors are
going into deals and saying we know we can get you 85 percent,
right, we have ``X'' percent local content. If it depends upon
a waiver process that inevitably in the course of things gets,
you know, tugs of war and political influence, that becomes
very difficult for businesses to go in and be credible on.
Chairman Miller of California. When the Bank is assessing
risk and those kind of factors, what paperwork does the Bank
require for you to provide for them to assess that risk and
what level of engagement is there for you and the Bank?
Mr. Bhatia. They certainly evaluate them. There is an
entire application process that goes where they would look at
the commercial risk and the flow of funds and so forth. There
is also a risk-analysis process that it undertakes with respect
to the country at issue.
So I don't know--does that answer your question?
Chairman Miller of California. In your judgment, what could
Ex-Im Bank do to support and encourage more exports but not do
it in a fashion that encourages you to use a higher percentage
of outside products within your manufacturing? I guess Mr.
McCotter has a concern. If we do something to reduce standards,
is it going to encourage you that maybe there is a cheaper way
to produce your product using more foreign goods but you know
you could still qualify? Is there some way we could circumvent
that?
Mr. Bhatia. To get to Congressman McCotter's issue, yes,
the reality is that if you lower the foreign content, if you
lower the U.S. content standards, you are going to enable and
permit U.S. companies to source globally in a more efficient
manner. But the consequence of that is going to be more U.S.
exports. The consequence across the board will be more U.S.
exports; and, as a result, you are going to have dramatically
more U.S. jobs created.
Chairman Miller of California. You are saying, even if you
used a higher content, the jobs in this country would increase?
Mr. Bhatia. Would increase, yes. The reality is that Ex-Im
is so limited, it is so marginalized effectively in terms of
international ECAs right now, by virtue of its content
requirements, cargo requirements, a variety of these other
requirements, that we don't have a tool. When we are competing
with the Chinese, when we are competing with the Brazilians,
when we are competing around the world to try and create U.S.
exports and U.S. jobs, it is simply not a viable tool. So what
we are saying is bring it into line with the OECD average, with
the OECD requirements, thereby giving U.S. businesses and
workers a chance to compete internationally.
Chairman Miller of California. Let's assume for a question
point that we did something like that, and let's make an
assumption that we increased it to $200 billion rather than
$100 billion. What benefit would that be to American workers
and jobs?
Mr. Bhatia. Going from $100 to $200 billion?
Chairman Miller of California. And modifying the--
Mr. Bhatia. I can't extrapolate. I can just give you our
examples.
Chairman Miller of California. Would it increase your
ability to manufacture?
Mr. Bhatia. Last year, to take as an example--let me give
you two examples. Our gas turbine power plant in Greenville,
South Carolina, a very large facility, 85 percent of our
products exported out of Greenville was for global markets, was
for international markets. Out of our aircraft engine facility
in Ohio, the number was somewhere between 78 and 80 percent of
production was for exports. But U.S. jobs are being sustained
by international markets. That is the reality, and that is what
we are seeing happening going forward.
Chairman Miller of California. Increasing the leverage they
could have as far as loans would not impact American jobs?
Mr. Bhatia. No. I see this being key to us being able to
sustain U.S. economic growth and U.S. job growth.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Scherer, would you
agree?
Mr. Scherer. I would agree 100 percent, and I would like to
give an example.
Aircraft in particular are very high-value capital goods,
and over 80 percent of the aircraft that we produce are
exported outside the United States. And many countries--many
governments and countries, they are looking at their trade
balance as well, they are looking at their acquisitions, they
are looking at their jobs programs and saying, look, if we are
going to spend $2 billion on a fleet of Boeing airplanes, then
we want you to source some of that work in our country. We want
you to buy some components and parts and so forth from us.
They tell this to the other competitors, such as Airbus,
and it gets to a point where it is a serious competitive issue
for us. And if we don't, if we aren't able to address
appropriately the jobs issue for a particular customer, we are
not going to win the business. And in fact, we have lost
transactions because we weren't prepared to go as far as a
particular customer wanted us to go. This is the business
reality out there.
I guess the point I would make is 70 percent of something
is better than 100 percent of nothing.
Chairman Miller of California. If you give me something in
writing based on what your assumptions are today that would be
more specific, I would appreciate that.
Ranking Member McCarthy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Mr. Law, I want to come back to you on small businesses and
what we can do with them. I believe in your testimony you had
talked about some of the smaller companies saying that to apply
for the Export Bank, it was too complicated, they didn't have
the time. Do you have any other recommendations that you might
think the committee should be thinking about as we go through
reauthorization?
Mr. Law. I think the ideas of having the forums are a
terrific idea. I think, again, utilizing business
organizations, chambers of commerce to get that information out
to the small businesses is a key. And anything we could do to
streamline the application and do it all on the Internet, Ex-
Im's Internet, I think would be worthwhile and encourage
participation in the program.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. I think somewhere in your
testimony, which I kind of found interesting, was that maybe
there may be a possibility through the Bank, they would have
people dealing just with first-time applicants.
I know, Mr. Ickert, you work exclusively with the Bank so
you know how the forms go and everything right now. But for
many people who have never done this before and which we are
going to encourage to increase, would having someone who just
specializes in people applying for the first time, would that
help the small businesses? Do you think that would have helped
you when you first applied?
Mr. Ickert. Yes, ma'am, I do. I think also looking at
first-time users of the Bank as to whether they are successful
or not successful, the Bank being able to follow up and see
what frustrations may have been there, to better understand,
decide from the small business to address procedures that could
address those later.
But there are difficulties. They are difficult. And I found
that having a bank that has been very helpful to me--as I said
in my testimony, they have been very patient with me. Ex-Im
Bank has been very patient with me. It requires some patience
for new, first-time users. It is not necessarily a user
friendly--it is not bad, but it has gotten better in the last
few years, but it is still a daunting process.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. That is something we will work
on.
Mr. Law, do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Law. No. I would agree with what Mr. Ickert said. I
think Ex-Im has a lot of terrific people working there, and
they do try to be helpful, but, like with any organization,
there are always things you can improve upon. That is one idea.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. McCotter, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCotter. Thanks. Just very quickly.
Again, I just want to be clear. I think you kind of hit it
when you talked to the chairman. When you lower that content
requirement, your contention is that even if there is
outsourcing of jobs here in the United States and the cost of
the social safety net, the upheaval in their lives, somehow
there will still be a net increase in jobs for the United
States. Right?
Mr. Bhatia. Yes.
Mr. McCotter. Because it is a global economy and we have to
find the cheapest supply lines, right?
Mr. Bhatia. Right.
Mr. McCotter. So wouldn't zero domestic content then
maximize American jobs under the Export-Import Bank's mission?
Mr. Bhatia. It is actually interesting you raise this,
Congressman, because Canada actually has that. So Canada
doesn't have a domestic content requirement. Rather, it has a
national interest test requirement, which in some ways is a
little bit more of a sophisticated way of looking at this,
particularly in the modern era.
Now, content matters to Canada, I have no doubt, production
matters in Canada, jobs matter in Canada, but it is a question
of is an 85 percent hard line test creating or discouraging the
creation of local jobs?
Just to give you a very concrete example, I go back--I
think I may have mentioned it before--wind turbines, right? So
if we need to depend upon--if there is an export market and we
need to have sovereign financing to qualify for the export of
that, we have the choice of shipping out of the United States
or the choice of shipping out of Germany. We manufacture them
there. We manufacture them here. We create jobs in both places.
If U.S. export content is set at 85 percent, we can't
access full Ex-Im funding. So we will source them out of
Germany. We will create the jobs there. We would prefer to do
it, obviously, in the United States, but we would end up doing
it out of Germany if Ex-Im is uncompetitive.
Mr. McCotter. Or it could be viewed that we are rewarding
the initial decision to outsource the jobs and we would like to
change the requirement so that we can still have the financing
in place.
Mr. Bhatia. It is a global market today, and we are
competing against people all over the world.
Mr. McCotter. One last question. I appreciate the tenuous
nature of the global supply chain. I am also fascinated by how
every generation in history makes that same argument that the
strategic needs have changed. It is a globally interrogated
economy. I am sure the Phoenicians thought the same and maybe
the Athenian city state, too.
But my last thing was something you said that was very
fascinating to me, Mr. Scherer, when you talked about how when
you do deals with other countries they may demand that they
have domestic industries taken care of.
I don't expect a response, but I would just like that to be
clear to people. Because when my Republican colleagues
especially talk about free trade, I want them to know that, no,
there is negotiated trade in this world today, because if we
had free trade, the United States would be just fine.
Thank you.
Chairman Miller of California. Ms. Moore is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bhatia, I want to turn my attention again to your
testimony regarding eliminating the cargo preference
requirements. The argument that you make is that this was done
during an era where there was a desire to build a U.S. merchant
marine fleet.
I am wondering, if we were to eliminate this requirement,
would that in fact lead to some insecurity with respect to the
chain of custody of contents of these barrels, other security
problems with regard to pirates, or various war components that
are being shipped being able to be intervened? Do the marine
vessels have sort of a military presence that would be able to
be matched by the Export-Import Bank's expansion of their
fleets?
Mr. Bhatia. Thank you, Congresswoman.
No, I think we do ship products that are not financed by
Ex-Im on non-U.S.-registered vessels. Obviously, we use global
vessels and haven't had issues that I am aware of with respect
to security of those products. I think this is--from our
perspective, this is a little bit of the vestige of a previous
era.
Ms. Moore. So what is shipped on the merchant marine ships
that is not shipped on other cargo?
Mr. Bhatia. Goods that Ex-Im finances, right? So if Ex-Im
finances an export, I can actually give you a very concrete--
Ms. Moore. Does it matter if there are military components?
Mr. Bhatia. No. No. It has nothing to do with the
components we are exporting. It has to do solely with the fact
there is Ex-Im financing for us that requires us to ship it on
U.S. vessels.
Ms. Moore. I am sorry. If we are exporting--
Mr. Bhatia. Let me give you maybe a concrete example.
Wind turbines. We had an opportunity to sell wind turbines
in Kenya. If we had used U.S. Ex-Im financing for that, we
would have had to put those blades, these big blades that go on
wind turbines, on U.S.-bottomed boats. The cost of using those
U.S. boats was so high, it was actually 19 percent of the
overall value of the contract--
Ms. Moore. I am sorry. I don't understand. Why were you
required to put them on the merchant marine boat?
Mr. Bhatia. Because that is standing Ex-Im policy.
Ms. Moore. Is it because it is something that can be
militarized?
Mr. Bhatia. No, it has no relationship to that. It is just
simply a standing requirement.
Chairman Miller of California. If the gentlewoman will
yield, it is not Ex-Im's policy. It is maritime policy, which
is a completely different committee. So it is nothing to do
with Ex-Im. It is just the policy they have to comply with.
Ms. Moore. Reclaiming my time, I was wondering, you say
that we should match financing offered by foreign governments
competing abroad where such financing is inconsistent with the
OECD arrangement. I am wondering, would this run us into any
problems with the WTO or providing these subsidies? What sort
of market disruption would it provide for us to provide funding
to the Ex-Im Bank to make it more competitive with places like
China?
Mr. Bhatia. I am glad you raised that. I think it is a very
important point.
Certainly, GE would in no way support WTO-inconsistent
practices by U.S. Ex-Im or anybody else. The OECD framework is
basically outside of the WTO. It sets a set of standards that
the OECD member economies have agreed to. China and other major
economies are actually outside the OECD framework. So all we
are saying, Congresswoman, is suggesting that the Ex-Im Bank be
in that situation able to match the non-OECD funding to be able
to level the playing field.
Ms. Moore. I have 30 more seconds, so let me ask you, is
there any prohibition in your charter against actually
marketing to small businesses that may not know that they can
access your programming? It seems to be a disconnect that I am
hearing from Mr. Law and people like that about people's
ability to realize that you are there. Is there any prohibition
against your advertising, marketing to small businesses about
the availability of the Export-Import--
Mr. Bhatia. As a private sector representative, I don't
know of anything that precludes Ex-Im from doing that,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Moore. Do they do it? What is the scope of their
outreach? Mr. Law?
Mr. Law. They certainly have developed small centers in
communities throughout the country, not that many, and they
definitely have established some and a Web site, and they do
then coordination with the SBA as well. My suggestion was that
they should use organizations like ours, because our members
are looking to us for information, and we could help get that
information to them.
Ms. Moore. Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
There are a couple of things I would like to read in the
record so we can try to clear this issue up.
First of all, cargo preference programs are administered by
the United States Maritime Association, an agency within the
Department of Transportation, wholly outside of our
jurisdiction. And if you look at PR 17, it is the sense of
Congress that any loans made by an instrument of the United
States Government to foster the exporting of agricultural or
other produces shall provide that the produce may be
transported only on a vessel of the United States, unless as to
many or all other products the Secretary of Transportation
after investigation certifies the instrumentality of the
vessels of the United States are not available in sufficient
numbers.
So, we have no control. I do understand your concerns, and
others. But, for the record, when we are debating this issue,
it is not something that we can control. The Transportation
Committee will deal with that. I have talked to Chairman Mica
about the concerns.
Ms. Moore. Mr. Chairman, just to continue this colloquy for
a second, this was their testimony, so I couldn't help but be
curious about it.
Chairman Miller of California. I understand. I wanted to
make sure there was no confusion out there.
Without objection, I would like to submit for the record
the statements of the following organizations: USA Maritime;
the Coalition of Employment Through Exports; and the National
Association of Manufacturers.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written question to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
This hearing is adjourned. Thank you, witnesses.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 10, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65673.037


