- OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 1, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-10

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-668                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 1, 2011................................................     1
Appendix:
March 1, 2011................................................    37

WITNESSES
Tuesday, March 1, 2011

Donovan, Hon. Shaun, Secretary, U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD)........................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore...................................    38
Donovan, Hon. Shaun..........................................    40

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Biggert, Hon. Judy:
Written statement of HUD Housing Counseling Intermediaries...    58
Frank, Hon. Barney:
Written statement of Hon. Cheryl A. Causley, Chairwoman,
National American Indian Housing Council...................    62
Donovan, Hon. Shaun:
Written responses to questions submitted by Chairman Bachus..    67
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Neugebauer.................................................    79

OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)

----------

Tuesday, March 1, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Spencer Bachus
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bachus, Hensarling,
Manzullo, Biggert, Miller of California, Garrett, Neugebauer,
McHenry, Fitzpatrick, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Hayworth,
Hurt, Dold, Schweikert, Grimm, Stivers; Frank, Waters, Maloney,
Velazquez, Sherman, Baca, Lynch, Scott, Green, Cleaver, Moore,
Ellison, Donnelly, Carson, and Carney.
Chairman Bachus. Good afternoon. The committee will come to
order.
Secretary Donovan, we are pleased to have you here. I think
that the committee has had a very constructive dialogue with
you on issues for which we have jurisdiction within your
Department. I commend you for your professionalism and welcome
you back to the committee. In fact, I will tell members on both
sides, there are issues that I think there is bipartisan
agreement on, and I hope to build on that.
I will say to the committee members, Secretary Donovan will
be very involved in the crafting of a Fannie Mae-Freddie Mac
solution with the Administration because FHA is obviously an
integral part of that, and HUD.
With that, Ms. Biggert is recognized for 2 minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Secretary Donovan. Thank you for joining us this afternoon.
I appreciate that the Administration has submitted a budget
request for next year. Perhaps unfortunately, rather than cut
costs, it builds on new spending authorized during previous
Congresses.
For example, the largest component of HUD's request is the
Section 8 Program, over $19 billion, and an over $1 billion
increase over Fiscal Year 2010. However, the Administration
offers no plan to empower individuals to gain independence from
the program. Instead of growing the Federal budget, the Federal
Government must prioritize its resources so that programs such
as Section 8 don't continue to grow exponentially.
Too much borrowing, taxing, and spending has been a drag on
our economy. Before embarking on new spending, agencies like
HUD first must get their fiscal house in order.
Instead, we are presented with a budget that asks Congress
to fund new Federal programs such as the trust fund to build
more housing. Where is the proposal to boost private sector
investment in single and multifamily housing?
Throwing good money after bad is not the answer to our
Nation's fiscal woes. We must make the tough choices and focus
our limited resources on our most vulnerable populations: the
homeless; children and youth; seniors; the disabled; and our
veterans. But most importantly, the Federal Government must be
laser-focused on creating an environment that supports private
sector job creation. With good jobs, families can afford
housing.
So I look forward to working with the Administration to
achieve these goals and I look forward to your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman is recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I am going to be focusing on the
GSEs, which are so important to housing. I hope that we have a
situation where access to the securitization market is not
limited to the four largest banks in the country. We need
someone who packages the loans of the smaller institutions,
credit unions, and community banks and taps into the capital
markets.
I hope that your people have advised you just what a
crushing effect it would have on the economy in Los Angeles and
roughly 10 other cities if the conforming loan limit is allowed
to drop at the end of this fiscal year. It is almost impossible
to get a loan just above the conforming loan limit. Of course,
if you need $20 million to buy a home in Malibu, that can be
arranged, but those people tend to own the bank themselves.
The theorists and the ideologues say that we should just
abolish Fannie and Freddie and not have any Federal involvement
in financing mortgages. I have yet to hear very many of the
industry stakeholders or practitioners, let alone homeowners'
groups, call for that kind of theoretical purity. I hope that
what we see at least for the next few years is a Federal effort
to support things at the current conforming loan limit and
avoid the crashing economic double-dip effect it could have if
we see another decline in housing prices.
Thank you.
Chairman Bachus. Mr. Hensarling is recognized for 2
minutes.
Mr. Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr.
Secretary. I have been impressed with a number of things I have
seen you do in your Department. I am looking forward to hearing
more about some of your plans for efficiencies and
consolidations within the Department.
I must admit though, as I look at the budget request and
put it into the context of the Nation's fiscal challenges, I
wonder when we are going to stop spending money that we do not
have? It is still a budget request for $47.8 billion and over
the last 15 years, according to OMB, all Federal housing
programs--and admittedly that is somewhat out of your
jurisdiction--have grown from $15.4 billion to $53.8 billion,
representing a 249 percent increase, when GDP over the same
time period increased 96 percent. In other words, the cost of
Federal housing programs is growing at a rate that is 2\1/2\
times greater than the economy.
The family budget can't afford the Federal budget. As we
are looking at not just our Nation's first trillion dollar
deficit, our Nation's second trillion dollar deficit, and now
our Nation's third and largest trillion dollar-plus deficit, I
am reminded again if we want to help foster job creation today,
if we want to save our children from bankruptcy tomorrow, we
have to quit spending money we don't have. And unfortunately,
what we see from this Administration is red ink as far as the
eye can see.
So, I hope that through the Secretary's testimony, we will
hear more ideas about what can be done to make this more
efficient, to consolidate, and to help us again create jobs and
save the next generation from bankruptcy.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Hensarling.
I recognize Mr. Green for 1 minute, and immediately after
that, Mr. Baca for 1 minute.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
Secretary for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, among the questions that I will ask will be
one that will focus on housing for persons with disabilities. I
see that there is a cut in that, a proposed cut in that, and I
am very concerned about it, because many of the persons with
disabilities are persons who are returning from Iraq and
Afghanistan, and I am hopeful that we will be able to
accommodate persons who have served our country well and who
will now need some service from our country.
This is a very serious concern with me, and I will eagerly
anticipate your response to my concerns about these veterans
and other persons with disabilities as well.
I yield back.
Chairman Bachus. Mr. Baca?
Mr. Baca. Thank you. First of all, I want to thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and Ranking Member Frank for calling this hearing. I
also want to thank Secretary Donovan for being here and
offering his perspectives on HUD's budget.
Only 2 months ago in Congress, we already had reached a
critical point. One of the greatest challenges that our country
faces is the need to rein in our national debt and get our
fiscal house in order. However, in a rush to do so, some of my
colleagues seem to have tunnel vision, blindly cutting critical
government programs without any regard to what they do or who
they help and the overall impact on our country.
I state this because many of these same individuals,
Republicans, who don't want government to intervene in housing,
yet live right here in the Capitol and don't pay rent and don't
invest in the private sector, and they come out and say let's
invest in the private sector, and they are living right here in
the Capitol. In fact, just after this Chamber passed a short-
sighted budget measure a couple of weeks ago, many Republicans
released details on the harm those cuts would cost.
Today, we are here to discuss the budget for the Department
of Housing and Urban Development. I say as we do that, let's do
it in line of what we want them to do, and not of ourselves, as
many individuals who live right here in the Capitol aren't
paying a cent, aren't investing, yet government is paying for
their housing.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Baca.
At this time, I recognize Mr. Miller for 2 minutes.
Mr. Miller of California. For the record, I live in
Virginia. I rent an apartment over there. So I don't live free
at the Capitol.
Mr. Baca. You are one of the good guys.
Mr. Miller of California. I am one of the good guys. But we
have a tough budget year out there. There are a lot of
difficult decisions that need to be made, and I am really
concerned that we be cautious not to make things worse than
they already are. There is no doubt that the housing industry
in this country is suffering, the housing market globally is
suffering, and I think we need to look at what went wrong, what
we could have done to have prevented it, and what we need to do
in the future to make sure we have the most robust housing
market you can have in this country without putting taxpayers
at risk.
My concern is with FHA. Your default rates are higher than
I think they should be, yet they are still lower than the
private sector's. I am not saying you did everything right,
because a lot of things were done wrong. But your default rates
are close to 5 percent, as I put it, correct? Fannie Mae is
about 4.2 percent, Freddie Mac is about 3.1 percent. The best
prime market default rate out there is 5.4 percent. Subprime
ARMs, 38.7 percent, subprime loans in general, 26.5 percent.
So when you look at those numbers, you have to say
something is structurally wrong with the mortgage industry at
large in this country, and we should be looking at that, rather
than just saying we need to deal with Freddie, Fannie, and FHA.
Yes, we need to deal with their problems, without a doubt.
There is not a doubt there are serious problems and we need to
address those problems.
But at the same time, when we are pulling out of a
marketplace on the FHA high-cost areas, as we are pulling back,
increasing rates, you are talking about doing the same thing
with Freddie and Fannie, there is not a private sector entity
out there to immediately pull in during this distressed
marketplace.
If we are going to protect taxpayers, 65.1 percent of the
homeowners in this country are taxpayers, so we need to protect
everybody. We need to make sure we do the best we can for the
entire sector. And I think we need to ask what went wrong, how
do we fix it and correct it, and how do we not put taxpayers at
risk in the future? I am afraid we have not done that, gone
back and asked, what did we do wrong in Freddie and Fannie and
FHA, what could we have done better, and how do we move forward
in the future? I hope you can address that.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Bachus. Mr. Frank is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Frank. I thank the chairman.
First, if I could, before my time, I want to give
encouragement to people who felt they were conscience-bound to
read the financial reform bill, which is, as I recognize, a
large bill. You don't have to do that. You can hold off now and
wait for the movie version, because I have just been told that
Senator Dodd has been named head of the Motion Picture
Association of America. So ``Dodd-Frank, the Movie'' is
probably on the horizon and you can skip reading it. The sequel
will be, ``The Financial Inquiry Report'' so people can keep
that going. I thank you for the time. I thought I would give my
former colleague a mention.
I welcome the Secretary, whom I think has done an excellent
job of trying to manage his resources. Let me say I understand
the concerns about spending in the cities, and I am inclined to
agree that in these past few years in particular, we have
greatly overspent in a number of cities--Baghdad, Fallujah,
Kandahar, Kabul. We have been spending a great deal of money I
think to no great purpose elsewhere.
Having thought that the war in Iraq was a great mistake and
it having cost us over $1 trillion, with more to come, I am not
shamed by those who tell me I am spending too much if I want to
have decent housing for poor elderly people or if I believe
that the notion of a homeless veteran is really a shameful
thing in this country and to the extent possible, it is not
possible in every case, there are personal factors, we ought to
try to diminish it.
I in particular hope that we can work, as I said earlier
today, on a better set of policies for affordable rental
housing. And in particular, as you know, Mr. Secretary, over
the years, in the beginning of the 1960s, with a Federal
subsidy on interest, the private sector, both the profit and
nonprofit private sector built hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of units for people not at the very bottom of the
spectrum generally, but in the lower- to moderate-income range,
and it was built under a program that I think while it had good
results in some ways, it was flawed because it allowed for
these units to no longer be protected after a while. I think
preserving those units is a very important thing.
Now, people talk about the costs of housing, but one of the
problems we have is that we have taken this policy that says if
you moved into one of those units and it no longer is under the
protection it was under when the subsidized loan was given, we
will give you a Section 8, a voucher far beyond what you would
ordinarily get to meet with those rents. So while we allow the
units to go out of the inventory, that has the impact of
raising the rental payments. I think by far the most efficient
and inexpensive thing we could do would be to preserve those
units.
It is something we had been working on, and obviously
things have changed here, but I would hope that it is something
that we could continue to work on. Similarly, with regard to
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, I asked Secretary Geithner about
this and he acknowledged what I think is clearly the case, and
I have asked him to document it, that the losses on multifamily
housing were far smaller as a percentage of outcome because
they were clearly smaller in general than single family. And I
would hope as we go forward with a new set of housing finance
rules, which we very much need, that we would be making sure
that we preserved, in fact improved, our ability to finance
multifamily rental housing, it doesn't have to be obviously one
building, multifamily developments, and that we would provide
some revenue so that the private sector could continue what we
have done successfully in the past, take a Federal subsidy,
private sector activity, build some rental housing, and not
just build it for a short, limited period of time, but
indefinitely.
So as we go forward on the GSE issue, one of the things I
would hope we could work together to do is to find some stream
of revenue that would not only be small enough to have no
negative impact on housing finance in general, but would help
us preserve that rental housing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Frank.
Mr. Huizenga, for 1 minute.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that,
and that actually leads in perfectly to my question.
Earlier today, we had Secretary Geithner here talking about
a myriad of issues, but one of the issues brought up was
exactly what you heard about now, there was not enough of an
emphasis on rental housing and assistance in this time. But as
I understand, in your Fiscal Year 2012 budget summary, 72
percent of your budget is going into 3 rental assistance
programs, 72 percent.
So I am curious, and I have 1 minute as we are going into
the question period time, do you really need more emphasis on
rental housing programs, 72 percent of your budget, which is an
increase over what has been happening in previous years, or do
you need to spend that money on some other programs? I will
appreciate your addressing that a little later on.
Thank you.
Chairman Bachus. Mr. Scott, for 1 minute.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Over here, Secretary Donovan. Let me commend you on the
work that you are doing. It was certainly a joy to have you in
Atlanta, where we did some great work there and we are going to
do more, and I want to thank you for working with me and
Treasury in our upcoming home foreclosure event program that we
have.
Just a point: I would like to see some voices coming from
HUD, from the Administration, to point out the dire
consequences if some of these very drastic cuts are taking
place, because it is not right. It is not fair as we want to
deal with the real challenges of the debts and the deficit to
disproportionately do it on the backs of the very people who
can least afford it.
And for many of our local municipalities and governments
who are thrust into these programs, one of the most drastic
areas has been a recent CR that we passed, I think last week or
so, that would drastically cut the funding for the CBDGs down
by 62 percent from $3.9 billion to $1.5 billion. The
consequences of that is very dear to some of these communities,
particularly in districts like mine and some other areas.
So I am thinking I would want to see HUD fight a little bit
and bring to the fore what these consequences are so the
American people will know that if these cuts go through, this
is what is going to happen. Then, we can make a rational
judgment on it with the spirit of the American people with us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
There is 1 minute remaining on our side. Are there any
members who wish to speak? Let me just use the time that we
still have.
Mr. Secretary, I think we do realize that our low-income
Americans, a great percentage of them cannot afford
homeownership. For them, renting is really the best option, and
many of them, I think as many as 25 percent of them, spend over
half of their income on shelter or rental income. I do believe
there is some agreement by this committee that multifamily
housing for low-income Americans is a concern if we prioritize
our budget. So I would associate myself with that.
Rental assistance is a large percentage of the budget, and
I think most of that is Section 8. I am not sure if
improvements couldn't be made to address where that money goes,
as Mr. Frank said, multihousing family and many others.
With that, Mr. Secretary, we welcome you before the
committee and look forward to your testimony. Your written
statement will be, with unanimous consent, entered into the
record. We will hear your oral statement at this time.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SHAUN DONOVAN, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)

Secretary Donovan. Thank you, Chairman Bachus, and also
Ranking Member Frank, as well as all the members of the
committee, for this opportunity to testify about HUD's Fiscal
Year 2012 budget proposal.
This afternoon, I would like to discuss the investments it
calls for to help America win the future by out-educating, out-
innovating, and out-building our competitors. I will also
highlight the steps our proposal takes to improve how we
operate HUD's programs and the tough choices it makes to ensure
we take responsibility for our deficits.
Mr. Chairman, in developing this proposal, we followed
three principles. The first is to continue our support for the
housing market while bringing private capital back. Two years
ago, with the housing market collapsing and private capital in
retreat, the Administration had no choice but to take action.
The critical support FHA provided has helped over 2 million
families buy a home since that time and nearly 1.5 million
homeowners refinance into stable, affordable products with
monthly savings exceeding $100.
And while the Federal Housing Administration and Ginnie Mae
will continue supporting the housing recovery in the year
ahead, we must also help private capital return to the market.
This is a process that HUD began many months ago, and I want to
thank this committee for passing legislation in the last
Congress to reform FHA's mortgage insurance premium structure.
With this authority, FHA announced a premium increase of 25
basis points last month. Because of these reforms and others,
FHA is projected to generate approximately $9.8 billion in
receipts for the taxpayer in Fiscal Year 2011. Indeed, the
reforms that are generating these receipts today have set the
stage for more private capital to return in the years to come
while strengthening FHA's reserves and ensuring that it remains
a vital source of financing for underserved borrowers and
communities.
Just as importantly, Mr. Chairman, while HUD's Fiscal Year
2012 request is $47.8 billion in gross budget authority,
because of FHA and Ginnie Mae receipts, the cost to the
taxpayer for this budget is only $41.7 billion, fully 2.8
percent below our Fiscal Year 2010 budget and more than meeting
the President's commitment to a 5-year domestic discretionary
spending freeze.
The second principle we used to develop our budget was to
protect current residents and improve the programs that serve
them. While the median income of American families today is
over $60,000, for families who live in HUD-assisted housing, it
is $10,200 per year, and more than half are elderly or
disabled.
At the same time, having seen from 2007 to 2009 the largest
increase in the history of HUD's worst-case housing needs
survey, it is clear that the recession hit these families hard.
That is why 80 percent of our proposed budget keeps these
residents in their homes and provides basic upkeep to public
housing while also continuing to serve our most vulnerable
populations through our homeless programs.
Because the cost of serving the same families grows each
year, protecting existing families in our programs required us
to make tough choices with the remaining 20 percent of the
budget, including the decision to reduce funding for the
Community Development Block Grants, HOME Investment
Partnerships, and new construction for HUD-supported housing
programs for the elderly and the disabled, all between 5 and 10
percent.
These are difficult cuts. I saw for myself as a local
housing official the difference these funds can make,
supporting senior housing, boys and girls clubs, YMCAs, and
other providers of critical community services. But American
families are tightening their belts and we need to do the same.
At the same time, this budget makes a strong commitment to
doing more of what works and to stop doing what doesn't. By
including the Section 8 Voucher Reform Act in the budget, we
will simplify and streamline the voucher program and save $1
billion for the taxpayer over the next 5 years while supporting
the ability of public housing authorities in small towns and
rural areas to better serve the working poor. Indeed, thanks to
this committee's work on the Homeless Emergency Assistance and
Rapid Transition to Housing Act (HEARTH), the budget funds a
new Rural Housing Stability Program that reflects the unique
and growing needs in those communities.
This budget also holds our partners accountable for the
funding they receive from HUD. To fully fund the Public Housing
Operating Fund, we require public housing authorities (PHAs)
with excess reserves to contribute $1 billion. These resources
were set aside so that our PHAs could continue operating during
a rainy day, and I think would all agree that rainy day is
here.
These efforts point to a broader commitment expressed
through our Transformation Initiative (TI) to improving HUD's
programs. TI funds are replacing data systems in our largest
program, housing choice vouchers, that date from the early
1990s, so we can hold PHAs accountable for managing their
budgets, just like families and businesses are doing across the
country.
The flexibility TI provides has also allowed us for the
first time to offer technical assistance across all our
community planning and development programs and launch a new
initiative to improve the financial management and
accountability of troubled housing authorities. And by
supporting research, evaluation, and program demonstrations, TI
improves HUD's own accountability by identifying what we do
well and what we need to do better.
These needed reforms allow us to propose increased
investments in programs we know work, like the HUD-VASH program
for homeless veterans. This effort is built on the solid body
of evidence that permanent supportive housing both ends
homelessness and saves money for the taxpayer by putting an end
to the revolving door of emergency rooms, shelters, and jails.
As such, this budget would increase funding for homeless
programs by more than 29 percent over 2010 to keep the
President's commitment to opening doors, the first Federal
strategic plan to end homelessness which the Administration
unveiled last June to end chronic and veterans' homelessness by
2015 and homelessness among families and children by 2020.
All told, this combination of tough choices and needed
reforms would allow us to serve over 4.5 million families in
our core rental assistance programs, 86,000 more than in 2010.
Our third principle for developing this budget is to
continue critical initiatives that have been part of our budget
for the last 2 years, but in this fiscal climate to propose no
new initiatives. The President has made clear that winning the
future depends on America winning the race to educate our
children. But that is not possible if we are leaving a whole
generation of children behind in our poorest neighborhoods.
That is why we worked with this committee last year to pass
Choice Neighborhoods legislation that was implemented in our
budget and have again proposed $250 million for Fiscal Year
2012. This funding will allow communities to use the mixed-use
and mixed-finance tools pioneered by Secretaries Jack Kemp and
Henry Cisneros with the HOPE VI Program to transform all of the
federally-assisted housing in the neighborhood.
Similarly, ensuring that America out-builds our competitors
requires us to protect and preserve public housing for the
future. Right now, we are losing 10,000 units from our public
housing stock every year. At the same time, there is billions
of dollars of private capital sitting on the sidelines that
could put tens of thousands of construction workers to work
rebuilding this housing.
That is why, Mr. Chairman, we have proposed a $200 million
demonstration in our budget to preserve up to 255,000 public
housing units using long-term, project-based rental assistance
contracts. As we have seen in the Section 8 Program and the
low-income housing tax credit, opening these properties to
total private capital not only brings new funding to affordable
housing, but also a new sense of discipline that extends from
the way these properties are financed to the way they are
managed.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, American businesses, large and small,
cannot out-innovate their competitors when their workers spend
52 cents of every dollar they earn on housing and
transportation combined, and moving products on our roads costs
5 times as much wasted fuel and time as it did 25 years ago.
That is why we request another $150 million for our sustainable
communities initiatives which helps regions and communities
develop comprehensive housing and transportation plans that
create jobs and economic growth.
In a community like Austin, Texas, which is linking its
long-term regional transportation plan to 37 mixed-income
communities near transit and job centers, you can see how the
grants it provides aren't about one-size-fits-all rules that
tell communities what to do, but saving the taxpayer money by
coordinating investments more effectively and efficiently. The
demand for these kinds of innovations explains the
extraordinary demand for this program. And it wasn't just
coming from our largest metro areas. Indeed, over half of our
regional grants were awarded to small regions and towns.
So, Mr. Chairman, HUD's Fiscal Year 2012 budget proposal
isn't just about spending less, it is also about investing
smarter and more effectively. It is about out-educating, out-
building, and out-innovating our competitors. It is about
making hard choices to reduce the deficit and putting in place
much needed reforms to hold ourselves to a high standard of
performance. But, most of all, it is about the results we
deliver for the people and places who depend on us most.
For HUD, winning the future starts at home, and with this
budget, I respectfully submit, of targeted investments and
tough choices, we aim to prove it.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Donovan can be found
on page 40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
At this time, I recognize Ms. Biggert, who is the Housing
Subcommittee Chair, and after that we will recognize Ms.
Hayworth and Mr. Schweikert, in that order, on the Republican
side.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, this goes back a little bit to what I said
in my opening statement: I am wondering about the long-term
costs associated with the existing vouchers and what will be
the impact of Section 8 funding costs, what impact they will
have on the overall HUD budget and the other programs within
the HUD budget.
Do you have a plan or are you going to have a plan to
empower individuals to gain independence from the program? The
program seems to work, but nobody ever leaves it, and we
certainly have long waiting lists for Section 8.
Secretary Donovan. Madam Chairwoman, thank you for the
question. I think it is very important that we focus in on the
Section 8 Program.
As I mentioned in my testimony, over half of the residents
of public housing are either seniors or people living with
disabilities. But beyond that, for those who are able to work,
we estimate that around 90 percent of those living in public
housing in Section 8 who are able to work, do work, and it is
critical that we take additional steps to encourage them to
take up work.
Mrs. Biggert. Do you have data on how long the average stay
in Section 8 housing is?
Secretary Donovan. Typically, what we see for non-elderly
or disabled is an average stay of 4 to 5 years in public
housing. I think one of the programs that you have focused on
historically, which is absolutely critical, is the Family Self-
Sufficiency Program. I know this from my own experience at the
local level where we were expanding with our own funds family
self-sufficiency. We are in the process, using our
Transformation Initiative dollars, of doing the first ever full
national study of the Family Self-Sufficiency Program because
we believe that it provides the kind of incentives that are
necessary to help people gain work and succeed, as well as to
open up spaces within the programs for those who are on the
waiting lists.
So, with your support, certainly we would look to do more
with the Family Self-Sufficiency Program.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. Then this morning, there was an
article published by the American Bankers Association stating a
deal had been made among the regulators writing the QRM rule,
and among the components reported was the 20 percent
downpayment requirement, loan servicing standards, and loan
modification standards.
Particularly with the 20 percent down standard, I am
concerned that there will be few first-time buyers who will be
qualifying for the QRM. So won't that result make most first-
time buyers fall into the FHA program, which you are already
trying to dampen down, too?
Secretary Donovan. First of all, let me assure you that no
agreement among all the regulators has been reached at this
point. There are numerous parties, including HUD, that are part
of those discussions, and there is no final agreement or
proposal at this point.
On your specific point about the effect on FHA, as you
know, there is an exemption for Fannie Mae--for FHA and for
Ginnie Mae from the QRM standards, and there is some risk that
we would see additional demand for FHA that would come out of a
standard.
On the other hand, it is important that we ensure that
capital is driven toward safe, stable products. And the
proposal we will put out will be a proposed rule. There will be
plenty of time for this committee and the public to weigh in on
any proposal. It is possible we might even propose some
alternatives within that rule. And this is one of the issues
that we will be talking about, balancing safety and soundness
with the risk of potentially driving more business to FHA under
the rule.
Mrs. Biggert. This morning, Secretary Geithner talked about
the Administration recommending a joint FHA and FHFA working
group to tighten the standards. Is this the same one, or is
this another group?
Secretary Donovan. I don't know exactly the question he was
responding to, but there are a number of places where we are
working jointly with FHFA. He may have been talking about
servicing standards, and in particular the standards for
compensating servicers for the servicing work that they do. We
have undertaken with FHFA a broad look at those standards.
It is clear that the current compensation model for
servicing is broken: it is not working for consumers,
homeowners; it is not working as well as it should for FHA; and
it is not working well enough for the servicers because of the
accounting and other complexities of the current standards. So
we are working together on that initiative.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Chairwoman Biggert.
Ranking Member Frank.
Mr. Frank. I want to pick up--I am struck by my colleague
from Illinois worrying now that we are going to be too tough on
mortgages for low-income people. I would hope we wouldn't go
from complaining totally that they were too loose to now
complaining they are too tough without ever passing go. And I
disagree with her. I don't think the 20 percent is out of line.
There are a couple of things that need to be said here.
First of all, I would hope we would not buy into the
argument that no mortgage loans will be made if they don't meet
the qualified residential mortgage definition. Remember, the
qualified residential mortgage definition gives you an
exemption. It doesn't say you can't give or make the mortgage.
It gives you an exemption from having to retain 5 percent of
the loans you make in a securitization. And the notion that no
one will make loans unless they can 100 percent securitize is
clearly false.
In the first place, many of the smaller institutions never
securitized in the first place. Many of the community banks
don't securitize. They will be unaffected by this, whatever the
qualified residential mortgage number is that gets them out
from under the requirement that they retain some of their
capital.
Now, there are some who do securitize everything. One group
of mortgage lenders came to us during the debate and said, ``If
you make us keep 5 percent of the loans when we securitize it,
we won't make any loans.'' We asked, ``Why?'' We didn't think 5
percent was excessive. They said, ``We don't have any
capital.'' In other words, they don't have any money and they
were resentful that we were telling them not to lend money they
don't own. When people lend money they don't own, it doesn't
end so well.
So this notion that you have to weaken the qualified
residential mortgage so people can buy homes, remember again,
it is not a ban on mortgages. It is an exemption from having to
keep 5 percent.
Secondly, while you have the smaller ones, Wells Fargo has
announced that they believe they can make loans under this
amount or that they could keep 5 percent.
So I think that was one of the key causes of the crisis,
people lending money that they had no stake in when it came to
repayment.
And I notice, by the way, now that we have seen a concern
about the securitization of commercial real estate. As I recall
the bill, there is no exemption--the securitization risk
retention does not apply only to residential mortgages, it
applies to anybody who is lending money and securitizing it.
And I hope the regulators, not you, because it is not housing,
will insist on that for everybody.
So I want to disagree with my colleague. Weakening the
qualified residential mortgage, remembering again, it is not an
absolute bar, it says simply that you can make these loans, but
if you make those loans, if you made a loan with very little
downpayment, then you ought to have to keep 5 percent of it.
All that means is--and I know you said you are going to try the
get the FHA to have better standards. I am all for that, and
the FHA has done a very good job under yourself and
Commissioner Stevens. It began at the end of the Bush
Administration. But the best way to do that outside the FHA is
to tell the private sector, ``Here is a good incentive for you
not to lend money to people who won't pay it back. If they
don't pay it back, you are going to take a loss.''
So as I said, I would be very disappointed to see a
substantial weakening of the qualified residential mortgage
exemption to the risk retention, and the notion that if you
don't give people the exemption, and, of course, the exemption
goes to everybody, then there will be people, community banks
will continue to make loans and not securitize, as they told
us. They didn't get too concerned about this. Other
institutions will make the loans at the 20 percent, and others
will presumably make the loans and securitize them.
Are we really being told there are so few institutions out
there with confidence in their own judgment that they won't
make residential mortgage loans which could be highly
profitable unless they were able to pass off the whole loss?
I have used up almost all my time. We have the Secretary
here, we have other members who want to ask questions. So I am
going to yield back and I will give my minute into the general
fund here.
But I would be very disappointed if we had a dilution of
the qualified residential mortgage. Again, it is being talked
about as if it was the absolute limit, and if you couldn't meet
that, you couldn't make a mortgage loan. No. All it says is if
you want to make mortgage loans that don't meet that test, then
either you can't securitize it, people can hold the mortgages
in their portfolios, or if you securitize it, you have to
retain 5 percent, showing a fairly small confidence in your own
judgment.
I yield back.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
Ms. Hayworth?
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I greatly appreciate your comments regarding
the value of the push to make HUD more efficient and more
effective. It is absolutely crucial at a time when we are
spending 42 cents of every taxpayer dollar on debt service
alone, and in which we have an over 9 percent unemployment rate
that we are finding difficult to overcome.
You also extol the value of private funding as instilling
discipline in these market placing, and I think that is so
important to recognize, that we should, I would submit to you,
minimize Federal involvement in the housing and mortgage
marketplace to the extent we can and keep it to the neediest.
I have an example of why that is so important from my own
home county, which is Westchester County, New York. We are
struggling under the burden of a Community Development Block
Grant agreement that was made under a previous county
executive's administration from HUD, and it has been very, very
difficult to try to comply with the terms of that grant because
they simply don't make sense in our county. It was not this
county executive's error, but we are now living with the
consequences, which points up again the exceedingly difficult
challenge of having the Federal Government involved in local
marketplaces.
But they had to hire a consultant to help, at HUD's
discretion, if you will, to help sort out this mess. And I
wonder if you might hazard a guess as to how much that
consultant is charging per hour, apparently a fee, a figure set
by HUD, what you might consider a reasonable fee. I am not
trying to put you on the spot, but what you might consider a
reasonable sum per hour to consult and help our county get out
of this predicament.
Secretary Donovan. Congresswoman, let me make sure I am
clear. This was a court case brought against the county. There
was a court-appointed master essentially who was put in place
to implement the decision of the court.
Dr. Hayworth. It is very difficult, yes.
Secretary Donovan. I would have to say I am not sure what
the court-appointed monitor was charging.
Dr. Hayworth. It is over $900 an hour that the taxpayers of
Westchester County, New York, are now paying, the sorely
pressed taxpayers. We are losing businesses, unfortunately, to
neighboring States and other States because the tax structure
in Westchester County, although it is a wonderful county in so
many ways, is so difficult to cope with.
So I wonder if you might as our Secretary see if you could
possibly help mitigate some of that burden, if that sounds at
all like that might be a rather exorbitant amount for the
county to be disbursing merely to have some sort of regulator,
if you will, in place. I would be most grateful on behalf of
Westchester County, New York.
Secretary Donovan. Congresswoman, this is an issue that I
know has been a lot of focus in the county. Under the prior
county executive, there was this court case brought
independently against the county for not complying with their
required fair housing obligations. The court did make a
determination.
I will say that we have been somewhat concerned that under
the new county executive, for example, he vetoed a piece of
legislation that the county legislature passed and was required
by the settlement. There are a number of other steps that have
been taken that I think have caused this to go on longer than
anyone would have liked. Certainly, we are very interested in
trying to resolve it.
We have offered technical assistance from the agency so
that we could minimize any costs to the taxpayer there, to the
local taxpayers in terms of working this through, but,
unfortunately, we haven't been able to get compliance with the
ruling at this point.
Again, this is not HUD's decision. It was the court that
imposed this decision, and we would like nothing more than to
get to a resolution, which is, frankly, to build a certain
number of units in the county on sites that I think we have
been able to work with the county effectively to try to
identify. We will do everything we can to accelerate it and
make sure it gets resolved as soon as possible.
Dr. Hayworth. That would be much appreciated. There has
been a tremendous amount of difficulty finding appropriate
sites within the county and sites that would make sense
actually for those who would indeed inhabit these new homes. It
is very difficult to connect them with job opportunities. This
is almost part of a spiral in which we have a heavy tax
structure. Federal taxes certainly play into that. HUD is part
of our Federal tax burden, and because of that, we don't have
the jobs climate that we should. And, of course, the best way
to afford a home and to afford a private rental or mortgage is
to have a job.
So, again, I laud your emphasis on streamlining what HUD
does so that we can relieve these burdens from places like
Westchester County, where it is starkly in evidence that a
Federal mechanism can be very difficult to layer on top of a
local community.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
By prior agreement of Mr. Green and Mr. Carney on this
side, Mr. Green on this side, and Mr. Schweikert on our side,
will be the next two speakers. Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
the persons who agreed.
Mr. Secretary, at first glance it does appear that there is
a $104 million decrease. However, there was a transfer, and as
a result of the transfer, there is actually a $10 million
increase when compared to the 2010 budget, and we are talking
about now for the 811 program, persons with disabilities. So I
compliment you for looking out for persons with disabilities,
many of whom are veterans. It is very important to me and
people in my district. I happen to have a VA hospital in my
district.
However, the CR that was passed by my friends on the other
side would cut approximately $210 million, and that would be a
70 percent cut, which could lead to approximately 14,000
households, and these are persons with disabilities either
losing their assistance or being displaced.
Now, my assumption is that this was a gross oversight and
my friends on the other side would not cut 70 percent from a
program that will have some significant impact on persons with
disabilities, many of whom are veterans. There is no question
that veterans are returning from these wars and they are
disabled. So I am going to assume that this is an oversight and
give my friends the benefit of the doubt.
But I would like you to comment briefly on what this cut of
$210 million, which is 70 percent from the 811 program, what
would the impact be, if you would, on persons with
disabilities? And when the yellow light comes on, if you could
wrap it up, I have one more question. Thank you.
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, the 202 and 811 programs,
the programs for the elderly and people with disabilities, are
our primary tool for construction of new units at HUD for
seniors and people with disabilities. And as I said in my
testimony, we did have to make difficult decisions in our
budget this year to cut by between 5 and 10 percent those
programs so that we would have fewer new units.
Obviously, a much deeper cut in those programs would have a
far more serious effect on limiting the number of seniors and
people with disabilities who would be able to get access. We
see typically many year-long waiting lists for these properties
around the country, and that is why we made difficult decisions
but felt we needed to maintain a significant level of funding
for new units in those programs.
Mr. Green. And do you find that a good many of the persons
with disabilities are veterans?
Secretary Donovan. We do. Also, one of the reasons why we
continued to propose an investment of $75 million in 10,000 new
HUD-VASH vouchers in the budget is because we have seen great
success in housing veterans who are at risk of homelessness or
are already homeless through that effort as well.
Chairman Biggert asked about the rising costs of Section 8.
A significant part of that has been the renewal of these HUD-
VASH vouchers as they have come into the Section 8 budget for
the first time. When we came into office, the President did,
there were only about 1,200 veterans around the country who
were being housed by VASH. We are now up to over 20,000
veterans who are housed under VASH, and it has put us a good
way down the road toward keeping the President's commitment to
end veterans' homelessness by 2015.
Mr. Green. Thank you. I compliment you and the President
for that commitment. It means a lot to many people in my
district and probably people around the country.
One additional question. There is a contemplation of
terminating HAP, FHA, NSP, which, of course, is the
Neighborhood Stabilization Program, the Emergency Mortgage
Relief Program. If these programs are terminated, my suspicion
is there will be an impact on housing of persons. Many persons
who might benefit from these programs and stay in their current
housing circumstance will now be pushed into other
circumstances.
Can you give a comment, please, on the impact of
terminating these programs in terms of how it will impact your
budget and what you are trying to accomplish? Again, I thank
the President for what he has done.
Secretary Donovan. I know you have a hearing on that
tomorrow morning. Commissioner Stevens will be testifying along
with Assistant Secretary Marquez on the programs. But let me
just quickly frame some of the issues there.
There would be a substantial risk not only to the families
who benefit from those programs and the neighborhoods that
benefit from those programs, but also to the broader housing
market. When the housing recovery is still fragile, we need to
continue to do more.
Every month, we have tens of thousands of new homeowners
who are at risk who benefit from modifications under the HAMP
Program. Our data shows that the redefault rates have been
dramatically lower than in other programs, so they are
successful. We have seen average reductions in payment of over
$500 a month under that.
The FHA refinance program, which is an effort to get banks
and owners of loans to write down principal on their own
nickel, so these are not taxpayer costs for writing down those
mortgages, these are private costs to those who hold the
mortgages. We have had three major servicers sign up just
within the last few weeks for that effort. And just as it is
beginning to expand, to cut it off now and stop the reduction
in negative equity, which we think is one of the most
significant barriers to housing recovery now, would be a real
problem.
In addition, the Emergency Homeowner Loan Program targets
borrowers who are unemployed through no fault of their own. The
primary reason we see new foreclosures and new defaults today
is because of unemployment. Yet the tens of thousands of
borrowers who would benefit from the Emergency Homeowner Loan
Program would be--we would not be able to help them without
that funding.
So, all of those are important.
The last thing I would say is the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program is one that has invested in communities
that have been devastated by foreclosures. What we have seen
already, where the program has been invested, we see reductions
of as much as 50 or 75 percent in the vacancy rates in those
neighborhoods. That means not only do we help families get into
those homes, but their neighbors who have paid their mortgages,
have done everything right, when they saw their property values
declining precipitously because they had 5 or 10 foreclosures
on their block, those families would not be helped as well to
help those neighborhoods recover.
We have seen lots of private capital come in. When we start
to fix up homes through the Neighborhood Stabilization Program,
it sends ripple effects into the surrounding community with
homes that get renovated with private capital as well. So all
of those are effects that would be significant from the
termination of these programs.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I owe you some time, and, of course, I am grateful.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you. I did want the Secretary to
give you a comprehensive answer to that, because I know that
there is a concern about that issue. I probably wouldn't allow
that much time again, but now the Secretary has answered, and I
didn't want to chop it up. I have to applaud that answer. It
was the most comprehensive answer that we have heard in a long
time.
Secretary Donovan. I apologize.
Chairman Bachus. No. I don't know whether you had that
written and you read it, but it was, very, very comprehensive.
Mr. Schweikert?
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, you don't have to be that comprehensive on
these.
What do you think the total liabilities, if we look at the
FHA loan portfolio right now, where are we at?
Secretary Donovan. On a net balance sheet basis, the FHA
fund, if we were to value it in a traditional way we would
value a company or insurance fund, the latest estimates are
that the value is just north of $30 billion. So that would mean
our assets outweigh our liabilities by in the range of $32
billion.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary, internally
when your team sets up the actuarial standards of what you
should have set aside, what range should you be in?
Secretary Donovan. By Congress' standards, we are required
to have a standard where we should be above 2 percent of our
outstanding portfolio in the fund. So that is the standard that
is set. And that is significantly higher than you would see in
the private sector typically for what the standards are for
capital with similar kinds of loans.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Secretary, is that 2 percent, or 2.5
percent?
Secretary Donovan. Two percent.
Mr. Schweikert. Two percent would be how much?
Secretary Donovan. I don't have it in front of me, the
total assets.
Mr. Schweikert. But it would be dramatically greater?
Secretary Donovan. It would be higher than we currently
hold in what we call our excess reserves. The $32 billion that
I referred to is our total reserves. The portion that is so-
called excess reserves above and beyond what we need to meet
our predicted liabilities is in the range of about $7 billion
today, and that is below the 2 percent standard at this point.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary, in that, let's
call it the $32 billion in reserves, is that also encumbered by
the number of units that have been foreclosed on that HUD is
holding title to?
Secretary Donovan. That includes all the potential
liabilities, not just current liabilities, but also expected
projected losses on every loan that we have made to date.
Mr. Schweikert. You beat me to where we are going. You take
all the fun out of it. How many units do you think you hold
right now, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Donovan. How many units of foreclosed?
Mr. Schweikert. Yes.
Secretary Donovan. It is in the tens of thousands. I bet if
the smart folks behind me--give me 2 minutes, and I could get
you the exact figure.
Mr. Schweikert. If anyone has a guess, just yell it out.
Secretary Donovan. I think it is in the 70,000 to 80,000
range.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. As we keep talking about housing
policy and some of the mechanics, let's just say it is 70,000
single-family or condo units that you are holding right now
that you are marketing, that you are selling. How does that fit
into some of your other housing policies? Is it just you are
going to sell them and refund, put the capital back in? What
are you doing with those?
Secretary Donovan. Typically, what we do is market those
and sell them at market price. There are targeted neighborhoods
that are particularly distressed where the prices that we would
get typically don't support rehabilitating and keeping those
properties in decent condition. So there are targeted examples
where we would discount those prices in order to get a
commitment from, whether it is a private sector group or a
public sector group, a nonprofit group to fix up that house and
to sell it say maybe to a first-time home buyer or in a way
that contributes to a revitalization of that neighborhood.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Secretary, in that context, I would
also encourage you to consider even just a speculator or a
family who gets together and is willing to spend money and fix
it up because it provides cash at the local Home Depot and jobs
and those things but also fix up that vacant house that sits
next door to you for sometimes months and months, sometimes a
year. If you are holding 70,000 housing units, one of my great
concerns, being from the Phoenix area--and I know that is one
of the areas you hold a lot of product in--is as long as those
houses are on the market, my market never comes back. We have
to consume a big portion of this inventory.
Does that at least fit into your policy of pushing this
dead inventory through?
Secretary Donovan. Yes, it does. And particularly in
targeted neighborhoods, as I talked about, where there have
been a significant number of foreclosures. I will say that we
actually don't hold a great deal of property through FHA in
Arizona because frankly we continued to lend 30-year fixed-rate
safe mortgage products during the housing bubble and our market
share shrank to almost zero in States like Arizona, California,
Nevada, and Florida. But this is where I think the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program that we talked about before is so
important.
The discussion tomorrow is about the third round of
Neighborhood Stabilization funding. We have already obligated
100 percent of the first $6 billion that we had. We have the
additional $1 billion which should be fully obligated by the
end of the month, this month. That funding can go to help buy
up and renovate vacant properties, foreclosed properties. And
we particularly targeted it in the third round to communities
like Arizona where they have been particularly hard hit by the
crisis.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry to go over
the time.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Secretary,
we have several very talented members in the freshman class on
both sides of the aisle. Mr. Schweikert, Ms. Hayworth, you have
heard from them; they are very thoughtful. And Mr. Carney on
the other side is now recognized, another one of our thoughtful
distinguished freshmen.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your
agreement to yield me some time. Mr. Secretary, thanks for
coming up today. Thanks for your leadership there at HUD. I
have been very impressed by your work, great work, trying to do
a very difficult job in meeting the President's budget cuts.
I have two questions. First, you gave a very comprehensive
answer to Mr. Green on foreclosure mitigation efforts. Is there
anything that you left out? And second, can you characterize
that, the homeowners you are able to touch in terms of the
total universe of people affected and at risk?
Secretary Donovan. Let me be honest, Congressman. I think
it is fair to say that we have not reached as many people as we
would have liked to with those efforts. We have reached more
than I think we get credit for, to be frank, but not as many as
we would have liked. We have about almost 600,000 permanent
modifications in the HAMP program at this point. One thing that
is often missed is that is only one piece of the overall
efforts. And in addition to that, we have about 700,000
homeowners who have been able to stay in their homes thanks to
loss mitigation work we do at FHA, which is separate from the
HAMP program.
Mr. Carney. Is there something you would do differently?
Secretary Donovan. One more thing I would add. One of the
things that I think HAMP did effectively was we targeted a
fairly narrow group of homeowners in the sense that we said,
you have to have a mortgage payment that is more than you can
afford on your current budget. And we only limit it to those
who live in their homes, other steps like that. But we did
encourage private modifications with no tax cost to the
taxpayer that now total over 2 million modifications. Before
the HAMP program, on average, those were actually increasing
payments to homeowners, not decreasing them. Increasing them on
average. And now that has changed dramatically where we have
really standardized the process through HAMP where we see a
significant reduction in payments to the average private
modification.
We have made a lot of the changes that I think have begun
to help this. We now see 75 percent of those who come into
trial modifications under HAMP actually get a permanent
modification because of the changes we have made. So there are
significant improvements. I think we are still concerned with
the servicers, the level of service they are providing, the
number of people they have doing this. Is it enough? There have
been improvements, but we have to go farther on that and demand
more from them.
Mr. Carney. This may be an unfair question. We had your
colleague, the Treasury Secretary, in this morning talking
about Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Were you part of the
discussions to develop that?
Secretary Donovan. Very much so. It was a joint HUD-
Treasury effort.
Mr. Carney. What is your view? We had a lot of angst about
the effect on low- and moderate-income homeowners; what is your
view of the various options? Full privatization is Option No.
3, which I guess creates an explicit guarantee with a limited
government role. Any of them have a more limited government
role, but HUD is going to have a big role. What is your view of
that and does your budget anticipate that role?
Secretary Donovan. Certainly, there are two critical things
I would say there. One is, we need to have reform. I think we
can all agree that the prior system was fundamentally broken
and that it needs to be fixed. The second thing I would say
that is important--more directly to your question--is that
under all of the three options that we propose, we believe FHA
should continue to be an important part of the market, and that
in that sense, an explicit targeted guarantee from the Federal
Government must be part of the new system through FHA.
Mr. Carney. So that would be Option 3?
Secretary Donovan. Actually even under Option 1, we are
saying FHA should continue. So HUD should continue to have a
role in the market. And then the question really is in the
three options beyond FHA, what additional guarantee should we
have?
But we also believe that FHA's role needs to step back.
Traditionally, we have been in the range of 10 to 15 percent of
the market. We are now over 20 percent. And if you add in VA
and USDA, we are close to 30 percent of the market. So one of
the things that we have done in the budget that is critical is
to increase the mortgage insurance premium by 25 basis points
for FHA. Not only will that bring in an additional $2 billion
of revenue next year that helps to strengthen our reserves, to
go to the Congressman's question before, to build up our
reserves again to the level they need to be, but it also will
help to allow us to start to step back as private capital comes
back in with mortgage insurers and others that can provide the
kind of protection that FHA does currently.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Keep up the good
work. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Biggert. [presiding] The gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Stivers, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you very much. I would like to follow up
on the HAMP program a little bit if we could. I have read some
statistics from the Federal Reserve, some research that said 30
percent of seriously delinquent loans were eligible for the
HAMP program. And of those, only 24 percent went on trial or
permanent. So that is about call it 7, 7.5 percent of the
eligible loans ultimately went through the HAMP program. And
then of those, about 10 percent were on a serious delinquency
within about 6 months.
What is wrong here? Why isn't the program working? And what
did you do to fix it? You said earlier that you have done some
things to fix it. Can you help me understand? Walk me through
that.
Secretary Donovan. As I said before, I think there is no
question that we haven't been satisfied that we have reached as
many people as we would have liked. And so that is part of the
equation here. I would point out that it is a different thing
to say we haven't reached as many people as we would have liked
to, as opposed to, we should end the program. Because there
still are tens of thousands of homeowners who get modifications
each month under the program. The primary reasons why people
have not qualified for HAMP have been, first of all, that we
don't allow investor owners. You have to have an unaffordable
mortgage payment. In other words, your current payment has to
be more than 31 percent of your income. Those are two key
things that have--
Mr. Stivers. Yes. I guess I am concerned about the ones
that have gone through. A lot of them are continuing to become
delinquent afterwards. So is the program really working?
Secretary Donovan. On that point, just to be clear, over 50
percent of those who didn't qualify in the first place for a
trial modification get private modifications or become current
on their mortgages. Only 10 or 15 percent actually end up in
foreclosure.
Mr. Stivers. That is where I was going to go next.
Secretary Donovan. I don't think it is accurate to assume
that those folks aren't getting help. And then again, over 50
percent of those who get a trial modification but don't qualify
for a permanent modification get some other form of
modification or become current. And those who do qualify for a
permanent modification, our numbers right now are that 85
percent of them are successful after a year. And so we would
like to reach more people. We are trying to do that. But those
who do get help are quite successful and we have set a standard
that means, even if you don't qualify for a HAMP mod, you often
can get help--on average, people do get help with other kinds
of modifications.
Mr. Stivers. Sure. And I guess that gets to my next
question. Because if 2 million homeowners got help without the
HAMP program and 600,000 got help with the HAMP program, how
many of those 600,000 would have gotten help without the HAMP
program in addition to the 2 million who received the help but
didn't qualify for the HAMP program? I guess I am trying to
understand the difference between what would happen with or
without the program.
Secretary Donovan. Each time we have a modification, we run
a net present value kind of model for them. And so what we have
seen is that the servicers are clearly willing with the
incentives that we have provided in HAMP to reach a set of
borrowers that they wouldn't reach otherwise. I don't think
there is any data that we could provide that would show that
every single one of those would not have been helped, but it is
clear that there are a significant number of those who would
not have gotten assistance otherwise. And I think most
importantly, that they got a modification that makes it much
more likely that they succeed in the long run because of the
standards that would be set.
Mr. Stivers. That is where I want to go next, and I am
running out of time, so I want to try to run through this.
So of the 2 million modifications that have happened in the
private market without the HAMP program, what is the success
rate there versus--you say you have an 85 percent success rate
after a year?
Secretary Donovan. We see a typically 20 percent or higher
increase in the failure rate in those modifications. So the
data is changing over time. Success rates are getting better as
the private sector is modeling more on HAMP. But typically what
we see is lifetime default rates now of 50 to 60 percent. The
default rate I talk about is a 12-month default rate. So we are
presuming that continues to go up somewhat over the lifetime of
those loans but we still expect it to be 20, 30 percent higher
over time.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, I would
like to thank you for coming. I really had intended to talk
about the Community Development Block Grants and the public
housing capital fund that is going to be cut by my friends on
the opposite side of the aisle, and I wanted to talk about how
it is going to impact communities all over this country. But
once you start talking about servicers, I have a lot of
thoughts about that and the HAMP program. Let me just say that
I really respect the work that you do.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Ms. Waters. And the experience that you brought to the job.
I know that left on your own, you probably could do a lot more
things. But I know a lot of things come into play as you try
and solve these difficult problems. And this whole role of
servicers is one of those areas that we should all continue to
be concerned about. Now I understand that some of you--meaning
some people in the Administration and perhaps you--have been
involved in some negotiations with the servicers. Is that still
going on?
Secretary Donovan. That is correct. And that is still going
on.
Ms. Waters. And I guess if it is still going on, it is not
like you can tell me while you are in negotiations, is that
right?
Secretary Donovan. These are enforcement actions that we
are undertaking, 11 different Federal agencies along with the
50 State attorneys general. So I am not at liberty to discuss
the details. That is correct.
Ms. Waters. Let me just mention that the movie, ``Inside
Job'' that received an Academy Award on Sunday, one of the
things that the director said was that nobody has gone to jail
after all of the fraud that has been uncovered. I am really
worried about the servicers. And I believe that if there are
weaknesses in the HAMP program--and there are, really, it is a
voluntary program, and they don't have to comply. They do what
they want to do. And it seems to me that there has been no way
to enforce what the Administration would like to enforce in the
HAMP program. That is why the weaknesses are now being
identified as reasons to get rid of HAMP.
Now, I don't agree with my colleagues on the opposite side
of the aisle that we should get rid of HAMP and NSP and the
Unemployed Homeowners Assistance Program. We worked very hard
for these programs and they service people all over America in
our small towns, our cities, our suburban areas, all of that.
And one reason I disagree with them on these cuts is that they
don't have anything better. They don't have anything to replace
it. And I know they are not saying they don't give a darn, that
they don't care about these homeowners who are losing their
homes, they don't care about these communities where people are
losing value because you have boarded-up properties that are
not getting renovated except for what we are doing with NSP.
So I guess what I really want to know is this, leaving
aside whatever you are negotiating with the servicers, when are
we going to set some standards? When are we going to talk about
principal write-down? We are not going to get loan
modifications really working in the way that we want until we
start to talk about principal write-down and some other kinds
of things. So I guess without going into the negotiations, tell
me where you think we could be tougher, where we would be more
effective.
Secretary Donovan. Given that I don't have criminal
authority, I won't go into a part of your question. Let me say
this just on the settlement, on the discussions that we are
having around the enforcement that I talked about. What I can
say is this, it is clear that servicers expect homeowners to
live up to their responsibilities in paying their mortgages.
Ms. Waters. Excuse me.
Secretary Donovan. We should demand exactly the same thing
from the servicers, that they live up to their responsibilities
in providing homeowners alternatives to keep them in their
homes and to meeting the requirements they have under servicing
those--
Ms. Waters. Mr. Secretary, I hate to interrupt you. But
when you say the servicers expect the homeowners to live up to
their responsibilities, I have to remind everybody that these
millions of homeowners who are faced with foreclosures didn't
all of a sudden just become bad people in America who don't pay
their bills. Something happened. And the something that
happened was, the products that were put on the market that we,
in our oversight responsibility, failed to do anything about.
These no-doc loans, these resets of people who were lured into
loans that they could not afford and did not understand, on and
on and on. So many people cannot live up to the
responsibilities of the mortgage that they signed on to because
it was fraudulent to begin with. And so I get really upset when
I hear that.
Secretary Donovan. Congresswoman, I thought I was agreeing
with you that the servicers need to live up to their
responsibilities. And that was my fundamental point. I
completely agree that we had mortgage products in this country
that nobody should ever have been able to provide.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the Chair. Thank you, Mr. Secretary,
for your testimony.
I am reading numerous press reports and getting word from
various folks around town about the ongoing settlement
discussions that my colleague referenced in her questions. In
light of the robo-signing and the servicers issues, can you
shed any light on these discussions?
Secretary Donovan. What I can say at this point, given the
nature of the discussions, is that our aim in these discussions
is to hold servicers accountable for mistakes that they have
made and to ensure that they live up to their responsibilities
under Federal requirements, whether it is in the FHA lending
program or the regulatory responsibilities that they have.
Mr. McHenry. When you say ``our,'' is that HUD or is that
FHA?
Secretary Donovan. There are 11 different Federal agencies
involved. Because FHA is a part of HUD, HUD is directly
involved. But there are 10 other Federal agencies along with 50
State attorneys general who have authority.
Mr. McHenry. Who is taking the lead within the
Administration?
Secretary Donovan. We are working very closely with the
Department of Justice and with Treasury to jointly lead the
Administration's efforts. We are coordinating with the banking
regulators that are independent.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Is there a lead institution here?
Secretary Donovan. In the direct discussions with the
servicers, I would say the Department of Justice has that lead
authority, and in coordinating with the State attorneys
general.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. There are also reports that Elizabeth
Warren, who is apparently, whatever her title is, now with the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), I guess advisor--
that she is taking a lead. That is not your understanding?
Secretary Donovan. That is not correct.
Mr. McHenry. That is not correct. Okay. But the CFPB is
engaged in these discussions as well? As one of the 11
regulatory bodies?
Secretary Donovan. At this point, CFPB is part of Treasury.
As I said, Treasury is involved in the discussions.
Mr. McHenry. So is that CFPB or is it others in Treasury?
Secretary Donovan. There are a number of people from
Treasury who are involved in the discussions.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. We are just trying to get an
understanding of it. There are 435 of us in the House and 100
in the Senate who are elected to represent the people and we
have ongoing settlements. Some have talked in the $30 billion
range. And so we want to have some understanding of what the
ramifications are.
Have there been discussions about what that settlement
money would be put towards?
Secretary Donovan. There have been discussions. As I said
earlier, given the nature of the discussions, enforcement
actions that are pending, I am not at liberty to discuss the
details of it.
Mr. McHenry. No, no, no. All the press reports we have seen
and the reports that I have gotten, what you use the money
towards, this isn't something secret. We have heard that it is
principal reduction. Is that not true?
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, given the nature of the
enforcement actions that are at issue here, I am not prepared
to discuss the details of it today.
Mr. McHenry. Two weeks ago before this very committee, Mr.
Stevens, who heads the FHA, I asked him exactly this same set
of questions about this, and he was far more forthcoming with
this committee about that, those settlements and even the
discussion about the range of options about what they would use
the money for. Could you at least discuss the range of options
that this settlement money would be used for?
Secretary Donovan. Commissioner Stevens has been involved
in those discussions. There have been a number of possible
options discussed. I don't want to give you the impression
somehow that we have settled on a particular course at this
point, particularly given that the State attorneys general are
involved as well and we have not settled on or decided any of
those direct--
Mr. McHenry. Do you foresee coming back to Congress for
authorization to spend these funds? Yes or no?
Secretary Donovan. These are enforcement actions that are
done under existing statutory authority.
Mr. McHenry. So that would be ``no?''
Secretary Donovan. There is no requirement that I know of
that we get approval for these discussions.
Mr. McHenry. Even if you created a $20 billion to $30
billion fund, which is multiple times larger than the HAMP
program, you don't foresee coming back to Congress in order to
have for mortgage write-downs? Interesting.
Secretary Donovan. A large part of the authority here is
State authority that the State attorneys general have. I think
that is an important component of this, that the Federal
authorities are only a piece of this and there is a significant
share that is held by the State attorneys general.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. I appreciate your testimony. I know it
is difficult to answer these questions. But my final question
is, do you think the HAMP program has been a success or
failure?
Mrs. Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McHenry. If he can just answer, success or failure.
Mrs. Biggert. We are facing a vote, so we are really trying
to limit the time.
The gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here and thank you for your leadership and
your service.
This morning, Secretary Geithner spoke about the role of
the GSEs in promoting affordable multifamily housing. The
multifamily portfolio has been profitable compared to the
single family portfolio. So what are some of the lessons
learned from the GSEs on this matter that you can tell us? And
what features of their multifamily model could we apply to any
housing system?
Secretary Donovan. Congresswoman, it is a very important
question because I think one of the things we often miss in the
discussion about the GSEs is that there is a significant
difference between single family finance and multifamily
finance. And in fact not only, as Congressman Frank said
earlier, has the multifamily been profitable, and as you said
as well, but there is also oftentimes more need for involvement
in multifamily because the types of transactions are so much
more varied, there is less standardization. So if we are going
to access securitization as a way of improving interest rates
and increasing the affordability of housing, oftentimes a
guarantee is more necessary there.
I think one of the things that has been particularly
important in the model that the GSEs have developed that could
be applied going forward is a risk-sharing model. One of the
things that I think is important in this debate is that FHA's
model has traditionally been a 100 percent insurance model. So
in some ways, taxpayers can be put at risk in ways that they
are not under the model that the GSEs pursued on the
multifamily side. And I think it is worth--and certainly in the
White Paper, we lay this out--that we look at risk sharing as a
potential alternative, whether for FHA or for some other
guarantee in the future.
Ms. Velazquez. Very good. Thank you. Secretary, your
agency's Fiscal Year 2012 budget proposes taking $1 billion of
public housing authority's reserve fund from the housing
operating account. Will our housing authorities have sufficient
funds for any contingency with the reserves reduced so much?
And would you tell us what will be an appropriate level?
Secretary Donovan. Thank you for asking the question. This
was one of the difficult choices that we had to make in putting
the budget together this year. We have seen reserves at housing
authorities for their operating funds increase substantially
over the last couple of years by over $1 billion. And the
proposal would be to draw down on excess reserves in a targeted
way--not at every housing authority but at housing authorities
that have excess reserves, but to leave them with an adequate
level of reserves to be able to continue operating. We
obviously would need to work with them to understand whether
there are commitments that they have made in those reserves to
ensure that we are doing this in the right way. And we realize
this is a new proposal. But given the fiscal realities, we felt
that this was a better, more targeted way to fully fund the
needs of operating public housing this year. And it is similar
to what we have done in the past with the voucher program where
we have drawn excess reserves to fund new vouchers.
Ms. Velazquez. So are you telling us that this does not
represent a shift in public policy?
Secretary Donovan. It is a shift. It is something that we
are proposing for the first time this year. We do have a model
from the voucher side where we have used excess reserves before
to fund the needs of the program. And it is something
obviously, given that it is new, we would need to have a
significant discussion with the committee about along with the
Appropriations Committee and to make decisions as we formulate
the 2012 budget.
Ms. Velazquez. Is it expected that the foreclosure rates
will rise in the coming months as foreclosure moratoriums come
to an end?
Secretary Donovan. I think it is likely that we will see
the number of completed foreclosures rise again. Just to be
clear, the number of people entering foreclosure was down about
20 to 30 percent year over year before the robo-signing problem
emerged and there was an even further reduction, another 20
percent reduction in the number of foreclosures that were being
completed at that point and the number of people entering
foreclosure. So I think while we may see it rise somewhat in
the coming months, the overall trend has been down. And I think
that is a significant part because of the more than 4 million
modifications we have seen relative to just 1.7 million
completed foreclosures.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentlelady's time has expired.
We have time for one more question before we go vote. We
have three votes. How many people would like to come back?
Mr. Scott. I would like to, but I don't want to be the only
one.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Mr.
Secretary, are the administrators of the Section 8 vouchers
held accountable through annual performance evaluations,
performance measures? And if so, and I hope so, what happens
when an administrator fails to meet the objectives? I have a a
quick follow-up question that has to do with the City of
Philadelphia Housing Authority.
Secretary Donovan. We do have performance standards that
housing authorities are required to meet under the voucher
program as well as the public housing program. More than 95
percent of all housing authorities meet those standards. We do
have a subset--Philadelphia as an example--where we designate
them as what we call troubled housing authorities. But
absolutely, there are performance standards. In addition to
that, we have implemented a new set of standards and data that
we collect. I run every month HUD stat meetings at HUD where we
look at realtime data on the performance of housing
authorities. We are also, through this budget proposal,
increasing investment in technology through our Transformation
Initiative which will allow us to hold housing authorities
better accountable in realtime because of enhanced data.
So we do have those in place, but I think we can agree that
we should strengthen them and that we are strengthening them.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. In connection with the Philadelphia
Housing Authority, since the former executive director Carl
Green was fired in September, a lot of questionable spending
has come to light, including Karaoke, yodelers, belly dancers,
thousands in outside lobbying and outside legal fees. Now just
this past weekend, I realize that you have called on the PHA
board to resign. The problems with the Philadelphia Housing
Authority seem to have been systemic for some time. The city
controller of Philadelphia said on Saturday that HUD failed to
catch the spending in its audits. Senator Grassley is also
following this issue closely and also said this weekend that he
hopes that HUD is finally paying attention to the situation in
Philadelphia. Even your agency admitted this weekend that
everyone could have done a better job.
So my question is, why were these problems at the
Philadelphia Housing Authority not caught sooner by HUD? And
what measures are you putting in place to make sure that
doesn't happen again?
Secretary Donovan. Clearly, there are things that we can do
to step up our focus on troubled housing authorities and to
make sure not just that we are taking substantial actions when
these issues come to light, which we have done here. We have
cut off their excessive spending on outside legal counsel. We
brought in a very experienced executive director to take over
the housing authority and, as you rightly point out, did call
for the board to step down. We will be working with the
inspector general and a forensic auditor that we brought in who
came to Philadelphia on Friday to make sure we get to the
bottom of this. But we also have to catch these problems more
before they happen, and that is why enhancing our data systems
is important.
The other thing that we are doing is setting up a dedicated
team using Transformation Initiative funding that we got in our
budget last year and that we are proposing to continue next
year that would allow us to target people to these problems,
look at the financial data more systematically from the systems
that we are building, and to send in those teams earlier on the
ground where we have early signs of financial or other
management problems on the ground.
So those are issues I would be happy to detail more to you
in specifics, but that is an outline of a number of things we
are doing to step up our oversight.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We will
recess for a time to go vote. We have three votes, so if
members would come back as soon as possible to respect the
Secretary's time. He has graciously said he will stay.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mrs. Biggert. We stand in recess.
[recess]
Mrs. Biggert. The committee will be in order. We will
resume. And the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, thank you so
much for coming again. I just want to take a moment to thank
you for your participation with our upcoming event in Atlanta
to deal with these home foreclosures--as you know, it is just
huge in the Georgia area--and the work that you have done in
working with us. As I spoke with to the Secretary of the
Treasury, Mr. Geithner, this morning, I am very worried in this
rush for what we truly need to do in a more deliberative manner
in cutting the Federal budget and moving, where we have to do
it. I have no problem with that. But I think that we are
creating some unintended consequences in many of the programs
that I think are disproportionately being examined.
Last week, we passed a CR. And in that CR, there was a 62
percent cut in the Community Development Block Grants. I think
that one of the things, as I said in my opening remarks, is
that I think there needs to be more of a cry, more of an
outpouring of what these programs are doing. And many people
who feel they have come up here just to cut out government.
There are people who don't want any government. But there is a
reason for government. Just saying, get it out of the way and
let the private sector come in, is not going to solve this. The
private sector is not out there finding homes and housing for
the elderly, for those who are disabled, for those on fixed
incomes, for those with low incomes, for those who are
unemployed, for the very people that the Department of Housing
and Urban Development was created for. There is a reason for
all of this. And unless we are going to find something that can
help to fill in this gap, I think we are doing the American
people a disservice.
I am reminded of the evolving appreciation now for the
labor unions and collective bargaining in terms of what is
happening in Wisconsin, for example. Once the American people
are educated and understand that there is some hurt here,
unintended consequences, we become aware.
So now that I made that point, my State of Georgia is
number five in home foreclosures. It is number four in
homelessness. It is number three in unemployment at 10.2
percent. And when you look particularly into the African-
American male community, it is hovering at 22 percent. Many of
these programs that you are working with, the Affordable Rental
Program, the HOME Program, the CDBGs, all of these that are
being cut are basically designed to kind of serve these. Now we
have veterans coming in, many of whom fought in Iraq and in
Afghanistan, and they are homeless.
So my point is, there is a need for government here, and
there is a need for us to, as we are examining the Federal
budget and looking at it, let's not be so hasty to rush to cut
some very vital programs that could put the very vulnerable out
there. And I believe that HUD has a great responsibility here
to help sound the alarm and maybe say, whoa, do you know what
you are doing here? Do you know what a 62 percent reduction in
the Community Development Block Grants will do? And I wanted to
ask you to react to that. Just that one fact alone.
You all have offered a 7.5 percent reduction. That is a big
drop from what was passed by this Congress last year. What
would that do? How devastating would that be to your programs?
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, first of all, let me make a
point broadly about this budget. I said in my testimony that we
had difficult decisions that we had to make, cuts that, as the
President himself has said, that he would not have made if we
were in different fiscal times. But what we have proposed in
the 2012 budget is the lowest level of non-security
discretionary spending since President Eisenhower. When you
look at it as a percentage of the overall economy, the lowest
level since President Eisenhower. So we think we have proposed
a responsible budget and to do that had to propose cuts that
were painful. Going beyond that, as the President said in the
State of the Union trying to balance the budget on the backs of
the most vulnerable is not something that we could support. And
that is something that I think we do risk if we go too far with
some of these cuts.
One of the things that many people don't recognize, they
think we have had a lot of foreclosures in the country. They
have seen vacancy rates increase in rental housing, rents go
down at the top of the rental market. But in fact, we just
released the worst-case housing needs study for 2007 through
2009. It showed the single largest increase in worst-case
housing needs in the history of the study, a 20 percent
increase in worst-case housing needs among the low income. So
the need for these programs has only increased during the
recession. And that is why we focused on ensuring we continue
to provide assistance to the most needy in the budget.
Mr. Scott. And that is why, if I may just now conclude,
Madam Chairwoman, that is why I think that there needs to be a
clarion call to help educate the American people on the
consequences. There are some unintended consequences. Do we
mean to put the elderly out? Those on fixed incomes. Those that
we are to serve? Veterans who have come back from the war and
have no home and they are homeless? These programs,
particularly your HOME Program, have you made an assessment on
just how many people will be eliminated from this program? Will
we be exacerbating the homeless rate by some of these drastic
matters?
Secretary Donovan. We do have information. I see that the
time is up. I would be happy to follow up with you directly on
those specific impacts.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Bachus. The gentleman from California, Mr. Miller,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Miller of California. Welcome, Secretary Donovan. There
has been talk about basically rolling the GSEs and FHA back out
of the marketplace, specifically in high-cost areas, which in
California and other States is going to have a huge, huge
negative hit. I guess my question is, from all the studies I
have seen, it seems like those loans are performing very well,
the new loans we are making out there today. Yet, I don't see a
private sector capable or ready to move in and backfill the
place of the GSEs or FHA if you do pull back out of the market.
And based on everything I have seen, they are filling the gap
that they were intended to fill, and you are too. Do you think
now is the appropriate time to start rolling back when there is
no evidence that the loans you are making are not high-quality
loans?
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, as you know, unless
Congress takes other action, on October 1st, the loan limits
would step back from a high--at least in the highest-cost
communities of about $729,000 down to $625,000. So in our
housing finance reform proposal, we did say that we think
Congress ought to let that expire as it would under current
law.
Mr. Miller of California. Why would you say that? If they
are performing well, why would you say that?
Secretary Donovan. We do believe that it is important--and
specifically speaking about FHA here--that we start to step
back to our more traditional role of serving a smaller segment
of the market. And from what we have seen--and I agree with you
that the market is fragile, it is why we need to take all these
steps carefully. We do see capital increasingly returning to
the jumbo market. We have seen particularly, for example, as we
have announced the premium increase that we did for FHA,
increasing interest from the private mortgage insurers. So we
do believe that we can do this carefully and responsibly in a
way that private capital will step back up. We have seen
indications of that in the securitization market and elsewhere
in the jumbo market.
But I agree with you, we have to watch this very carefully
to ensure that we are not taking steps that could hurt what is
a very fragile market at this point. So we believe that the
step down of the loan limits is something that the market can
absorb, and particularly in FHA, where those loans, the loans
above the $625,000 and below the $729,000, make up a very small
share of our overall business that we are doing today.
Mr. Miller of California. But you are going to take your
portion out and the recommendations to get the GSEs out of the
high-cost areas also. You are talking about the capital
marketplace. I am not finding anybody else seeing it. The
REALTORS aren't seeing it. Builders aren't seeing it.
Homeowners we are talking to aren't seeing it. The only loans
that are available out there, based on everything we are seeing
between the GSEs and FHA, you are 92 percent of the
marketplace. So if there is a private sector backfill, you
wouldn't be 92 percent of the marketplace. It would be
significantly less than that. You would see a decreasing number
as the private sector rolled into the marketplace. We don't see
that number decreasing, I guess is the problem. And you are
sending a message to Congress from FHA and the comments of
Freddie and Fannie that they can be rolled back.
But the problem I have always had with a system, for
example is, let's take the GSE for example. You might have a
limit of $429,000, yet in an area where the median home price
is $150,000, they can borrow $429,000. Yet nobody in our
districts can borrow a dime because that is so far below the
median. From 2000 to 2005, FHA loans went from 99 to 1. So in
2005, one in our area. And you go back to the old traditional
marketplace you are in, there will be no FHA loans in the
marketplace. My concern is--I am not borrowing from FHA so it
doesn't matter--but you are looking at a marketplace that is
very stressed at this point in time. I don't think it would
take a lot to have it start going in the other direction. And I
am afraid that we are moving too proactively in the vein of
pulling back and not considering the consequences that might
occur if the private sector marketplace is not back there to
fill the backfill of it. And if we let you move back, we don't
authorize the dollar amount, you are out of it. There is
nothing you can do. What will you do then?
Secretary Donovan. Again, Congressman, the step that we are
talking about is not to go back to the old FHA limits October
1st. It is simply to go to the HERA limits down to the
$625,000. And within FHA, the portion of our lending that is
between $625,000 and $729,000, even in California, it makes up
a very small share of the lending that we are doing. But again,
we are very cognizant, and I know Secretary Geithner was this
morning when he testified, that we have to take these steps
carefully. We need to see how the market develops, and we need
to ensure that we are not taking steps that hurt them more or
less.
Mr. Miller of California. And I want to encourage you to
send that message to Congress because it is not getting
through, that you are not talking about pulling out, you are
talking about phasing down slowly from $729,000 to $625,000,
test the market and then go from there. I don't have a problem
with that. But the debate is occurring around pulling out
completely, getting GSEs out completely, completely getting out
of high-cost areas, and that would devastate some of the States
that need it.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I will pick up where the wise
gentleman from California left off.
When you say your position is to let it drop to $625,000,
is that a position with regard only to FHA or Fannie and
Freddie as well?
Secretary Donovan. Under current law--
Mr. Sherman. I know what current law does.
Secretary Donovan. --step back for the GSEs as well as FHA,
and we support allowing that to step down across-the-board.
Mr. Sherman. That would have an absolutely devastating
effect not only on the $900,000 and $800,000 homes in the Los
Angeles area, but the $400,000 and $500,000 homes that are more
in parts of my district than Gary's because if you see a
$100,000 drop, as you would in home sale prices south of
Ventura Boulevard, then those north of Ventura Boulevard are
going to drop commensurately and those a little further north
are going to drop as well.
It is perhaps a good thing that the Administration doesn't
have a vote in the decision that Congress needs to make between
now and September 30th. As you point out, there is no real
savings for the Federal Government that you can quantify in
response to the gentleman from California's question. You seem
to agree with him that these were low-risk, high-quality
mortgages that FHA was guaranteeing or Fannie and Freddie were
making and that it was a very small percentage of your overall
portfolio. Do you have any proof that the Federal Government--
do you have a score that says by letting this drop we decrease
the Federal deficit?
Secretary Donovan. The primary reason we are focused on
bringing FHA back to a more normal market share for FHA is the
risk that we take on in the next potential recession.
Mr. Sherman. You can calculate that, but CBO is the referee
on not only costs but risks; whether we are guaranteeing loans
to Zimbabwe or to residents of Gary's district or we have a
flood insurance program, we have CBO determining that. Is there
any CBO score that says that dropping this and seeing a double-
dip recession in Los Angeles and New York, if not the country
as a whole, reduces the Federal deficit?
Secretary Donovan. If anything, for next year, it would
likely shrink our market share somewhat and therefore result in
fewer receipts in the short run.
Mr. Sherman. Again, the CBO scores things long term and
short term. They are not the best referee, but they are the
only referee we have here.
Mr. Miller of California. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, I will.
Mr. Miller of California. I want to clarify, my comments
were specifically to a distressed market today. When the market
starts to recover, none of us have a problem with the system
modifying.
Mr. Sherman. I don't want to see a double-dip recession in
the community we both represent.
Mr. Miller of California. I don't either.
Mr. Sherman. But let me go on to the issue of private
mortgage insurance. I don't want to see a world in which if you
don't have 20 percent down, you can't buy a house. That means a
third of Americans will never buy a house, and it also has the
effect that I am concerned about, a depressing effect on home
prices in the middle of a recession. And don't let the
economists tell you that we are not in the middle of a
recession.
So I think that private mortgage insurance has a role to
play. When FHA insures the loan, then the taxpayers are 100
percent at risk. It is my understanding, typically with private
mortgage insurance, I would say a 5 percent down or 10 percent
down, you have the downpayment and then you have another 25 or
30 percent of private risk.
You are going to be defining the qualified residential
mortgage, and the statute says that you need to look at data
that indicates there is a lower risk of default if there is
mortgage guarantee, and I hope in the next few minutes to give
you some ideas as to how you and your fellow regulators would
deal with that.
First, lower risk of default should mean lower risk of
foreclosure, not lower risk of being 1 month behind on your
payments. We have all been 1 month behind on our payments. And
if you catch up, neither the lender nor the community is
adversely affected in any way. In fact, the lender makes an
extra couple hundred bucks. What we are trying to deal with
here, the risks that we are trying to deal with, the risk
retention idea is focused on default.
Mrs. Biggert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sherman. I ask for another 30 seconds.
Mrs. Biggert. Thirty seconds.
Mr. Sherman. So I hope that you would do that.
And second, the overall purpose of this section is to make
sure that the private sector has skin in the game because we
really think the private sector is smarter, especially when
they have skin in the game. When you have private mortgage
insurance, the lender may not retain 5 percent of the risk but
the private mortgage insurer, also a private sector entity with
expertise, has 30 percent risk. So I hope you would help us
make sure that we have private sector eyes with skin in the
game but don't have to see 20 percent downpayments.
I yield back.
Secretary Donovan. Thanks for your comments.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. The vice chairman of the Insurance
and Housing Subcommittee, Mr. Hurt, is recognized.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. I have some comments. And I hope you
didn't cover these already in your statement. I apologize for
not being here earlier. But I was just wondering about the
total spending that is going to be spent on your program. It
looks like to me from your remarks that the actual spending
will be $47.8 billion but there is a credit of $6 billion that
is deducted from that. So the total claim is $41.7 billion. And
I am wondering, I think it is important to us who have to make
the funding decisions, how much are we talking about actually
spending? How much will your Department spend, not how much
does it have coming in, in terms of the offsets and credits and
that sort of thing? I would like to know how much you are
actually going to spend.
Secretary Donovan. The $41.7 billion figure is the actual
appropriated funds that would be from the taxpayer. And that is
a 2.8 percent reduction from the appropriated amount that we
used in 2010. So from a taxpayer point of view, that is the
number to focus on and it is a 2.8 percent reduction.
Mr. Hurt. Is that comparing apples to apples? Is that the
same analysis or framework within which we would look at the
2010 spending levels?
Secretary Donovan. That is right.
Mr. Hurt. All right. And my other question, and I just have
one more related to the Housing Choice Voucher Program. Is it
my understanding that the President has proposed a $1 billion
increase in that program?
Secretary Donovan. That is correct. The reasons for that
increase are primarily, we have a set of vouchers that were
appropriated in earlier budgets, for example, VASH vouchers
that serve veterans who are at risk or have fallen into
homelessness. There were 10,000 new vouchers in 2010. Those
then, to be renewed, come into the Section 8 account for the
first time. So there is a set of new vouchers that have never
been renewed before. There are also some vouchers that are new
because we lose public housing units, we lose project-based
Section 8 units and they are replaced by vouchers. So some of
them, when there is an increase in a Section 8 account, there
is an offsetting decrease in other accounts. And then the third
reason is that costs go up to serve the same number of people
each year because of inflation but also in the recession, as
families' incomes have either stayed level or even declined,
that causes the cost per person to increase over time.
So those are the three primary factors that lead to the
increase. And again, our priority in this budget was to
continue to serve the most vulnerable 54 percent of the
residents of Section 8 who are either elderly or disabled. And
so we made cuts in other parts of the budget to accommodate
that billion dollar increase.
Mr. Hurt. Are you able to report as to the net? Is it
ultimately going to be more that is going to be spent?
Secretary Donovan. It is an increase.
Mr. Hurt. Across the secretariat, as a consequence?
Secretary Donovan. It is an increase because we are
proposing, for example, another 10,000 vouchers in VASH. There
are other vouchers that we believe we should prioritize to
continue to spend but have taken cuts in other areas to offset
that.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. So there will be expanded programs as a
consequence and an expanded number of people who will be
served?
Secretary Donovan. For example, 10,000 additional veterans
that we would serve, yes.
Mr. Hurt. That is all the questions I have. I yield back.
Thank you.
Mrs. Biggert. I thank the gentleman. Without objection, I
would ask unanimous consent to place the statements of the
following organizations in the record: the National American
Indian Housing Council; and HUD Housing Counseling
Intermediaries.
I would like to thank the Secretary for being here and
spending time with us so that everybody who was here got to ask
their questions.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this witness which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to this
witness and to place his responses in the record.
Again, thank you so much for your testimony, and we look
forward to hearing from you again.
Secretary Donovan. I thank you, Chairwoman Biggert. I
appreciate your hospitality here today. Thank you.
Mrs. Biggert. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:50 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 1, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5668.044


