- EXAMINING CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS CONCERNS, NEW PRODUCTS, AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS
CONCERNS, NEW PRODUCTS, AND
FEDERAL REGULATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 24, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-149

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-120 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

James H. Clinger, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 24, 2012................................................     1
Appendix:
July 24, 2012................................................    57

WITNESSES
Tuesday, July 24, 2012

Berlau, John, Senior Fellow, Finance and Access to Capital, the
Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI).........................    32
Bishop, Frances C., owner, Dollar Pawn, Inc., on behalf of the
National Pawnbrokers Association and the Alabama Pawnbrokers
Association....................................................    31
Edwards, Kenneth W., Vice President, Federal Affairs, the Center
for Responsible Lending (CRL)..................................    34
Flores, G. Michael, Chief Executive Officer, Bretton Woods, Inc..    35
Gardineer, Grovetta, Deputy Comptroller for Compliance Policy,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)................     7
Jackson, Mary, Senior Vice President, Corporate Affairs, Cash
America International..........................................    30
Munn, Hon. John, Director, Banking and Finance, State of Nebraska
Department of Banking and Finance, on behalf of the Conference
of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS)...............................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Berlau, John.................................................    58
Bishop, Frances C............................................    65
Edwards, Kenneth W...........................................    74
Flores, G. Michael...........................................    80
Gardineer, Grovetta..........................................   114
Jackson, Mary................................................   125
Munn, Hon. John..............................................   127

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of Americans for Financial Reform..........   143
Baca, Hon. Joe:
Written statement of The Hispanic Institute..................   150
Luetkemeyer Hon. Blaine:
Written statement of The 60 Plus Association.................   152
Written statement of Quik Pawn Shop..........................   154
Written statement of Hon. Mark L. Shurtleff, Attorney
General, State of Utah.....................................   156
Edwards, Kenneth W.:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representatives
Luetkemeyer and Baca.......................................   161
Gardiner, Grovetta:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Baca.......................................................   167
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Luetkemeyer................................................   169
Written statement of William M. Isaac, former Chairman, FDIC.....   171
Munn, Hon. John:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representatives
Luetkemeyer and Baca.......................................   173

EXAMINING CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS
CONCERNS, NEW PRODUCTS, AND
FEDERAL REGULATIONS

----------

Tuesday, July 24, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, Royce,
Hensarling, Pearce, Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Grimm,
Fincher; Maloney, Watt, Hinojosa, Baca, Scott, Meeks, and
Carney.
Also present: Representatives Schweikert, Sessions, and
Green
Chairwoman Capito. The hearing will come to order. I would
like to first thank my colleagues, Mr. Luetkemeyer and Mr.
Baca, for their hard work on the legislation before us today.
This subcommittee held a hearing last fall on issues about
access to consumer credit for borrowers who may not have the
ability to use traditional sources of credit. H.R. 6139 is an
attempt to address some of the potential inequities in the
current regulatory structure for nondepository institutions and
consumers.
The recent economic downturn and anemic recovery have
highlighted the difficult environment for consumers to access
credit. A recent National Bureau of Economic Research study
found that nearly 50 percent of Americans are unlikely or
unable to raise $2,000 in case of an emergency with 30-days'
notice. And we know this frequently occurs in many American
families, an emergency that needs to be addressed.
Furthermore, the FDIC found that nearly 25 percent of
American households have trouble accessing credit from
traditional sources like banks and credit unions. These tough
economic times are highlighting, I think, the need for
innovation and diversity in financial products. Last fall, the
subcommittee had a hearing on innovation in the consumer credit
market. Entrepreneurs across the country are developing new and
innovative techniques and methods for consumers to access
credit from nontraditional sources. Technology is providing new
ways to analyze data and create platforms to distribute credit
in a more cost-effective, transparent manner.
We have also learned, through a series of hearings on the
future of money, that it is entirely possible that consumers
may become less reliant on traditional financial institutions
as more payment services are driven towards mobile devices.
H.R. 6139 is an important part of a broader discussion about
how these financial products should be regulated. The majority
of these products are currently subject to a patchwork of State
regulatory regimes. In some States, consumers have access to a
broad array of products, whereas in other States, there is
little or no access to consumer credit from institutions
outside of the traditional sources of banks and credit unions.
Title X of Dodd-Frank grants supervisor authority for some
nondepository institutions. The legislation before us today
creates an optional Federal charter for nondepository
creditors. They will be housed within the OCC. I look forward
to hearing our witnesses' testimony on H.R. 6139 as well as the
overall need to keep up with the innovation in nontraditional
financial products.
I now recognize Mrs. Maloney, my ranking member, for 4
minutes for the purpose of making an opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank the chairlady for calling the
hearing, and I also thank all of our witnesses for being here.
I am looking forward to the updated version of the bill that my
colleagues--Mr. Baca and Mr. Luetkemeyer--have introduced that
would give non-banks an optional Federal charter, allowing them
to operate nationally to give small loans.
I do want to say that this hearing is focused on what is a
real problem in American society today. The amount of personal
family debt is growing, credit card debt is over $1 trillion,
and student loans have surpassed credit card debt. And I would
say around the kitchen tables of America, many people are just
trying to figure out how to make ends meet.
One colleague told me a story about a mother whose car
broke down. It needed a new transmission, so she needed a loan
of $2,000 to fix her car. So where does she go to get this
loan? Most credit unions and banks wouldn't give a loan of that
small amount. It would be difficult to get.
So there is a need in our structure for small loans and
access to them. But until the financial reforms that were
enacted in 2010, non-banks were exclusively regulated at the
State level. But as we worked to revamp our financial system,
we saw gaping holes in regulation and consumers were often on
the losing end of the deal. The FTC had some oversight for
these non-bank loans.
Now that we have the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB) with its sole mission of consumer protection across the
financial industry, including non-banks, there will be a
Federal regulator exercising authority over certain non-banks
consulting with the FTC. And States like New York will still be
able to exercise their authority to set a ceiling for consumer
protection.
For example, New York has imposed a usury cap of 16 percent
on consumer and personal loans. Most payday and low-dollar
loans are not permitted in the State because they almost always
carry interest rates higher than 16 percent. However, we cannot
deny that lower-income and underbanked consumers often turn to
short-term loans to make it to the next paycheck. Some
consumers are turning to the Internet for these products and to
financial entities that are located offshore and away from all
regulatory scrutiny.
This is the main argument by proponents of the bill that is
before us today, that consumers are turning to offshore
entities which provide predatory products to consumers who have
nowhere else to go. The bill we are reviewing today will
preempt State laws for an entity that wishes to pursue a
Federal charter with the OCC. The OCC, which is traditionally a
safety and soundness regulator of banks, would be the principal
regulator for these entities, and they have expressed some
significant concerns about the bill.
So I hope that this hearing will shed light on the entire
question. And the questions that I have are: is the OCC the
appropriate agency to be approving appropriate consumer
products for the underbanked and underserved communities; and
are consumers going to be sufficiently protected in creating
this charter? So I look forward to the comments and to the
testimony today. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 3 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
for holding this hearing to discuss what I believe is a very
important topic: greater access to credit. I also want to thank
the gentleman from California, Mr. Baca, for his hard work on
this issue. He has been a dedicated leader on this subject and
I greatly appreciate his efforts.
At a time when nearly half of all Americans are living
paycheck to paycheck, we cannot continue to operate without
innovation in the credit sector. It is essential to begin to
understand the true needs of American families in trying to
address the problems that continue to plague them. H.R. 6139,
the Consumer Credit Access, Innovation, and Modernization Act,
will allow for and even encourage the development of new and
badly needed financial products. And it does so under strict
regulatory guidelines without jeopardizing consumer safety.
Let me be clear, this is not a payday lending bill. In
fact, this legislation bars new federally-chartered
institutions from making loans for terms less than 30 days.
Again, this legislation prohibits payday loans, and other loans
with terms of less than 30 days. This legislation also requires
the OCC to approve or deny any and all products and to
coordinate with the CFPB, the Attorney General, and other State
regulators. With that, Madam Chairwoman, I request unanimous
consent to insert in the record a letter of support and a
statement from Mark Shurtleff, Attorney General of Utah, and
also a letter of support from The 60 Plus Association.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
We can sit here and say that consumers don't need these
products, and we can continue to say that they are aren't
necessary and they shouldn't be permitted, but that simply
isn't a responsible way to move forward. These products are
needed. Data shows that each year, Missourians alone initiate
almost 2 million Internet searchers for these types of small-
dollar loans. Nationwide, that number surpasses 74 million. Our
economy and society are moving toward doing more and more
business online. To facilitate this movement in customer
preference, we need to provide a structure to allow this, as
well as safety measures to protect the consumer from
unscrupulous practices.
Mr. Baca and I offer today legislation that will closely
regulate and monitor institutions and their products, ensuring
full consumer protection and rigorous oversight by Federal and
State entities. However, without these products, consumers
seeking a small loan will be forced to go to offshore lenders
in the black market, leaving Americans in need with no consumer
protections whatsoever. It is time to allow all Americans
access to safe, closely regulated forms of credit. I thank our
witnesses for testifying today, and I look forward to the
productive conversation. With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Baca for
3 minutes.
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much for having this hearing. I
would also like to thank the witnesses for being here this
morning. I request unanimous consent to insert a letter on H.R.
6139 from The Hispanic Institute into the record.
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Baca. Thank you. Just last week, the unemployment rate
in my district rose to 12.6 percent. Combine that with the
constant high unemployment across the country, hard foreclosure
rates, and low economic growth, and you can see why more and
more families are living paycheck to paycheck. As such, we have
seen a credit divide grow deeper between the haves and the
have-nots. What happens to the single parent who needs to fix
their car? Think about that, those who have to fix their cars.
What happens to unemployed families in need who need to pay
their mortgages or monthly bills for food, heat, and
electricity? How do these people deal with unexpected high
medical bills?
To make matters worse, many of these people have no access
to banks or credit unions to provide them with the credit they
need.
Last year I introduced H.R. 1909, which creates a Federal
charter for non-bank lenders to provide small-dollar loans to
underserved individuals who are in need of credit. And I was
pleased to work with my good friend, Mr. Luetkemeyer, in
introducing a new bill, and I would say we both have come
together in trying to come to a compromise, and a better bill
that addresses a lot of the problems, and this is something
that has been going on for 3 years.
In working with him, we wanted to create safe, affordable,
and innovative products that can be offered to those who need
it. And those are the important reasons why we came up with
this bill. H.R. 6139 creates a Federal charter under the OCC,
and it will allow the OCC and the CFPB to work together to
create again a safe and affordable credit option for
underserved communities. Remember that, underserved communities
can create an option. Instead of reinventing the wheel, this
bill will work with what we have. It creates a Federal charter
on unincorporated product institutions that are already in the
market, increases access for struggling Americans across the
country, and allows for experts innovation that is in the
marketplace to grow and serve as many people as possible, and
also allow for strong Federal regulatory oversight.
And to those claiming that this is a payday, as my good
friend, Congressman Luetkemeyer said, this is not a payday
bill; it should be noted that payday products specifically are
banned by chartered institutions. Over the past few years,
there have been many who have made all kinds of points as to
why certain products don't work, or why they are predatory or
why they only make the products work. The fact is problems were
easy to talk about and they don't require responsibility. What
we haven't discussed is a solution, and this is a solution, a
solution that will involve, over time, recognizing the market,
and the industries that are already in place, and law for
Federal regulations in which all parties are involved. That is
why I believe H.R. 6139 provides that solution. And with that,
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to ask unanimous consent from the subcommittee
to allow Mr. Sessions 4 minutes for the purpose of making an
introduction. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Sessions?
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Capito, and
thank you for allowing me to sit in with the subcommittee
today, and I also thank your delightful ranking member and my
colleagues on this subcommittee. During my first term in
Congress, in 1997 and 1998, I had the opportunity to sit on
this committee. I sat down front, and enjoyed many long debates
and opportunities to understand the banking system. It has now
become the Financial Services Committee, and your leadership,
as well as the attention that these Members pay to this, is
really very important.
I also am delighted to be with my dear friend, Ed Royce. I
have always sat to his left, and somebody made a mistake today
and put me over here today, and I thank you for that mistake.
Madam Chairwoman, today I am here to introduce a witness
who will appear before the committee. I have the privilege of
introducing a very successful Texas businesswoman, a great
Texan, and a constituent of mine, my dear friend, Mary Jackson.
Mary is senior vice president of corporate affairs and chief
legislative officer for Cash America, Incorporated. Cash
America is headquartered in Fort Worth, Texas, and provides
financial products and services to consumers across the United
States. She is representing her company and the Online Lenders
Alliance, known as OLA, an association of U.S.-based online
providers of consumer short-term loans. I have known Mary for
over 20 years. She is a strong leader in the north Texas
business community and an advocate for the free enterprise
system. Mary is here today to testify about H.R. 6139, the
Consumer Credit Access, Innovation, and Modernization Act of
2012.
My discussions with Mary have convinced me there are really
three truths about this piece of legislation and the need for
it. First, we have a serious credit gap in America, as has been
noted by our speakers earlier today. Americans of modest means
do not have adequate or acceptable access to financial credit
products and services on a day-to-day basis, especially in the
event of an emergency.
Second, our Federal policies, both the Federal Reserve's
efforts to make credit available and reliance on traditional
sources, I believe have fallen short. The nondepository lenders
such as Cash America and other OLAs could be a responsible and
significant provider in this necessary and needed marketplace
and could be a part of that solution.
And finally, under H.R. 6139 the proposed federally-
chartered lenders can and will provide new and innovative
products and services, and more importantly, competition in an
effort to provide more and better credit options to so many
hard-working Americans who need to access credit and be able to
know that they can help their families in times of need.
I appreciate you allowing this hearing to take place today,
and I thank the gentlewoman and the ranking member for allowing
me to sit in for a few minutes with this opportunity today to
hear about this bill. Thank you very much. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Hinojosa for 3 minutes.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, and Ranking
Member Maloney. Today, we are discussing whether to give the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency the power to grant
Federal charters to certain non-bank institutions. While I
believe that the stated goal of my colleagues to increase the
amount of credit to the underserved and unbanked populations is
noble, and something that is necessary, I believe that this
bill approaches it from the wrong direction, and I warrant to
explain why.
Two years ago this month, we passed the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which set up the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, or what we call the CFPB.
In its 18 months of existence, the Bureau has made great
strides in writing rules and beginning supervision of the non-
bank financial institutions that have eluded supervision for so
long.
I believe that to take these particular non-bank
institutions out of the jurisdiction of the Bureau is
premature, and that we should allow the CFPB to finish
completing its rulemaking on non-bank supervision.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is
represented here today, and according to submitted testimony
that I read, they do not support the policy put forth by this
bill, which is significant considering that they would be the
ones in charge of doling out Federal charters.
I look forward to hearing the testimony today. I hope that
it addresses some of my concerns for my district and for my
State of Texas and helps to push the dialogue about how best to
serve the underbanked and unbanked constituents that I
represent. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our opening statements, and I would now like
to introduce the first panel of witnesses.
I will recognize each one of you for purpose of making a
5-minute statement. Our first witness is Ms. Grovetta
Gardineer, Deputy Comptroller for Compliance Policy, Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF GROVETTA GARDINEER, DEPUTY COMPTROLLER FOR
COMPLIANCE POLICY, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY
(OCC)

Ms. Gardineer. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito,
Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Consumer Credit
Access, Innovation, and Modernization Act. Providing
responsible financial services to underserved consumers is an
important goal, but this legislation would harm minority
populations, low-income neighborhoods, and communities with
concentrations of our military servicemembers. In addition, it
would encourage the development of businesses with unsafe and
unsound concentrations in products that have serious consumer
protection and safety and soundness concerns.
My testimony provides a summary of our understanding of the
bill, and gets into greater detail about each of these risks.
During my remarks this morning, I will highlight just a few of
our concerns. First, H.R. 6139 would adversely affect the
consumers that it intends to help most. This bill would provide
special status and Federal benefits to companies and third-
party vendors that would primarily offer credit products and
services that carry greater risks or cost for consumers who
lack access to more traditional bank products. We anticipate
that such companies will request approval to offer products
that include payday loans, tax refund anticipation loans, and
car title loans. Our experience with these products is that
they depend on high fees, repetitive use, high default, and
severely weak legal compliance.
Consumer interest groups have voiced similar concerns that
these products trap consumers in a cycle of debt and prevent
their access to safer, more traditional credit and banking
services that could better meet their needs.
We are also concerned that H.R. 6139 would negate many
actions that Congress, the OCC, and other regulators have taken
to safeguard consumers from the risks of these types of
products.
First, this bill prohibits establishing usury caps where
otherwise appropriate. This prohibition could significantly
reduce specific limits established by Congress and many States.
For example, it could eliminate protection for members of
America's Armed Forces. The cap to annual percentage rate of
payday loans, auto title loans or tax refund loans extended to
cover persons at 36 percent.
Second, H.R. 6139 would create a class of federally-
chartered institutions with serious safety and soundness
concerns. Our supervisory experience suggests that in addition
to consumer protection issues, companies chartered under this
bill rely on products that pose serious compliance BSA/AML and
other operational risks.
H.R. 6139 would direct the OCC to encourage joint ventures
between credit corporations and third-party vendors to
facilitate innovative products and services. Our experience
teaches us that dependence on third-party providers to
originate or deliver such products and services can create
serious compliance risks. Such vendors often lack the requisite
systems and procedures to comply with the myriad of BSA and AML
and other regulations and risk management practices that are
essential to the safe and sound conduct of these activities.
The Comptroller recently singled out weak third-party oversight
as a significant contributor to operational risk.
Companies chartered under the bill also face significant
BSA/AML exposure, because of their dependence on products with
remote deposit capture characteristics, the lack of long-term
customer relationships, and the ability of money launderers to
exploit weaker monitoring and reporting processes.
In addition, companies chartered under the bill faced
significant concentration risk because of their limited
business models that can threaten their viability if underlying
market conditions deteriorate. These risks are magnified for
firms that lack stable funding and depend on non-deposit
wholesale funding. Because of these risks, these are products
and services that the OCC has largely extinguished from the
national banking system. And we would not support, license or
charter an institution concentrating in these services today.
Finally, the OCC agrees that consistent and uniform
standards provide benefits for both consumers and businesses,
but we believe authority already exists to achieve these goals.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
authorized the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to adopt
standards for financial consumer products and services without
regard to whether they are offered by banks, non-banks, or
State- or federally-supervised institutions. The CFPB has
general authority to supervise and regulate non-bank lenders,
including payday lenders and large non-bank participants and
consumer credit and services, and will be conducting
examinations of such companies.
In summary, the OCC is concerned that H.R. 6139 could have
unintended and undesirable effects on the population it is
intended to benefit. H.R. 6139 raises serious consumer
protection, compliance, and safety and soundness concerns by
creating a national charter for companies concentrating on
products most prone to abuse and that are most often targeted
to minority populations, low-income neighborhoods, and
communities with high concentration of our military
servicemembers.
Furthermore, where the services are offered, State
officials and the CFPB already have adequate authority to
regulate these products and the companies that provide them.
The OCC shares the authors' goal of providing financial
services to underserved communities and unbanked populations
and we look forward to working with the members of the
subcommittee to achieve that goal. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Comptroller Gardineer can
be found on page 114 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is the Honorable John Munn, director of
banking and finance, State of Nebraska, Department of Banking
and Finance. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN MUNN, DIRECTOR, BANKING AND
FINANCE, STATE OF NEBRASKA DEPARTMENT OF BANKING AND FINANCE,
ON BEHALF OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATE BANK SUPERVISORS (CSBS)

Mr. Munn. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. My name
is John Munn, and I serve as the director of the Nebraska
Department of Banking and Finance. It is my pleasure today to
testify to you on behalf of CSBS. State regulators play a
central role in overseeing the nondepository consumer credit
industries. And we appreciate the opportunity to be part of
this important discussion.
I applaud the efforts of Representatives Baca and
Luetkemeyer and their colleagues to make financial services and
products available for unbanked and underbanked consumers.
While we recognize that providing these individuals with access
to financial services and products is an important objective,
we have significant concerns about H.R. 1909 and H.R. 6139.
First, we are concerned the bills would establish an option
for a Federal business charter without meeting the necessarily
high thresholds that Congress has traditionally required for
receiving such a benefit. Historically, Congress has created
Federal charters only in highly limited circumstances. In fact,
most industries and businesses--large and small--in the United
States thrive and meet important consumer needs very
successfully without a Federal charter.
Second, the bills would circumvent our ability to establish
and enforce laws governing the financial services providers.
The current legal structures governing the types of businesses
covered by the two bills have long-standing foundations in
State law. The citizens of each State have determined what
financial services companies and what products are available to
them.
In my home State of Nebraska, much of the legal structure
around payday lenders was adopted in the early 1990s. At that
time, our legislature made the decision to take these
businesses out of unregulated back alleys and away from loan
sharks and to place them into regulated storefronts. The result
of this action was to preserve access to these services and
products but with more protection for consumers and
accountability for the industry.
In 2010, Nebraska had approximately 115 licensed payday
lenders, and these companies reported a 20 percent net profit
after taxes.
Finally, the bills would undermine the carefully structured
State-Federal balance in financial services regulation. The
State law structures and processes governing financial services
providers are complimented by our Federal partners. These
partnerships leverage the benefits and strengths of each side
of the relationship. States serve as the front-line licensing
and regulatory authority ensuring that companies wishing to
offer such services meet certain minimum requirements and
comply with State and Federal laws. The Federal component
brings a perspective that reinforces without supplanting State
authority.
Members of Congress on both sides of the aisle and in both
Chambers have repeatedly voted to keep existing State
regulatory regimes. Unfortunately, both bills run contrary to
the goal of State-Federal collaboration and will fundamentally
undo our existing partnership. As State regulators, we benefit
from our proximity to the consumer transaction and to the
communities served by the financial services providers. We hear
firsthand about the regulatory burdens, and we see up close the
consequences of bad actors. These bills take this perspective
out of the picture to the detriment of the marketplace and of
consumers.
The challenge for policymakers is to create a framework
that ensures industry professionalism, accountability, and the
proper alignment of incentives while avoiding unnecessary
regulatory inefficiencies and burdens. For State regulators,
regulatory collaboration and coordination have been vital to
striking that balance. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
today. I look forward to responding to any questions or
thoughts the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Munn can be found on page
127 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
That concludes the testimony from panel one, and I will
begin my 5 minutes of questioning.
The GAO recently studied depository institutions offering
short-term, low-dollar loans--we all talked about this in our
statements--and concluded that these products still are not
very widely available. Given that many States either directly
or indirectly have eliminated payday lending, does your agency
intend to encourage these institutions that you regulate to
move into this market and meet the rising consumer demand for
short-term, low-dollar products?
Ms. Gardineer. Madam Chairwoman, the OCC continues to
encourage the institutions that we regulate to meet the credit
needs of low- and moderate-income individuals in this country,
and we agree that more can be done to achieve that. We
encourage them to issue affordable credit, and we oftentimes
make sure they understand that they can get favorable CRA
recognition by doing so.
However, our concerns with regard to this bill are that in
our experience, we have issued guidance because of the concerns
and the problems we have seen with the harm that these types of
products have brought to consumers in the past. So we know we
can do more and more needs to be done and we are certainly
willing to work with the committee, as well as our State
partners and other Federal regulators to achieve those goals.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Munn, let me ask you, let's use your
State of Nebraska as sort of a sample. What availabilities do
you have in Nebraska that are State-regulated for this type of
lending? Do you have payday lenders?
Mr. Munn. Yes, we have payday lenders. We license small
loan companies in addition to the 173 banks and 18 credit
unions that we supervise.
Chairwoman Capito. Do the institutions that you regulate
make tax refund anticipation loans and those--
Mr. Munn. No, they do not.
Chairwoman Capito. So those have been specifically banned
through State statute?
Mr. Munn. Not specifically; I think more because of
regulatory scrutiny of those practices.
Chairwoman Capito. As a regulator, what product concerns
you the most in terms of being maybe unfair or difficult for a
consumer in this high-risk, low-dollar area?
Mr. Munn. I think the burden in payday lending improperly
granted the debt cycle it has created is maybe the most
worrisome, and the cost that leads to for the individual
consumers.
Chairwoman Capito. The loss--most of those loans are
supposed to be repaid in relatively short periods of time,
correct?
Mr. Munn. Yes, they are. And while we have a law that
prohibits same-day transactions as far as going in paying
interest and renewing that transaction, often the gap isn't
very far between. Also, in Nebraska, you can go to different
payday licensees for an additional advance having paid off one
payday lender.
Chairwoman Capito. So you could go to one, and then go to
another. You can do that in Nebraska?
Mr. Munn. Yes, you can.
Chairwoman Capito. I would imagine--I am from West
Virginia, a small State. We have low socioeconomics in some
cases, a lot of elderly people. I am certain that is the case
with everybody here, but you have heard the statistics, and I
am directing to both of you really, of folks who can't get a
$2,000 loan for whatever, tires for the car or anything, a
medical emergency. What options--are we going to push everybody
to the Internet for Internet lending, is that something that
falls in the bailiwick of this type of regulatory environment?
What suggestions can you make to try to solve this problem?
I know, Ms. Gardineer, you said we are encouraging our
institutions to do this, but the reality is I am not sure they
really are doing it, and if they are, I am not sure that is
maybe in the magnitude to solve an issue here. I think we all
acknowledge there is an issue here.
Mr. Munn, do you want to start?
Mr. Munn. Absolutely. Being from a rural State as I am,
which I think applies to your State, I think maybe we have
better support systems in place for those situations,
oftentimes in the car repair situation you mentioned, the shop
doing the repair would allow the individual to do it in
payments. About 20 percent of our credit unions in Nebraska,
both federally- and State-chartered, have initiated quick cash
programs with an 18 percent interest rate which keeps it within
our State usury rate, therefore, they have the ability to
structure, they will allow up to 60 days, keeps the APR much
lower than it does when you compute the APR on payday loans.
Chairwoman Capito. Did you have something to add, Ms.
Gardineer?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes, I believe that we all recognize that
there is a problem here and there is a need for enhanced access
to credit, but I think that is part of the issue that we see
with the bill. We have great concerns about increasing
consumers' access to building their creditworthiness here. And
in many ways, what we see is access to transactions that
perhaps provide money, but don't necessarily provide the
credit-building relationship that we think is vital to these
consumers as they begin to get these small-dollar loans.
Chairwoman Capito. I am going to have to stop you there,
because I am going to run out of time, I am sure we will get
into the rest.
Mrs. Maloney for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. So Ms. Gardineer, you agree that, or rather
the OCC agrees that there is a credit gap in our country and a
serious lack of credit access for Americans of limited means? I
think you both agree that there is, is that an appropriate
assessment?
I would say the OCC and State institutions have a
responsibility to try to help meet these needs. And Mr. Munn,
you mentioned the credit unions' efforts with the quick cash
deal. What is the OCC doing to help fill that gap? What would
you recommend, if you are opposed to the bill, how would you
recommend that you fill the gap for the people who do need
access to short-term credit?
Ms. Gardineer. I think what the OCC--
Mrs. Maloney. To build credit scores, as you said.
Ms. Gardineer. In order to help consumers build their
credit relationships, I think what we don't want to see is the
unintended consequences of the harmful effects that could come
from some of these products and services that, in our
experience, we have seen have done more harm than good in
helping these consumers meet those credit needs.
So our concern is not that there is a lack of access to
low-dollar loans. However, we do think that they have to be
done in a very prudent and safe and sound way, and our concerns
are not limited only to the consumer protection issues, but we
also see the significant concerns we have with the safety and
soundness issues that come with the offering of these products
and services as well.
As I mentioned in my statement, and as reflected in my
testimony, there is a significant amount of oversight required
with regard to BSA and AML compliance that oftentimes is
extremely expensive and could certainly undermine the economic
viability that the bill seeks to have these companies achieve
in order to be profitable, but meet credit needs of these
individuals.
So again, we want to work with you to look at the
innovations that could be offered, but we are fearful based on
our supervisory experience.
Mrs. Maloney. You have commented in your statement that you
want to serve underserved communities and unbanked populations,
but I am not hearing and you don't want any abuses, and you
want to protect them, and you want to help them build their
credit scores, and I think that is all great, but how? Where
does the mother whose car broke down and desperately needs
$2,000, where does she go to get a loan that she needs? Would
the quick loans that the credit unions have give a loan as low
as $2,000? And what are the answers, you are saying what you
are against, but you are not saying what you are for. How do we
help this unbanked, underserved, really needy population?
Ms. Gardineer. I think that the goal of the bill is to
foster and encourage the innovative products and services. And
we do support the goal of that bill.
Mrs. Maloney. Do you have any ideas for innovative products
or services or how we would serve this population, either of
you? I agree that you want to protect consumers, I am with you
100 percent, and you want to build credit, but you are not
saying how you would do this, how that would happen.
Ms. Gardineer. I think what the bill structure actually
anticipates as far as the OCC's ability to charter and approve
these products and services is not to--and I think there may be
language in the bill that specifically addresses we are not to
create these products, but we are to evaluate them, that would
be what would be asked of the agency. And our concerns, again,
Congresswoman, that we--
Mrs. Maloney. You testified you find them unsafe and
unsound, but I am looking for solutions. Mr. Munn, would the
credit unions give $2,000 loans, or do you have any other
solutions that would be safe and sound?
Mr. Munn. No, the largest loan in the program in Nebraska
is $500 for a 60-day period.
Mrs. Maloney. Is that a national program or is that just in
your State?
Mr. Munn. I believe they developed it on their own.
Mrs. Maloney. I would say pawnbrokers, too, are a source,
wouldn't you say?
Mr. Munn. They can be. We do not regulate pawnbrokers in
Nebraska. We should give credit to financial institutions we
supervise for tremendous efforts at financial literacy to try
and address the problem hopefully before it develops, as low as
elementary school, and even up through senior citizens' events.
As far as appropriate budgeting, savings and also they're very
quick to refer people to financial counselors, if they are
unable to assist them with a loan.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. Renacci for 5 minutes.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I want to
thank the witnesses this morning for being here. Ms. Gardineer,
you indicated in one of your responses that the OCC encourages
low-dollar, short-term loans, correct?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes.
Mr. Renacci. And the Center for Financial Services
Innovation conducted a study in 2008 that found as much as 75
percent of the unbanked and the underbanked population had
credit scores that would be considered subprime or lack enough
credit history to generate any score at all. Do the financial
institutions that you regulate which offer short-term, low-
dollar loans require the borrower to have above-average credit?
Ms. Gardineer. I am sure that the institutions that we
regulate require the consumers to have the ability to repay,
and to be able to demonstrate that.
Mr. Renacci. But if they had below average credit or no
credit score at all, would those banks that you regulate loan
money out to those individuals?
Ms. Gardineer. I believe I can say we would be concerned
with that type of lending activity.
Mr. Renacci. You would be concerned with that? So how do
those individuals build a credit score, and at the same time,
how are they able to borrow the money that they need for short-
term emergencies?
Ms. Gardineer. I think one of the things that we need to do
is take a more holistic approach to how we deal with this
problem. And by that, I think we recognize that a lot of these
consumers do have access to these types of products now, and
they are clearly regulated by the States. What I think we would
like to see is the creation--with the creation of the CFPB,
there is now a framework of a Federal agency that can issue
very robust guidelines to lending standards that could be
applied on a national scale. And by doing that, you would
ensure that consumers would have the very protections that I
think the bill seeks to introduce.
Mr. Renacci. I have to interrupt you. Your explanation has
nothing to do with how the individuals build their credit
score; you are talking about the CFPB and standards. We have
individuals that need dollars today, need to be able to borrow
money today, don't have a credit score, want to go to these
organizations, and you have haven't answered how they get that
money, or how they are able to borrow that money.
Ms. Gardineer. The lending standards of financial
institutions regulated by the OCC would require a demonstration
of a borrower's ability to repay, as I said earlier. One of the
concerns that we pointed out with the bill is not only that
consumers have access to cash, but begin to rebuild their
credit. We have concerns with some of the products and services
we think we would see from some of the companies that would be
chartered, such as reloadable prepaid cards.
Mr. Renacci. I don't mean to interrupt you, but I only have
so much time. How about those people who have the ability to
pay but have low credit scores? I keep getting back to the same
thing and we keep going off in a different direction. There are
some who have no credit score but have the ability to pay, and
those who have a low credit score but have the ability to pay.
Does the OCC promote those type of loans, for small banks to
loan out money?
Ms. Gardineer. We encourage our institutions to make these
types of loans, but there is a regulatory framework within
which prudent loans need to be made. And we do believe that
while meeting the needs of these consumers is paramount to the
bill, and we certainly support the goals, they have to be done
in a prudent manner and in a safe and sound manner.
Mr. Renacci. Let's go to the institutions that you regulate
in offering short-term, low-dollar loans, can you tell me has
that increased or decreased over the last decade?
Ms. Gardineer. I don't have the data to support that, but I
can get that and get back to you.
Mr. Renacci. Okay. Mr. Munn, quickly, can you comment on
the importance of being able to share information between
regulators and securing confidential manner?
Mr. Munn. We are in a new environment, especially with the
CFPB primarily, and the ability to share among financial
regulators, both State and Federal, and law enforcement is key,
not only in Bank Secrecy Act and money laundering efforts, but
also just in general as to character issues.
Mr. Renacci. I have introduced legislation, H.R. 6125, to
ensure that information can be shared among regulators in a
manner that ensures confidentiality and privilege protection
stay in place. Can you give me your thoughts on that, and do
you believe it is necessary?
Mr. Munn. It is necessary and needed, because there is a
wide array of regulatory bodies out there now, especially from
State to State. And having access to information about,
especially bad actors, is key to us being effective regulators.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. Baca for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baca. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Gardineer, in
your testimony you raise the objection to a 45-day review
period for the approved product that the OCC would be required
to follow stating that it would be too quick to turn around.
For chartered banks that you currently oversee, what is your
typical review process for new credit products and how long
does it take--how long would you propose the review period be
for short-term products?
Ms. Gardineer. I think the 45 days is taken in context with
the language of the bill and the OCC's expectations in
reviewing and approving the products. So the bill requires the
OCC to make a determination that the products and services
would significantly harm the interest of underserved consumers,
or small businesses, which we believe would require us to prove
a negative, based on activities that have not yet been
conducted. Generally--
Mr. Baca. What proof would you be able to do that in
determining that, that it would do harm? You said it would do
harm.
Ms. Gardineer. That is the standard that is outlined in the
bill, that the OCC would have to apply in order to disapprove a
bill.
Mr. Baca. We don't really know if it would do harm or not.
Ms. Gardineer. Exactly. So in order to meet that standard
in evaluating the product or services and the only way that the
OCC could disapprove any of the products or services offered by
one of these companies would be to meet that standard, and to
meet it within a 45-day period. I think the bill provides that
if the OCC does not act within that 45 days, the product or
service is deemed to be approved, and at that point cannot only
be offered to low-income, underbanked--
Mr. Baca. Let me ask an additional question. In your
testimony you infer that under the bill, the lines between the
OCC's authority and the CFPB's authority would be unclear.
Doesn't the bill initially leave the CFPB essentially intact
with its consumer protection authority under the Frank Dodd?
And moreover, can you point to any part of the bill that would
allow the OCC to overturn any determination made by the CFPB
that a product is abusive or predatory?
Ms. Gardineer. I think what we looked at is the concerns
raised by the bill in its current form that would require the
OCC to create disclosure for these types of products. The issue
that we see and what I addressed in the bill is the exemption
for certain types of disclosure under the Truth in Lending Act
(TILA), which the CFPB now administers. And if certain
disclosure would not be required for the short-term loans that
would be part of the offers presumed by these companies, then
there could be confusion with regard to consumers who would not
necessarily benefit from the protections under TILA for the
disclosures of APRs, for example. So those are some of the
concerns that we referenced in our testimony today.
Mr. Baca. You also make the point that we should turn our
attention to small-dollar loans authorized by Dodd-Frank which,
to date, has not received $1 of Federal funds or had any funds
requested by either the President or Congress. If this program
were funded, the program would only be successful as much as
the appropriated funds allow it to be. And I am not sure if you
have been aware of the current political debate of the Federal
spending has not been something that Congress has been able to
agree on. Considering all of this, what would be your solution
for the growing credit divide, and why should the CFPB be able
to oversee the Federal charter, even though it is not what they
were constructed to do? How does a program that has never been
funded allow for small-dollar loans? And how much Federal funds
would it take for this program to really make some of the
progress in today's current economy?
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman, I don't know how much money it
would take to make such a program successful. We could
certainly go back and see if there are folks at the OCC who
could develop data and we could get back to you on that. With
regard to the CFPB, what I am suggesting is that the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Act created the CFPB and gave them the authority to
issue broad standards and guidelines that would cover both
banking and non-banking entities. And in order to maintain a
level of consistency and consumer protection, we believe that
robust guidelines that would be issued by the Bureau would
better help to achieve the goals of the bill.
Mr. Baca. Did my time run out?
Chairwoman Capito. Your time has run out.
Mr. Baca. Oh, okay.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Royce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Yes.
Ms. Gardineer, you mentioned several times in your
testimony that the OCC has some concerns with this legislation
in regard to money laundering and the Bank Secrecy Act. It
sounds as if you are saying that this legislation, which
creates a Federal nexus for some of these institutions, would
weaken certain money-laundering provisions, or you have some
concerns with that. I wondered if you could explain that to me.
Ms. Gardineer. Of course. Certain of these products and
services would utilize products that we believe would
facilitate money laundering. In our experience, one of the
things we know is that the cost of controls, in order to have
an effective BSA/AML program in a financial institution, is
extremely costly. Not only that, there is a myriad of oversight
that is required to meet the very complex set of regulations
and rules that have been put into place to protect against the
BSA/AML concerns.
This is pretty much echoed by FinCEN, which recently
promulgated rules to address prepaid cards, a product that we
believe would be utilized by many of these companies to offer
transactional-type services to the underbanked and unbanked
that are targeted in the bill.
Mr. Royce. The thing that is concerning, I think, is the
presumption that the OCC would not be capable of adequately
safeguarding this sector when it comes to the anti-money
laundering provisions, because what we are talking about here
is a system of attempting to address offshore sites, to address
these tribal entities that are involved in the business. And,
again, it would seem to me that with a Federal nexus here, this
would give you the wherewithal to monitor this more
effectively.
We currently have a situation where you have offshore
companies, you have Indian tribes playing a very large role and
an ever-increasing role in this sector. So it would seem that,
again, giving a Federal regulator some oversight, that fact
would actually increase the safeguards on this front.
Today, FinCEN is forced, if you think it through, to work
with 50-plus State regulators, all the State regulators and the
District of Columbia. That can't be an ideal structure for
trying to detect money laundering through the United States.
In a way, you are arguing against the ability of the OCC to
do an effective job on this front, and, of course, we had
recently in the Senate that study about the OCC's failure in
this regard. But I would think that in many ways, this would
help give you the tools to pull that together.
Ms. Gardineer. I think the issue that we have identified,
Congressman, is not one of our oversight, but it is the issue
of expanding the market for these products. By providing this
specific Federal charter, you would now be allowing products
and services that in our experience, we have identified as not
only having safety and soundness concerns, but consumer
protection concerns as well.
Mr. Royce. All overseen by the OCC here.
Ms. Gardineer. And my analogy to what you are talking about
is the issues that we saw growing from the subprime market with
regard to real estate. Subprime products had been around for
many, many years, but generally offered to a very niche group
of individuals. It was the expansion of that product to a
broader demographic and across the country that led to a
significant downfall with regard to the real estate crisis that
we saw.
So the expansion of the products into the marketplace is
where we ground our concern with regard to the growing AML and
BSA concerns that we have identified.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Hinojosa for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you.
I thank the distinguished panelists for your testimony. It
seems to me, just like my colleagues who sponsored this
legislation, I am concerned about the availability of credit
and the type of financial products available to our most
underserved communities. Hidalgo County in my congressional
district in deep south Texas has a population of nearly
800,000, and it is the most unbanked county, with over 100,000
low-income households, many of whom are unbanked or
underbanked. I have concerns that stripping the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau of their role to oversee non-bank
small lenders will dilute their ability to comprehensively
protect the underbanked and non-banked in my district.
Supporters of the new proposal argue that it does not in any
way remove the authority of the Bureau to examine, to issue
regulations, or to enforce rules regarding these lenders.
So my question to you, Ms. Gardineer is, do you believe
that granting the OCC the authority to issue formal approval of
these consumer products could undermine a later Bureau finding
that the practices are abusive?
Ms. Gardineer. I think that given the current structure of
the CFPB and its role to evaluate and study consumer products
and services, it is vital under the Dodd-Frank Act that the
CFPB have the ability to issue national standards with regard
to the offering of lending products. This safeguard exists
currently today in our statutory structure.
Mr. Hinojosa. Are you concerned that the OCC does not have
the resources to provide sufficient oversight of a completely
new class of financial entity such as small-dollar lenders?
Ms. Gardineer. It is certain risks that we have identified
that we believe with the expansion into the market would do
more harm than good and create--
Mr. Hinojosa. But you don't understand. We only have 800
people in the Bureau. We need 1,200 to be fully staffed. So
that is what my question was about, and I didn't get an answer.
I have a question for Mr. John Munn. Is there a compelling
national interest to establish a Federal charter in this area,
and what gaps in regulation do you believe this bill is looking
to close?
Mr. Munn. I see no compelling need for a Federal charter,
as these bills would basically gut State regulation. We feel we
are the feet on the ground.
In regard to the question about the Bank Secrecy Act and
any money laundering, the information that is used in that
pursuit flows up from the institutions we supervise, and the
majority of institutions are State-chartered or regulated.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you for clarifying that.
How does Nebraska's licensing scheme and enforcement
mechanism differ from what would be in place if this bill were
enacted?
Mr. Munn. We license on a county basis, which gives us a
much smaller area in which to monitor the performance of a
payday lender. We have a limit as to the fees that can be
charged: $15 per $100. A licensed payday lender may not hold
more than two checks from an individual at any one time. A
check may not be held for more than 34 days, and the checks in
the aggregate cannot exceed $500.
Mr. Hinojosa. So how do States differ now in their
regulation of the non-bank lenders? What kinds of protections
are in place that could be preempted if this bill were enacted?
Mr. Munn. I think those States that have a central registry
of payday-lending transactions where each licensee needs to
forward electronically a notation of an advance to an
individual would be a way in which they can coordinate amongst
them so that the use of payday lending advances is appropriate.
Mr. Hinojosa. My final question: Would the bill undermine
our States' authority to license and regulate non-bank
financial service providers?
Mr. Munn. Absolutely.
Mr. Hinojosa. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I would like to follow up for just a second with Mr. Munn.
So far, Mr. Munn, you have been talking about payday
lending and H.R. 1909, and none of that is what we are talking
about today. We are talking about our bill, H.R. 6139, which
does not allow payday lending, number one. Number two, all of
the lending that is in there is beyond 30 days.
So my question to you is, you made the comment a minute ago
that there is no compelling need in your State for small-dollar
lending. Is that what you just said?
Mr. Munn. Yes. No, I am sorry, the question was, is there a
compelling need for a Federal charter.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. A Federal charter, right. But you don't
have anybody whose--you don't allow lending above $500 for
small-dollar loans; is that correct?
Mr. Munn. As far as payday lending advances, yes. As far as
small loan companies, they may loan to whatever limit they feel
is appropriate.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. We have a situation, though, in your
State, you may not be aware of it, but about 900 people a day
go online to find other sources of lending. Does that concern
you at all?
Mr. Munn. Absolutely. I am concerned about how do they know
that they are working with a valid entity on the other end?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much. You just made my
point. I think it is very important that we do that as well,
and that is what this bill is trying to do. Because what they
are doing is going offshore. They are going to tribal locations
where they are loaning online. And what this bill tries to do
is allow a Federal charter to take those folks into
consideration to allow them access to that credit so that it
can be controlled. And it is not out of--and it addresses your
concerns and makes sure that it is done in a safe and sound
way. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Munn. How will the individual know, the consumer, when
they go online, that they are interacting with a licensed
supervised payday lender? I did a search--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Wait. Timeout. We are not doing payday
lending. This is not payday lending.
Mr. Munn. Is there going to be a prepayment penalty if
somebody repays a 30-day advance?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No. There is no prepayment penalty. Have
you read the bill? There is no prepayment penalty in this.
Ms. Gardineer, let me talk to you a little bit. Obviously,
Mr. Munn hasn't read the bill, so it is going to be difficult
to ask him any questions about it.
With regard to you, you keep talking about a number of
things here that keep going back and forth, back and forth,
with regard to the issues that we are talking about. First, you
say traditional banking is not working. You made the comment
that you want to extinguish small lending from the banking
system, yet you want to work with our banks to make sure that
they can provide for the folks who are in need, who are on the
line with their lives and their livelihoods, who just need a
small-dollar loan, yet you have no solutions. Your solution was
a prepaid card.
If I am not mistaken, you have to buy the prepaid card with
money; do you not?
Mr. Munn. I assume so.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. How does that solve the problem? Mr. Munn,
I am asking the question of Ms. Gardineer. Thank you.
Ms. Gardineer. This was just an example of the types of
products and services we believe would be utilized in order to
provide the loans that are contemplated under the bill.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That prepaid card is not a loan.
Ms. Gardineer. No, it is not.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No, it is not. Thank you very much.
Another question for you. You are talking about a problem
building credit history. We had a hearing here not too long ago
with regard to the folks who rent to own, and it is very
interesting that during the course of the discussion, many
people testified that to rent to own was a great way to
establish their credit history to be able to go back then and
be able to get a normal loan.
You don't believe that people being able to get a short-
term loan, most of whom pay it back--in fact, I was the
chairman of the Financial Services Committee when I was in
Missouri, and we were working very long and hard on all of
these small-dollar lending folks like this, and we had fewer
complaints about them than we did the banking industry. Why?
Because the people come in, they have a particular need, and
they go in and address it, and they take care of their
business. That is the way they establish credit. I think that
is important, don't you?
Ms. Gardineer. I agree that it is important to establish
credit. Our experience, however, has shown that the types of
products and services that the OCC has reviewed and taken great
steps to issue guidance to protect consumers and enforcement
actions to deal with the high cost of the fees, the rollover
and the unsustainable debt that we believe consumers can be
trapped in is of a greater concern and does not help them build
credit.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You keep looking at the glass as if it is
half empty. I think it ought to be half full. I look at this as
an opportunity to help people if it is structured correctly.
You keep telling me that the OCC can't do this, it can't do
that; we are looking for this, we are looking for that.
We are giving you the authority in this bill to be able to
work with the individuals who want to do this type of lending
and create an environment that will work for not only the
lender, but for the person who is getting the money as well,
and works for you to be able to regulate this. The CFPB is
involved in this. This is a collaborative effort on all
people's part to be able to offer a product that helps
everybody in this situation.
I am really curious, and I have another question in regards
to safety and soundness, but I will leave that for another day.
I see that my time is up.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Here is what I think is wrong with this--that is a
challenge with this bill. KPMG did a study, a very, very
effective study, that said that there are 30 million Americans
who are either unbanked or underbanked, and my problem with
H.R. 6139 is that you have in this bill a $5,000 unsecured
credit limit and a $25,000 secured credit limit, both of which
the OCC can raise. That is correct; is it not?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes.
Mr. Scott. All right. Can you explain to me the
justification for such a high required level of credit? And
what about those folks who simply need $2,000 or $3,000 and
where the bulk of these 30 million are impacted? How do you
justify this high limit?
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman, these are issues with the bill
that we have identified in our testimony. The bill would
actually allow short-term loans that could be greater than 30
days. They could be secured. They could be secured by salary
payments, if you will. They could be high cost. They could have
rollovers. They could, of course, increase the cycle of debt,
the very thing that we believe is not the goal of the bill, but
could certainly be the unintended consequence of the bill.
Again, what we believe we have seen in our experience is a
construct of the bill that would essentially require us to
charter companies as national consumer credit corporations
against--and have as a part of those new charters companies
against which we already have cease-and-desist orders
outstanding for offering the very types of products that trap
consumers into a cycle of debt that we think is more abusive.
Mr. Scott. Could you share with us what potential
implications would result from this requirement, from this high
level?
Ms. Gardineer. I think what we see with regard to the high
dollar amount is it doesn't actually achieve the goal that we
have identified with regard to underbanked and unbanked. There
is a range here with regard to the dollar amounts, as you have
pointed out, the $5,000 unsecured, $25,000 secured credit. But
in the discussions and the studies that we have read,
oftentimes consumers are seeking much smaller dollar amounts in
order to meet their short-term needs.
Again, our concern is if the goal of the bill is to help
consumers build their creditworthiness, but these unintended
consequences that could sustain a cycle of debt with these
types of fees is the result, then we haven't actually achieved
the goal of helping the consumer.
Mr. Scott. So you agree with me that this is a major
shortcoming of this bill?
Ms. Gardineer. I agree.
Mr. Scott. Now, let me ask you about this issue of the
overlapping between the OCC and the CFPB. What are your
concerns there? Isn't there a danger here that when you have
this overlapping, when you bring in another agency and you have
one in place that is just getting really under way, and we are
still faced with efforts of trying to disavow that, doesn't
that bring out a sense of uncertainty and unpredictability of
who is in charge of what, and isn't that another basic flaw in
this approach?
Ms. Gardineer. I think what would be created under the bill
is the OCC having the authority to charter national consumer
credit corporations and to then approve or disapprove, given
the standard products and services that are presented to it
within a 45-day period. That would seem to be in conflict with
the current regulatory or statutory regime, rather, with the
CFPB that has the authority currently to issue rules and
guidelines that would create national lending standards that
apply both to banking and non-banking entities and achieve that
level of consistency that consumers need in order to make
informed comparisons about the costs of low-dollar credit and
the availability of that type of credit. The two agencies
together, or the OCC having this authority, doesn't appear to
be needed, given the authority of the CFPB currently.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I would like to
yield a couple of minutes to Mr. Luetkemeyer.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Luetkemeyer is recognized.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Pearce.
I just had a quick question with regards to safety and
soundness, Ms. Gardineer. You made that comment a couple of
times. Can you explain how a small-dollar lender has a safety
and soundness problem?
Ms. Gardineer. I think that the bill actually requires the
OCC to encourage affiliations with third-party vendors, and as
I mentioned in our testimony, the Comptroller very recently
made a statement about third-party vendor oversight and the
problems that it raises with operational risks on a safety and
soundness basis.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You continue to go down this track, Ms.
Gardineer, of saying, well, we have had this experience, and
therefore it is a bad thing. Why don't we change the way we are
doing business then and make it a good thing? You have the rule
capability. You have the authority, working with the CFPB, to
come up with new rules, new criteria. If it has to be
capitalized differently, if it takes new management practices,
that is fine.
But when you say safety and soundness, I have a real
problem with that comment. As a former regulator, safety and
soundness has a whole different meaning to me. When you impugn
that the integrity of the institution is at risk, you are
talking about safety and soundness. And we are talking about an
institution that has no safety and soundness impact on this
society or this whole regimen as a whole. We are looking at one
individual institution that may or may not be in compliance,
and you have power over that.
And I keep saying, you keep wanting to not say, well, we
can't do a good job of overseeing it. If you can't do a good
job overseeing a small-dollar lender, how in the world can you
do a good job overseeing Bank of America and JPMorgan?
Ms. Gardineer. The issues that I have raised, Congressman,
deal with the third-party vendors who the OCC would be
encouraged to have these--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ma'am, with all due respect, if you don't
want them to hook up with those lenders when they apply for
their charter, you don't give it to them. You are in control.
You act like you have no control over this, and yet this bill
gives you the authority to do everything you want.
I yield back to my good friend from New Mexico. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you.
Mr. Munn, you talk about wanting to protect the consumer,
and the great fault you find with the payday loans or whatever
is just the charge, right, the amount of the charge; is that
it?
Mr. Munn. The--
Mr. Pearce. So what is your real objection to the payday
lending?
Mr. Munn. I don't object to payday lending as a process. It
is the law of the State, and I enforce State law. So I am
neither in favor of it nor against it.
Mr. Pearce. So you pass regulations in order to control
what? Do you pass regulations--
Mr. Munn. So that the business is in regulated storefronts.
Mr. Pearce. So you would control the price of the products;
is that right?
Mr. Munn. That is correct.
Mr. Pearce. Okay. And that is basically where you are
coming from Ms. Gardineer; is that right?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pearce. Now, would you both say that several hundred
million dollars is an exorbitant amount to pay for a $140,000
or $150,000 loan, and the cost was several hundred million
dollars? Wouldn't you say that is exorbitant?
Mr. Munn. Yes.
Ms. Gardineer. Yes.
Mr. Pearce. There was a guy in New Mexico trying to get a
$140,000 loan and couldn't find it. He just had an idea. He was
willing to give up half his company stock for the $140,000. No
one in New Mexico would take it on, so he moved to Seattle, and
Bill Gates ended up paying somebody a lot of money for
$140,000. Now, what you all would do is stop that completely,
because that was a pretty large amount to pay, yet Bill Gates
didn't mind. At the end of the day, he came out okay, I think;
wouldn't you say?
Mr. Munn. Absolutely.
Mr. Pearce. He survived it.
The question I have at the end of the day is one a
constituent put to me: If I want to borrow $100 today and pay
$120 back at the end of the week, what business is it of yours,
the government? It is a pretty similar question to what Bill
Gates would have asked.
What we are going to do is regulate out the potential for
this economy to thrive. We are going to regulate out every
opportunity for anybody who is right now unbanked to find
money. We are going to do that on credit cards. We are going to
do it all the way up and down the row. Maybe we should just put
out a warning that says, if you go out beyond here, you are on
your own. We are not going to protect you at all. We don't know
what is out there. You go here at your own risk.
But the idea we could regulate every breath that people
take, every step that they make, every business decision, every
crunch they get into is one that is doomed to fail. A
government that intends to regulate everything has no freedom
and no movement. We have plenty of examples of those economies
in the word. Now, I don't want anybody cheated either, but I
also want Bill Gates to find his $140,000 when he comes along.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to ask for unanimous consent to insert a
statement into the record from Mr. William Isaac. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Carney for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you and the
ranking member for having this hearing, and for the sponsors of
the legislation and the witnesses today for coming to discuss
what is a difficult issue and a serious problem for so many
folks.
We had in here several months back a hearing with, I
believe it was the FDIC, who had a pilot program to address the
credit needs of the unbanked, and I think their target APR was
like 38 percent. The report that they presented to us that day
was that it was a miserable failure. They tried to get their
member institutions to take up that program, and it was quite a
failure.
I spoke to Richard Cordray before he was made the head of
the CFPB, when he was the Chief Enforcement Officer, about
payday lending and my concern about consumers and how they were
addressed by that. He had field hearings, I understand, after
that and found that there are a lot of people out there in
communities across the country who need access to credit. They
are not getting it from the banking institutions.
So, there is a real need out there. He said he had heard
that. I know that all of my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle are hearing that as well. So the question gets to be how
do we address that need? It seems that the banking industry is
not doing it, the regular banking industry, if you will.
Mr. Munn, I know you are here on behalf of, I guess, the
Conference of State Bank Supervisors. Are you speaking on their
behalf?
Mr. Munn. Yes, I am.
Mr. Carney. Was there a process that you all or the
organization went through to develop your position on the
legislation that we are discussing today?
Mr. Munn. Discussions between regulators, State regulators,
happened both through CSBS and outside of CSBS, and gradually,
I think, we have the benefit of understanding what is working
in other States and what may not be working in other States.
Mr. Carney. So it is essentially the issue of preemption,
from your perspective?
Mr. Munn. Yes.
Mr. Carney. So you are regulating these kinds of lenders
right now. What are the kinds of problems that you see?
Mr. Munn. The problems that we see, we are very restrictive
as to Internet, access to Internet payday lending. We require
that a license--
Mr. Carney. By ``we,'' do you mean in Nebraska or just
generally?
Mr. Munn. Excuse me, I am speaking in terms of Nebraska, as
far as we require a physical presence within a State for that
licensee to offer Internet payday lending so we have some
office where we can go to to review the records.
Mr. Carney. Is that typical of other States?
Mr. Munn. Yes, I believe it is.
Mr. Carney. What other kinds of things? In terms of--the
biggest concern are these short-term loans that translate into
an APR that we would otherwise think is excessive, but if you
are looking for that $500 to pay for your new brake job or
whatever, you are going to pay what you need to do.
Mr. Munn. That is right.
Mr. Carney. Isn't that really the essence of the problem?
Is that what you see at the State level?
Mr. Munn. Each State sets its own caps on it. And, of
course, there are 16 States that either don't allow it or have
set the APR so low that payday lenders can't make money at it.
Mr. Carney. Is it the APR, or is it the continuing reupping
if you will, taking an additional--the cycle of debt, if you
will, that has been described earlier?
Mr. Munn. I have not read the Pew study that just came out
last week, but in reviewing the major points, I think they used
the 5-month cycle of debt was common for people who go in for
one payday advance.
Mr. Carney. Ms. Gardineer, you heard me talk about the need
for this. What is the alternative? Is there a way to cure the
legislation that we have before us, or is there a different
approach? You didn't seem to have an answer in response to
other Members who asked a similar question.
Ms. Gardineer. In looking at the legislation and preparing
the testimony today, we offered our observations on the bill
presented in front of us. The OCC would be willing to work with
any of the Members, the committee, and the other Federal
regulators to address the needs of short-term credit, but I
don't have today any additional ways that we could do that.
Mr. Carney. I think you may have suggested to try to get
this population in the regular banking system. Did you suggest
that, or did I hear--
Ms. Gardineer. No. Actually what I said is that I think the
best oversight that we have in the current structure of the
statutes is the CFPB's ability to issue nationwide standards
that would apply to non-banks as well as banking entities to
address the credit needs.
Mr. Carney. Thank you. My time is up. Thanks for coming
today and sharing your expertise with us.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Grimm for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Munn, you just mentioned that you have very robust and
strict rules about online lending in Nebraska. I just had a
question. How do you enforce those rules? And let me give you a
specific example. I am in Nebraska. I log on. I go offshore,
and they send me a prepaid card in the mail. How do you enforce
that? And they are breaking the rules of Nebraska, let us just
say, in many ways. How do you enforce that?
Mr. Munn. Of course, we would not be licensing that
offshore lender. If the consumer complains about it, we would
attempt to get to the bottom of the situation that they have
put themselves in.
Mr. Grimm. But in all sincerity, you being in Nebraska, you
are not going to do anything about that company in Macau?
Mr. Munn. We are very limited as to what we can do.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. So, again, I just want to emphasize, I
think it is a little bit misleading to discuss all of the rules
and regulations that you have for the Internet when we all know
that these offshore companies is what we are really trying to
avoid in the first place. You can't really do anything
whatsoever to stop them from doing these loans on the Internet,
because unless you plan on monitoring people on the Internet,
which we know you certainly are not going to do, you wouldn't
even know about it until after the fact, until after the damage
is done.
So isn't there something to be said about limiting or at
least trying to attack the problem of all of this offshore
lending that is going on and get something that is regulated
and that we can maybe do a better job of?
Mr. Munn. As a State regulator, I don't think we can begin
to try and regulate foreign companies.
Mr. Grimm. Exactly.
Ms. Gardineer, you mentioned before an analogy with the
real estate market. First of all--and also safety and
soundness, and I think it all goes together. Are these
institutions, these lenders, are they depositories? Because I
thought they were nondepositories.
Ms. Gardineer. The entities that the bill would ask the OCC
to charter?
Mr. Grimm. Yes.
Ms. Gardineer. That is correct. But they could be owned by
depositories.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. But for the most part, they are not
depositories?
Ms. Gardineer. They are not depositories.
Mr. Grimm. So if they are not depositories, where is that
safety and soundness issue? Because I have to be honest with
you, I don't see it either. Normally in this committee, safety
and soundness goes to the integrity of the overall banking
institution. We are talking about having taxpayers on the hook.
If one of these small payday lenders makes loans they shouldn't
make, they go out of business. But it certainly isn't systemic,
or it is not going to affect the taxpayers, will it? Can you
foresee a situation where it is affecting the taxpayers if a
payday lender or one of these small lenders goes out of
business?
Ms. Gardineer. The form of ownership can change under the
bill. So even though these would be chartered as
nondepositories, I think the bill actually would permit
depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and
loan holding companies to own these types of companies. And at
that point, I think that you do have the nexus between the
depository institutions, the holding company structure that
could create a safety and soundness issue.
Mr. Grimm. Hold on. But under that bill, the OCC can decide
whether that happens or not, correct?
Ms. Gardineer. In the framework of the bill.
Mr. Grimm. So the OCC, based on this framework, could
prevent that.
Okay. Back to the real estate market. Is that really a fair
analogy? In this scenario, we have a lender that is lending
money pretty much on the hook themselves. Are they then selling
that, packaging it and selling it, to the Federal Government?
Ms. Gardineer. I think--
Mr. Grimm. The risk? Are they or are they not selling the
risk to the Federal Government?
Ms. Gardineer. I am sorry, Congressman, I don't think I
follow your question.
Mr. Grimm. The risk of that loan, is it being packaged and
sold to the Federal Government? These lenders, are they going
to package and sell it to the Federal Government?
Ms. Gardineer. No, I don't know that--actually I can't say,
because the products and services would have to be approved by
the OCC. So the construct of how those services would be
offered--
Mr. Grimm. Okay. I can assure you that they are not being
packaged and sold like--that is silliness. Okay? This is a
serious proceeding. The subprime loans were sold to Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, sold to the government, which put taxpayers at
massive risk. The banks were knee deep in this stuff, and it
was a systemic problem that hurt our overall economy. And real
estate in my State is 25 percent of our State economy. This
amount of lending isn't even in that regime, and I just think
that analogy is simply absurd.
Ms. Gardineer. Actually, I think the analogy has some
merit, because what we are talking about with regard to all
aspects of lending are the disclosures that consumers need in
order to make informed choices. And what we saw with the
subprime market was the expansion of that product to a broader
demographic without the disclosures with regard to how the
products were offered and the mechanics of that type of loan.
Mr. Grimm. I know my time is up, but the problem wasn't
with disclosures; it was that the Federal Government was buying
it all, so no one cared.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I especially
thank you for allowing me to continue to interlope, given that
I am not a part of the committee. And I thank the witnesses for
appearing. Let me start with Mr. Munn.
Mr. Munn, you were asked a question earlier, and you didn't
get a chance to respond in terms of your knowledge of the bill.
Would you like to respond before I go to some other areas in
terms of your knowledge of the bill?
Mr. Munn. Thank you.
The point has been made more than once that in the bill as
proposed, the lenders would not make a loan of less than 30
days. And my question was, well, I don't see any prepayment
penalty called for, so somebody may go to one of these lenders.
They only need the money for 7 days, but they are made a 30-day
loan with the 30-day fee, and pay it off in 7 days. From an APR
standpoint, that increases the APR substantially.
Mr. Green. And does that, in your mind, constitute a
penalty?
Mr. Munn. A penalty? It would quadruple the annual
percentage rate, and, of course, that is what we are used to.
The terms we think of in terms on payday lending is the annual
percentage rate so that the consumer can shop from one payday
lender to the next.
Mr. Green. How many hats are you wearing today? I know what
your current title is, but in your testimony you seem to
indicate that you are representing some other entities.
Mr. Munn. I represent the State of Nebraska as the director
of its Department of Banking and Finance and serve at the
pleasure of the Governor, but then I also appear on behalf of
the Conference of State Bank Supervisors in which I am actively
involved. I also represent all State financial regulators on
the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, an
entity created by Congress in 1979.
Mr. Green. When you are speaking, how do I know when you
are representing Nebraska or the other entities? Where is the
line of demarcation? Is there a bright line for me?
Mr. Munn. There probably isn't a bright line. I would think
today, probably 60 to 70 percent of my testimony was Nebraska-
based.
Mr. Green. Let us ask a few questions now about your
opinion as it relates to the other entities. Has there been a
request by these other entities to regulate in this area? Are
you aware of a request that is being made by entities,
Governors, for example? I know you are not representing
Governors, but are Governors asking for this kind of
regulation?
Mr. Munn. No, I am not. It is the powers granted to the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau by Congress is where the
new source of regulation is coming from.
Mr. Green. And as it relates to preemption, your State
would oppose preemption, I take it?
Mr. Munn. Yes, we would.
Mr. Green. Do you have any sense of how the other States
would weigh in on the question of preemption?
Mr. Munn. I think the States would come down consistently
on my side, especially when 16 of the States either don't allow
payday lending or have set a usury rate such that it is not
economically feasible for the lenders.
Mr. Green. And for the benefit of people who may not follow
these issues closely, but may be following this hearing today,
explain what preemption means so that people will understand.
Mr. Munn. Okay. Preemption means that the Federal law in a
certain situation is given supremacy over the laws of the
State, and the State has nothing to say about how--whatever the
object of the preemption was, the State regulation is cast
aside.
Mr. Green. Generally speaking, who usually favors
preemption? I hate to get you into a political quagmire, but
who usually favors preemption?
Mr. Munn. Generally, companies that want to do business in
more than one State. However, I am more familiar on the banking
side. We have banks we supervise which operate in several
States very effectively because State regulators work together
from a home State-host State basis.
Mr. Green. Let us talk about persons who are States' rights
advocates. Do they usually favor preemption, persons who are
States' rights advocates?
Mr. Munn. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Green. Let us talk about what your knowledge base
reveals. What does it reveal as it relates to preemption?
Persons who are States' rights advocates, would they normally
favor this kind of thing?
Mr. Munn. The subject of the bill?
Mr. Green. No, not the subject, but having the Federal
Government decide what States should do, or taking the
authority from States.
Mr. Munn. No, I would think they would naturally be opposed
to that.
Mr. Green. And my final question will be this: If this is
passed, will Nebraska have the opportunity to continue to
regulate, in your opinion, payday lenders, as opposed to what
is being now established? There is a new name being given to
institutions that will engage in this conduct. Are you of the
opinion that you will be able to continue to regulate payday
lenders and other lenders?
Mr. Munn. I don't believe that we would. I think that the
current payday licensees that we have would probably either be
forced out of business or would seek a Federal charter.
Mr. Green. So you would be preempted.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our first panel. I thank both of our
witnesses. We will assemble the second panel and begin in a few
minutes.
I would also like to ask unanimous consent to insert a
statement into the record from Americans for Financial Reform.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Chairwoman Capito. We will have a quick changeover.
[brief recess].
Chairwoman Capito. All right. We will reconvene, if I can
get order in the room.
I want to recognize each of our witnesses. First of all, I
want to thank them for coming, and I want to recognize each one
for 5 minutes for the purpose of making a statement.
Our first witness is Ms. Mary Jackson, who was introduced
by her good friend Pete Sessions, a Member of Congress. She is
the senior vice president, corporate affairs, of Cash America
International, Incorporated. Welcome.
I would remind the witnesses that you are really going to
need to pull the microphones close, and make sure they are on
so, that we can properly hear your statements. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MARY JACKSON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, CORPORATE
AFFAIRS, CASH AMERICA INTERNATIONAL

Ms. Jackson. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, and members of
the subcommittee.
I am here to advocate today for consumers. The National
Bureau of Economic Research released their study citing that
about half of all Americans couldn't come up with $2,000 in 30
days to meet an emergency. I am sure this is something you are
already keenly aware of because the study is referring to your
constituents.
I have been an employee of Cash America for over 20 years
and have watched our businesses grow as community banks have
left the neighborhoods, and I have seen the improvement in the
non-bank lending space, and it is exciting to see the progress
of products and better customer service that has evolved. But
as with any business, there is still room for improvement.
We have witnessed the explosion of Internet lending. We
believe the current State laws do not adequately protect
consumers, forcing them to opt for loans that do not have high-
quality standards or enough consumer protections. But foremost,
we listen to our customers who have consistently told us they
need more choices.
Cash America is an innovative, 28-year-old financial
services company with over 7,000 employees. We operate with
4,100 licenses in 31 States and adhere to 12 Federal lending
laws, most notably anti-money laundering, truth in lending, and
fair credit reporting. We are a customer service company that
hears from our customers--such as Regina in Atlanta--who say
more options would be a great idea that would help a lot of
families in need.
Consumer behavior is changing rapidly with advances in
technology, and according to research, global Internet usage
increased 75 percent in the last 5 years and is expected to
increase another 40 percent in the next 3 years. Research also
shows that 59 percent of the U.S. population banked online in
2010. At Cash America our online lending subsidiary, E-Nova
International, conducted about 4 million transactions last year
and extended around $2 billion in credit.
A Federal non-bank charter, as outlined in H.R. 6139, would
take the industry from struggling with 50 different State
models to one overriding solution that meets consumer needs.
The State-by-State model is utterly ineffective. We can't offer
the same choices to consumers with identical financial needs
because they are separated by nothing more than a State line.
And in most States, the spectrums of offerings is limited by
outdated laws that restrict the number of choices available to
consumers.
For instance, in California, if someone needs $1,000, they
would have to borrow from 4 different payday lenders at $250
each, or qualify for a loan over $2,500 and pay back $1,500
immediately to get the $1,000 they seek.
Also, States like Nebraska have not modernized and will not
license Internet lenders. Currently, lenders are required to
develop new products dependent on antiquated State consumer
credit statutes that were not drafted for current technologies
or online interstate consumer lending. And if we were to apply
the same State-regulated scenario to credit cards, most
Americans living in States like New York and Texas would not be
able to carry a credit card due to their State laws.
More than 60 million Americans are in need of non-bank
financial products. We envision under the charter working
alongside banks, credit unions, nondepository lenders, and
others who desire to provide credit options for consumers. Even
the CFPB has stated that achieving solutions at scale requires
that we actively engage in all sectors.
What innovative production do consumers need and want?
Consumers need amounts from $500 to $5,000, with longer terms
of 3 months to 2 years, and we are committed to providing these
under the charter. Moreover, we care about our customers, and
despite recent articles to the contrary, we have no desire to
circumvent the CFPB's efforts, and the bill specifically states
so.
We have Federal banks and State banks. We have Federal
credit unions and State credit unions. We need a Federal non-
bank charter and State licensed lenders. The debate over
consumer lending continues to be volatile, but most ironically,
everyone here wants the same thing: more quality financial
choices in the marketplace for hard-working Americans.
Cash America was built on the foundation of serving people
that traditional financial institutions have overlooked. We
encourage you to support H.R. 6139. Let's modernize our
thinking and our laws so we can truly meet the needs of those
who have the fewest options.
Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
subcommittee members. It has been a pleasure to share our
thoughts with you today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jackson can be found on page
125 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Ms. Frances C. Bishop, the owner of
Dollar Pawn, Incorporated, on behalf of the National
Pawnbrokers Association. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF FRANCES C. BISHOP, OWNER, DOLLAR PAWN, INC., ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL PAWNBROKERS ASSOCIATION AND THE ALABAMA
PAWNBROKERS ASSOCIATION

Ms. Bishop. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney,
and members of the subcommittee. My name is Fran Bishop, and my
husband and I have owned and operated Dollar Pawn in
Haleyville, Alabama, for 24 years. I have also been an active
member of the National Pawnbrokers Association and the Alabama
Pawnbrokers Association, having served as president of both
organizations as well as chairing their government relations
committees.
As the old ``What's My Line'' game show began with enter
and sign in, I am a wife, a mother, a grandmother, a
pawnbroker, and a small business owner. Today, I am here to
express the concerns of the National Pawnbrokers Association,
which is comprised of independent, family-owned pawn stores all
across the country.
By point of clarification, none of the large publicly
traded pawn companies are members of our association. Our small
business members serve over 30 million consumers' short-term
cash needs through face-to-face, nonrecourse pawn transactions.
The NPA only represents pawnbrokers and no other nondepository
industry.
With the greatest respect to the Members sponsoring H.R.
1909 and H.R. 6139, these bills provide or even expand access
for providers, but are not likely to afford more access for
consumers. Specifically, this bill is anti-small family-owned
business and favors large megaproviders. It is Wall Street
versus Main Street once again. Its anticompetitive nature is
likely to result in fewer providers rather than more. Fewer
providers commonly results in higher prices.
These bills preempt States' regulatory, supervisory,
licensing or examination powers already in place by State
legislatures, or in some cases, a vote of the people.
Consumers' credit needs are being met in our members'
communities by State-licensed, nondepository providers as well
as local community banks and credit unions. The sky is not
falling.
Another Federal bureaucracy to charter Federal
nondepository providers is unnecessary. The permanently broad
powers a Federal charter holder would receive will at best be
scantly regulated by only one agency, the OCC, which already
has its plate full supervising, examining, and enforcing laws
regarding national banks and federally-chartered thrifts.
A Federal charter holder would be able to bypass all of the
State requirements I mentioned previously, as well as TILA,
annual percentage rate disclosure, CFPB examination,
supervision, enforcement, et cetera; but our members, small
businesses, will remain subject to all of the above and more
that time does not permit me to cover here.
Pawnbrokers are the Nation's safety net lenders, regulated
by the States for decades. Regulators rarely receive complaints
about pawn transactions. We serve our communities and our
customers well. I urge you to not create an unlevel playing
field for our small businesses by giving megaproviders access
to expanded and largely unregulated markets under the guise of
access to consumers and small business.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and members of the
subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bishop can be found on page
65 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. John Berlau, senior fellow, finance
and access to capital, the Competitive Enterprise Institute.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BERLAU, SENIOR FELLOW, FINANCE AND ACCESS TO
CAPITAL, THE COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE (CEI)

Mr. Berlau. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member
Maloney, and honorable members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for this opportunity to present testimony on behalf of my
organization, the Competitive Enterprise Institute.
This story also shines light on one of the most untold
stories on the workings of Congress, and that story is that
sometimes Members of Congress actually are working together and
finding common ground on legislation, legislation that would
pare down excessive regulations that block stable and
transparent sources of credit and capital for both consumers
and entrepreneurs.
My organization, the Competitive Enterprise Institute, is a
Washington-based free-market think tank that, since its
founding in 1984, has studied the effects of all types of
regulations on job growth and economic well-being. My title at
CEI is senior fellow for finance and access to capital, and to
increase access to credit and capital, CEI proposes a public
policy strategy that can best be described with a phrase
sometimes associated with energy exploration, ``all of the
above.''
Banks, credit unions, and non-bank lenders all have a role
to play in expanding credit for responsible consumers and
entrepreneurs, and all should be able to operate free of
excessive regulation. That is why we supported the regulatory
relief in the recently enacted and bipartisan Jumpstart Our
Business Startups Act for community banks to allow them to more
easily raise capital and seek investors, it is why we support
bipartisan legislation allowing credit unions to make more
business loans, and it is why we support the subject of this
hearing, H.R. 6139, giving non-bank lenders the same
opportunity to offer financial services through a national
charter similar to the system that banks have had for 150
years.
Now, my organization, the Competitive Enterprise Institute,
has actually long supported optional Federal chartering as part
of our goal of what we call competitive federalism. As our
Chairman Michael Greve has written, real federalism aims to
provide citizens with choices among different sovereigns and
regulatory regimes. And all this bill would basically do is for
the unsubsidized non-bank lenders who aren't taking deposit
insurance, aren't a risk to the taxpayers, to create a similar
system of optional Federal chartering that has existed for
banks for almost 150 years at the very same agency, the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency.
It was in the Civil War that the National Bank Act was
enacted, and many banks have chosen to stay with State
regulators. But competition from federally-chartered banks has
lowered the cost of credit and capital for everyone, and I
think a similar reduction in the cost of credit and increase in
access to credit could occur under a system of optional Federal
chartering for non-bank lenders to work to the benefit of both
consumers and entrepreneurs.
I want to point out that research on entrepreneurship from
the Kauffman Foundation and other respected sources, as well as
some prominent specific examples, shows there is much less of a
gulf between personal credit and business credit than some
policymakers may believe. Sergey Brin, for instance, started
what is now Google, Incorporated, as a college student, using a
personal credit card. Spike Lee financed some of his first
films by maxing out his credit cards. And the Kauffman
Foundation has found that nearly half of entrepreneurs use
personal credit cards, and there is also evidence that
entrepreneurs utilize non-bank lenders more typically
associated with consumer borrowing. Former Federal Reserve
Senior Economist Thomas Durkin has written that--and has found
that small independent businesses, seasonal businesses such as
landscaping, plumbing, and handyman services, may use auto
title loans as a source of short-term working capital.
H.R. 6139 would broaden these options and lift barriers to
loan innovations such as short-term loans, and would have
longer-duration installment loans specifically suited to small
entrepreneurs and to many consumers.
Thank you so much again for inviting me to testify, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berlau can be found on page
58 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Kenneth W. Edwards, vice president, Federal affairs,
the Center for Responsible Lending. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH W. EDWARDS, VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL
AFFAIRS, THE CENTER FOR RESPONSIBLE LENDING (CRL)

Mr. Edwards. Thank you. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify on better understanding of the
regulatory regime for nondepository creditors and my views on
H.R. 6139.
I currently serve as vice president of Federal affairs at
the Center for Responsible Lending, a nonprofit, nonpartisan
research policy organization dedicated to promoting and
protecting homeownership and family wealth by eliminating
abusive financial products.
In my testimony today, I would like to emphasize the
following three points: Point number one, H.R. 6139 would
circumvent the CFPB's carefully contemplated supervisory,
enforcement, and rulemaking authority over certain
nondepository financial institutions. The CFPB is the primary
Federal regulator with explicit authority over large
nondepository institutions and certain nondepository entities,
including payday lenders. Title X of Dodd-Frank tasks the
Bureau with consumer protection through rulewriting supervision
and enforcement to ensure that markets allow borrowers to gain
access to and choice among financial products and services that
are fair, transparent, and competitive.
In just 1 year, the CFPB has begun to create sensible rules
of the road for financial markets through a balanced and level
regulatory playing field for market participants. Without such
even-handedness, consumers would be exposed to a financial
marketplace rife with the very kinds of abuses that led to the
financial crisis. The CFPB supervisory purview over
nondepository entities is prudently designed to improve the
quality of financial services in this sector and enforce
Federal consumer financial law.
Point number two, H.R. 6139 would expressly allow
nondepositories to evade 230 years' worth of State consumer
protection laws, licensing, and supervision that are essential
to protecting vulnerable consumers from abusive financial
practices.
Under H.R. 6139, nondepository charter holders would be
able to offer financial product terms that some States have
either expressly prohibited or heavily regulated; for instance,
high-cost payday loans. Marketed as short-term relief for a
cash crunch, payday loans typically carry annual interest rates
of around 400 percent and create long-term debt traps for
working people. The loan structures ensure that the vast
majority of borrowers cannot pay off the loans when due without
leaving large gaps in their budgets. As a result, borrowers are
forced to take out new loans after paying the first one back.
States are the traditional regulator for most small-loan
products, including payday loans. In fact, State limitations on
interest rates have existed for over 200 years. However, since
the mid-1990s, payday lenders affirmatively sought and were
often granted special authority to charge over 300 percent APR
on their loans. Since 2005, a countertrend developed, and no
new State agency has granted payday lenders or other short-term
lenders their needed exemption from traditional small-loan laws
and other regulations.
Despite the harmful impacts of payday lending and the
States' efforts to rein in the financial abuses associated with
this form of small-dollar credit, H.R. 6139 would permit credit
companies to circumvent State laws and would prohibit the
Federal financial consumer watchdog, the CFPB, from acting to
protect borrowers from harmful products.
Point number three, H.R. 6139 would roll back important
Federal credit protections for consumers. Since 1969, the Truth
in Lending Act has required creditors to disclose finance
charges and APRs before consumers sign a loan as a baseline
cost-credit comparison measure.
Payday loans, for instance, are also subject to TILA's
credit disclosure requirement, and as a result, consumers are
afforded an accurate way to gauge the true costs of lending
across products. H.R. 6139 upsets this long-standing Federal
consumer protection by exempting credit companies from this APR
disclosure. This would result, of course, in a significant
marketwide rollback of Federal credit law.
In conclusion, we believe that this legislation would
directly harm vulnerable borrowers, particularly the
underserved, and should be opposed.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Edwards can be found on page
74 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
And our final witness is Mr. G. Michael Flores, chief
executive officer, Bretton Woods, Inc. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF G. MICHAEL FLORES, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
BRETTON WOODS, INC.

Mr. Flores. Good afternoon, and thank you very much,
Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to testify today on a topic of
growing concern to many in this room, and one that I have
followed for several years. My firm provides management
advisory and research services to banks, credit unions and
alternative financial services providers. With more than 30
years' experience, I have witnessed the evolution of the
financial services marketplace. In 2008, this country woke to
the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. I belive
we have now reached a decision point on how to deal with the
credit needs of the 60-plus million Americans marginalized by
the traditional banking model.
Based on my most recent study, ``Serving Consumers' Needs
for Loans in the 21st Century,'' I would argue that consumers,
notably those in the low- to moderate-income range, would stand
to benefit from a new financial paradigm that recognizes the
potential of alternative financial services providers. Many,
but certainly not all of these consumers are part of the 60
million Americans who are either unbanked or underbanked. In
addition, there is a growing class of moderate to middle-income
consumers who have chosen to leave traditional banking because
of increased fees or because they need an unsecure personal
loan, a product no longer offered by most traditional banks.
Access to credit has been an ongoing problem that has
worsened with the times. Difficulties of underbanked and
unbanked consumers to obtain smaller dollar loans has been the
subject of increasing debate, including in a number of
Congressional hearings. But it is not just about low- to
moderate-income consumers, because the fact is that bank
customers, many of what you and I consider healthy bank
accounts, are coming up short as well.
Since the 1980s, banks have used credit card lines, home
equity lines, and overdrafts to provide consumer credit. These
are now less viable due to the poor economy and increased
regulations. Overall, the community banks' focus on consumer
lending has declined significantly since 1985 according to the
FDIC. And during that period, unsecured installment loans have
all but disappeared from bank product suites, due to
profitability, risk, and regulatory concerns.
Today, loans under $5,000 are all but non-existent, and
with good reason. Given the legacy cost structure and slowed
option of new technology, many banks aren't capable of properly
making loans under $5,000. New Federal regulations and
increased compliance costs are causing banks to examine their
customer base. As my study details, the traditional banking
business model relies on scale to be profitable. According to
JPMorgan Chase, about 70 percent of customers with less than
$100,000 in deposits and investments will be unprofitable.
Given the level of investment required to succeed in the
21st Century, it is only rational that banks target their most
profitable customer segments. The potential fallout is
significant and will likely add to a further retraction in the
credit market. Limiting consumer and small business credit also
has a detrimental effect on local economies.
Consumer financial services are clearly at a crossroads and
I believe that a new financial regulatory structure is
warranted. The answer points to the capabilities of alterative
financial services providers; many have invested in more
efficient and cost-effective technology, but costs associated
with regulatory variations in 50 States inhibit their ability
to offer a range of standard products, particularly in the $750
to $5,000 range. Differing State regulations deny alternative
financial services providers the ability to achieve scale,
reduce cost, and thereby pass on the savings to the consumer.
Studies of the impacted restricted regulations and other
industries, most particularly the lack of Federal preemption,
repeatedly shows that these very State regulations limit
options and increase costs to consumers. There is room for both
Federal- and State-approved lenders, as it is a model for State
and national chartered banks.
I would further argue that the lack of standard product
nationally, in and of itself, creates disparate impact on
consumers. That is, nothing more than a State line can cause
consumers to meet their specific credit needs with less than
optimal and more expensive alternatives. I believe this bill
will move us from the status quo, and we need to move from the
status quo, we have been talking about it, identifying the
problem, but we have yet to act upon any solutions. I think
this bill will help bring relief to millions of American
consumers. Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to
answer any questions. I would like to submit my study for the
record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Flores can be found on page
80 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you all very much. I would like to
begin the questioning. Ms. Jackson, just a point of
clarification here on this bill. You mentioned several States,
I believe mine is one of them that does not do, or at least it
does not permit payday lending. It was a Federal floor here
that such is proposed with a bill, would that statute be
preempted by this? So it could go forward in all 50 States?
Ms. Jackson. The premise of the bill is basically to allow
longer-term installment type loans in the marketplace. So
States like West Virginia that have a usury cap where citizens
are going online and getting either payday loans or a form of
installment loans, yes, we would, as a federally-chartered
enterprise, be able to compete with the offshore lenders to
deliver products that do have consumer protections, that do
have oversight and give consumers a choice.
Chairwoman Capito. So, that is a yes. Then, would the State
legislature, in your opinion, be able to come in and override
that federally-chartered provision? I would suppose, no.
Ms. Jackson. I believe with the way credit cards are
treated in this country and other banking products, that we
could be working with State regulators on some of those
solutions. There are some exceptions. The Credit Card Act and
the way credit cards are processed in certain States, but it
doesn't prohibit the basic tenets of a credit card to be
available to consumers in those States.
Mr. Berlau. Congressman, if I may, it would only--the
entities would only get the exemption if they applied and met
the standards of the Office of Comptroller of the Currency
prescribed under the bill, similar to the system of State and
national banks where a bank can choose to be regulated by the
Federal or by the State government.
Chairwoman Capito. Right, so the OCC would--that
determination would then allow people to override the
prerogative of the State legislature.
Mr. Berlau. But if it chooses not to, or the OCC decides it
does not meet their standards, then yes, all the West Virginia
rules would still apply.
Chairwoman Capito. Ms. Bishop, you mentioned and launched
concerns in your testimony that this would disproportionately
favor large entities, and you mention that yours was not one of
those. So in your State, what is the situation now? Who are you
competing against? Are your customers the same? And has your
customer base changed over the last 3 or 4 years? Who are you
competing with as your customers changed, and who are you
competing against?
Ms. Bishop. Speaking to the pawn industry, which is what my
business is and the association I represent, I continue to
compete with other pawnbrokers down the street, or in the next
town or what have you. We also--payday lending is allowed in
Alabama, it is regulated also by the same State banking
department which also regulates the pawnbrokers, small loans,
mortgage brokers and so forth. So that--
Chairwoman Capito. Do you feel like--not to interrupt, but
I have a little--do you feel like you are serving the same
customers?
Ms. Bishop. No.
Chairwoman Capito. And then on the other one, has your
customer base changed over the last 4 years with the downturn
of the economy, is it broader or has it basically stayed
steady?
Ms. Bishop. It has broadened somewhat, not only just with
the downturn in the economy, but other economic situations
with, for instance, the price of gold, which is higher than it
has been in probably who can remember when. That has brought an
additional segment of customers in who can use that asset as
collateral for their tangible personal property loan.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Flores, a consumer who does not have
enough money in their checking account, or even if they don't
have a checking account, they have an option, or in their
checking account, they could bounce a check, use overdraft
protection, get a payday loan, pay the bill late or borrow from
another institution. Why would consumers pick one of these--I
am going to postulate the reason they pick one over the other
is it is the one they can get and they can get to, and sort of
get them over the hump until they can solve whatever problem,
the electric bill or whatever. Do you have an opinion on which
one of these, because they all come at a relatively high price,
or gaining momentum or losing momentum or why a consumer would
choose one of these over another?
Mr. Flores. There is a continuum of need, and I break it
down in my report, unanticipated needs for short-term dollar
amounts, and overdraft coverage, which is much less expensive
than bouncing a check with associated fees and late charges, et
cetera. A payday loan is less expensive than an overdraft, if
you look at what the average overdraft amount is and overdraft
fee, the installment loan meets that longer-term need for a
higher ticket item, that $2,000 to $3,000 that we are talking
about that really is not available out there and hasn't been
since the old finance companies of the 1970s or 1980s.
Chairwoman Capito. I bought my refrigerator with one of
those, 30 years ago.
Mr. Flores. So I think we need to give the consumer a lot
more credit than we do. Their need to manage their finances
down to the last penny, they know how to do that and they look
for the best options available to them. So the more options we
can give them, ultimately the less cost they will incur to meet
these needs.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. I think we all agree that there is
a need for small loans. And the supporters of the bill argue
that they are not there, so therefore they are going on the
Internet, they are going offshore, they are getting these loans
that are more predatory with higher interest rates. And I would
like to ask the panelists if they have any research, or Mr.
Flores, if your report touched on this area, or Mr. Edwards, or
Mr. Berlau, and your comments, Ms. Bishop, if you could tell me
how widespread pawnshops are, are they in every single
community, all across rural, every State, whatever? But my
primary question right now is the question on the statements by
some earlier that people are going on the Internet to get loans
in order to get this refrigerator, or get that car fixed, or
whatever it might be. And Ms. Jackson, if any of you or all of
you would comment on whether that is widespread or whatever.
I am going to start with Mr. Flores and just go down the
panel. And if you would like to comment on what your research
is or your understanding of the use of the Internet to address
these needs?
Mr. Flores. I did a research report on overdrafts a few
years ago comparing other short-term alternatives. The demand
was upwards of $100 billion a year for this money, and the
demand is not going away even though some States had legislated
products away from it.
Mrs. Maloney. Are they going on the Internet to get this
loan?
Mr. Flores. Absolutely. They are looking at whatever option
is available, and the Internet is a growing option. It is very
convenient, they don't have to go search for a storefront. And
I think a key point to remember is that this market is growing,
that the Washington Credit Union League estimates a 2.8 million
a year increase in their unbanked and underbanked communities.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. Edwards?
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito. If I could just
respond to the previous comment of Mr. Flores, payday loans and
overdraft fees are not interchangeable. The first payday loan
may be an initial choice the consumer makes. But the structure
and unaffordability of that first loan results in a financial
debt trap for subsequent payday loans. With respect to an
overdraft fee, the research indicates that it is unintentional.
And the typical overdraft fee is about $34 for, let's say,
maybe, a $17 overdraft. We are talking about servicing the
unbanked and underbanked. And we have research that shows that
a leading cause of people to become unbanked or lose their bank
accounts is because of the excessive cost associated with
overdraft fees. So I would disagree that payday loans and
overdraft loans are somehow interchangeable and alternate forms
of small-dollar credit.
With respect to research, the Pew Foundation recently
released a report that sampled about 100 would-be borrowers and
asked them, it was 100 would-be borrowers that are located in
States that either heavily regulate payday loans, or completely
outlaw payday loans. And out of that 100 borrowers, 95 of those
did not to go online lenders and only 5 of those did. So what
that shows is that there is an actual low percentage of a low
number of borrowers who are actually seeking out online payday
loans in instances where the storefront payday lenders are
actually outlawed.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Berlau?
Mr. Berlau. Yes, I think that is such a good question. What
are the alternatives if you restrict credit or don't allow new
forms of credit, so thank you for asking that, Congresswoman
Maloney. And I am going to dispute my fellow witness, Mr.
Edwards. I think the evidence does show that overdraft fees are
and late fees and bounced checks are frequently a substitute
for payday loans, unfortunately. I reference in my written
testimony the Federal Reserve of Kansas City's Senior Economist
Kelly Edmiston and others who have written about that, in
States with highly restrictive laws as far as credit and payday
loans.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you my time is almost up. Ms. Bishop,
or Ms. Jackson?
Ms. Bishop. My research is behind my counter every day,
serving the needs of my customers and consumers. But I have a
question, and that is, whatever type of online loan we are
talking about here, I don't care, payday, small, whatever, if
there is a national Federal charter that is applied for by
companies that are legitimate, and that are trying to do the
right thing. The ones in Macau are not going to apply for that.
And the consumer is still not going to know who they are
dealing with. When you go to the Internet, you all know that
this pops up here, that pops up there, and people have the
tendency to click on them. Sometimes, it clicks on itself for
you. People who are not legitimate are not going to get that
way because of a Federal charter.
Ms. Jackson. Mrs. Maloney, if I may, we are the largest
online lender here domestically, and we offer State-by-State
options for consumers. We are attempting to do better. We would
like to offer longer-term loans. We have scoured all 50 States
to see where that is feasible, and there are about 15 States
where we can offer a longer-term loan. Right now, you asked
about the size of the marketplace, 61 percent of online small-
dollar loans are done by non-domestic players, and that is only
going to continue to grow.
So in order to protect consumers, to let them know that
they are dealing with an OCC-regulated Internet company where
there is a place to call if they have concerns with the CFPB,
or the OCC, that is what we are trying to accomplish here
today.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Mr. Renacci?
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I want to
thank the witnesses. Just a couple of comments I heard while
you were talking. Mr. Flores, you said we need to give the
consumer credit for making these decisions that they make as
far as short-term loans. Mr. Edwards, you said payday loans are
a choice consumers make. It is interesting because I took the
time to actually go talk to those individuals who are going to
these payday loans and using this service and using this
product. These are everyday, hard-working Americans who are
just short on cash, not on a regular basis, sometimes just on
an emergency basis, who really appreciate the service, they
want this service, they really don't want the government
meddling in it much more. They are happy with the service that
they have right now.
I was interested because if you spend a half hour just
talking to the consumers as you said who make these choices,
and as Mr. Flores said, give them the credit to make those
choices, I am concerned in your conclusion, you said indeed
this legislation--and this is to Mr. Edwards--indeed this
legislation offers nothing beneficial for consumers. On the
contrary, it would lead to direct consumer harm. Can you
explain that?
Mr. Edwards. Sure. And let me just make sure I clarify with
respect to my previous comments regarding the choice. That is
within the context of looking at payday loans with respect to
overdraft fees. Overdraft fees research has shown are
unintentional, and I want to make sure we are clear with
respect to the distinction I was drawing there.
In terms of the harm, if you are talking about consumers
who are in financially fragile households, who are often living
from paycheck to paycheck, the purpose and intent of this
legislation draws that demographic. These are people who can
ill-afford to be trapped in long-term debt.
If they are taking out financial services, and research has
shown that they are doing it nowadays to cover actual everyday
living expenses like rent or utilities, if they are doing that
and they are standing in debt about 5 or 6 months per year,
taking out maybe 8 loans if we are just talking about payday
loans, for instance, that is problematic. It doesn't do the
consumer any good because they are constantly either flipping
that loan, paying off the loan and taking out a new one. That
puts them in a cycle of long-term debt, and that is a huge
problem. And I don't think that would be do a consumer any
good. To be quite frank, it is a concern, you can even argue,
of national interest.
Mr. Renacci. That is interesting, Mr. Edwards, because you
are talking for the same consumer that I talked with who said
that they appreciated that loan, and that they were very happy
to have it. So sometimes--when I get back in the district, they
talk about how Washington is disconnected. Sometimes, we just
have to go and listen to the people using the services.
Mr. Edwards. But Representative, if could I interrupt for a
second, the consumers that you are talking to and they say they
appreciate those loans, I would be curious to know the follow-
up question, if they appreciate being charged sometimes in
certain instances triple digit APRs if you look at it, and then
being associated with the fees that they have and standard debt
for quite some time, I think the answer might be a little bit
different.
Mr. Renacci. I will tell you what the answer is, because
one of them said to me, would you be willing to give me $100 if
I gave you $107 back in a week? And it is an interesting
response that you have to think about. Because we talk about
this high APR, but we are talking about short-term loans, and
how many people are willing. Some of these people do have low
credit, so I think when you talk to them you will find out, you
will get some interesting answers.
Mr. Berlau, I guess I am a little concerned, and I want to
see, do you have any concerns that the CFPB may take steps to
even further constrain the offering of short-term, low-dollar
loan products?
Mr. Berlau. Yes. As a matter of fact, I do have concerns
about that. We are--I should say that my organization is
involved in a constitutional challenge to the CFPB because we
think the structure lacks accountability. But as far as this
bill goes, and some of the other concerns about it, I think
that it makes clear that this doesn't affect for good or ill
what the CFPB is planning to do; it is just another alternative
to offer these loans, and then the CFPB would have final say.
So yes, I am, but this bill doesn't address that, but it
does do very good things as far as creating alternatives, which
then the CFPB would be able to have a say on as well.
Mr. Renacci. Ms. Jackson, do you feel whether it is the
CFPB or the States if they further restrict this type of
credit, that it will be more difficult for these individuals
that I talked with to obtain short-term credit?
Ms. Jackson. We have seen real evidence that attempts to
limit rates, attempts to limit usage, have just exploded the
illegal or unlicensed lending market. We saw that with military
lending which was mentioned here earlier today. We cannot make
loans to the military because the rates are so low. And what
happened is military members would go online and get loans from
offshore lenders.
So we would like to be able to, again, have safe and sound
lending requirements, but you can't do it when the rate gets so
low. Also in California, they passed an installment loan law
which was great, but there has only been one license
application since because the rate was too low. So again, back
to my scenario, what do you do if you need $1,000? Residents
from California still have to go to payday lenders, or go find
a higher level loan or pay back an amount right away. So we put
consumers at a disadvantage when we try to protect them.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Watt?
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It seems to me that
we are having two discussions here, one of which I am not sure
why we are having it. I am not sure I understand how subjecting
something to Federal regulation is going to increase credit
availability; that is one question. Mr. Renacci raised an
interesting point about government meddling in their choices.
Most of my constituents would rather have the State government
meddling in their choices than they would the Federal
Government meddling in their choices. And this bill proposes a
Federal charter that preempts State law, which makes me raise
the same concerns that I raised when we were debating the Rent
to Own legislation in this committee.
I just don't understand the rationale for it. And I
understand the rationale for it even less now that we have
passed Dodd-Frank and have a Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, which is a Federal agency that would regulate these
entities. I would have understood it a year ago or 2 years ago,
before we had the CFPB.
I don't know that I think the OCC would be any better
Federal regulator than the CFPB would be. And I wouldn't want
either one of them to preempt State law, especially if that
law, that State law had a higher threshold of protection for
consumers.
And so I guess I am having trouble understanding the
rationale for this bill in general. I raised these questions,
obviously I lost, because the bill--the Rent to Own bill passed
out of here with almost absolute preemption. This bill, as I
understand it, has pretty much absolute Federal preemption,
too. And while we would take small lenders, small credit people
and give them an optional Federal charter, I just--I don't
understand it.
So Ms. Jackson, tell me how you think this is going to
increase credit availability to consumers?
Ms. Jackson. Congressman Watt, it is going to help us keep
pace with technology and what is being offered on the Internet.
Mr. Watt. So you think the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau doesn't have the capacity to do that, and the OCC does?
Ms. Jackson. First, from what I understand, the OCC has
licensing authority, that is why the OCC is looked at as the
regulator. The CFPB will look at the products to determine the
consumer protection measures within those--
Mr. Watt. So my State has a licensing authority, why would
I opt for OCC licensing over my State which has traditionally
operated in this area, the same point Ms. Bishop has raised
here? Why would I want the OCC to be licensing a pawnshop, or a
payday lender when my State doesn't even allow payday lending?
Ms. Jackson. In North Carolina, Congressman Watt,
installment lending is not prevalent, so the longer-term loans
that most people would want some additional options would be
available through the Federal charter. Installment loan--
Mr. Watt. What additional options are you talking about
would be available that aren't currently available if we
created a Federal charter for--I don't understand that?
Ms. Jackson. Some States, again, it is not addressed to the
usury laws, or the limits do not allow an installment loan.
Right now if people would like to have a longer-term loan, they
would have to go to the Internet for States that don't provide
a licensed lender. So as a national chartered lender, I would
be able to offer that, they would look for the union label, or
whatever we would want to say that CFPB or OCC regulated
entity. If it is not available in their State, they will go to
the Internet, they will get what they see.
Mr. Watt. Forgive me for just saying, you have not
convinced me of this. Of course, they have been trying to
convince me for 3 years on Rent to Own that this is a good
idea. I think this is a terrible idea.
Ms. Jackson. Congressman, we respect your opinion. What is
happening, though, is in the marketplace, online, 61 percent of
the market is being served by non-domestic lenders.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. The previous
panel talked about credit history. Ms. Jackson, would you like
to address that with regards to people who utilize your
service, they establish a credit history by paying their loans
off on time or picking up two or three more as a result and
eventually move on, or take advantage of a more traditional
loan at some point. Can you give me a little credit history
analysis how that helps?
Ms. Jackson. Currently, the short-term lending product is
anything less than 30 days. It typically will not include
people's credit, because the credit bureaus do not want to take
that data. And so we are finding that being a struggle for
consumers to try to figure out how to use these products and
improve credit.
What we envision with this charter is to allow for those
longer-term products, the fact that bureaus we already know
that we talked to will accept that data so we can graduate
people from the smaller short-term loans, into, again, maybe a
midway product where they could get their credit built so then
they can deal with a bank.
So we do have to think about how consumers build their
credit, and how can they do it with non-bank credit products,
because if you don't have credit, you are not going to get a
bank loan, so how do you transition consumers, and we are
extremely interested in trying to figure that out.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. As a former bank regulator and someone in
the banking industry for 30 years, I have made probably
thousands of these small loans, because I come from a little
bitty small town, with a small bank. We don't have a pawnbroker
in our town; we don't have a payday lender or a small loan
lender. We are it. And so, I have dealt with this all my life.
And we sat there across the table from a young lady who is
stuck in a situation, a single mother, has no way to make her
car payments because she doesn't have a car because her husband
just left her last night and she is sitting there in front of
you. She needs some money to be able to go out and buy a car to
be able to get to work, to be able to pay the bills for the
baby she has in her arms. How do you solve that problem? You
solve it with being able to provide credit. Access to credit
for people like that in an emergent situation, this is what we
are trying to do today. It is interesting to me to listen to
some of the comments. Mr. Edwards, did you read the bill by any
chance?
Mr. Edwards. I did.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Where in there did we circumvent the CFPB?
Mr. Edwards. Congressman, as you well know, the CFPB, under
Section 1024 of Dodd-Frank is tasked with supervising non-bank
entities. And under your bill, having the OCC to supervise,
examine, prescribe rules and regulations, and to allow the OCC
to approve a product sounds like it is encroaching upon what is
written in Dodd-Frank already.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. If you go back and read 4(k), the CFPB has
full regulatory authority over all consumer financial
protection under laws that regulate these lenders. There is no
change, there is no taking away of this. All we are doing, as
Ms. Jackson said, the documentation to issue the charter under
the OCC--
Mr. Edwards. There is obfuscation in terms of what the CFPB
is tasked to do under Dodd-Frank
Mr. Luetkemeyer. There is no intent to circumvent the law,
and the law in this bill specifically spells that out.
Very quickly, my time is about gone here. I have one quick
question. Mr. Berlau, you made a comment that this would
encourage entrepreneurs. I was curious how you see this
encouraging entrepreneurs?
Mr. Berlau. I do, in two ways. First I see, and if Ms.
Bishop has a cost estimate of how much it would cost a small
lender to get licensure from the OCC under this bill, I would
like to see it and perhaps we can make some improvements. But I
scrutinize legislation for cost of small business, and I see
nothing where even one pawnshop can't apply for the OCC and
become a national lender and offer consumers more choices.
And the other way is, as I mentioned in testimony, in the
written testimony, Thomas Durkin of the Federal Reserve has
found that actually auto title loans are utilized not only by
consumers, but by landscaping businesses, by plumbers, and
others who don't have a line of credit with a big bank, and
utilize short-term loans in a similar way as consumers do. And
of course, a lot of small businesses use credit cards--49
percent, so this would just create a lot more options for non-
banks for them.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. And just one following comment.
I know, Mr. Edwards, you made the comment a while ago that
people who overdraft normally do it unintentionally. I can tell
you for over 30 years in the banking business, they are
supposed to keep a checkbook and make sure that they don't
write more checks than they have money in the bank. It is not
unintentional; it is irresponsible.
Mr. Edwards. If I could respond to that, Representative.
The financial institutions are not supposed to reorder
transactions from high to low causing consumers to overdraft,
unfortunately. And that is a situation which is costing
consumers countless amounts of money, and courts have slapped
fines upon some of the larger institutions.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Baca?
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. Just to
ask one of the same questions I would like to ask Mary Jackson,
it was sort of asked, but many of the opponents of the bill
would like to simply frame this bill as a payday bill and talk
about the problems of specific products. This is done even
though the traditional payday loans are prohibited. However,
what is lost in the debate is the innovation aspect. Currently,
many national banks and large credit unions are provided the
ability to operate on a Federal platform that allows them to
come up with new products to better serve the customers. And of
course, this only works for those who have access to mainstream
financial services. Can you talk about the aspects of this
bill? And would the Federal standards created by this bill
allow for the same increased innovation, specifically to serve
consumers who need credit for expenses that cost more than the
typical payday loan?
Ms. Jackson. Yes, Congressman Baca. The Federal charter,
again, is designed to drive innovation, it is very difficult
for banks and credit unions to do that because they put
deposits at risk. So they are going to be more circumspect on
who they are going to lend money to; they are going have higher
credit score standards. And there has been so much in this
space to try to analyze the ability for consumers to repay. We
have so much more data out there. We have a team of 10 people,
our analytics team, who looks at the data all the time to
determine if we can make that loan and the customer's ability
to pay us back. So there has been so many dynamic things that
have happened in our sector and we would like to share that in
a national way.
We would also like to be able to perform some of these
services as a marketer servicer to banks so they can grow their
portfolios and grow their banking business. But when you put
deposit at risk, and when you put FDIC insurance at risk for
these types of loans, it is very difficult. We believe we can
do that in partnership or directly with consumers.
Mr. Baca. Thank you. And one of the questions asked, it is
very difficult to determine, how many times or how many payday
loans have actually been offered, because we know that is 30
days. So there is no way of monitoring how many of those have
been done. But right now, isn't it very hard for small-dollar
lenders to know how many loans a consumer has taken out unless
they actually go to the same place? However, the chartered
institutions would be--have a strong Federal oversight, and
wouldn't it lead to greater transparency and more complete
credit history for consumers?
Ms. Jackson. Again, folks in the non-bank sector who
underwrite unsecured loans are going to use all kinds of data
points, companies like Teletrack, where companies do put in how
much a person has borrowed with the payday loan. We use that
type of service to determine if we are going to be the third
lender on the list, is that a good idea? It usually isn't. So
with that said, the technology, the ability to offer more
choices to consumers is important. I am not sure if I answered
your question.
Mr. Baca. Right. But the ability to track and know how many
loans the individuals, we would be able to do it. It would be a
lot easier than the way the system is under the payday lending
because you wouldn't know how many loans that person has had
because there isn't that transparency and oversight. Having a
charter, we would be able to determine how many loans that
person has actually obtained.
Ms. Jackson. Right. Under a charter, you can offer a
longer-term loan, the credit bureaus will take that data and
then you will have what you need to make sure that, again, they
have the ability to pay, looking at that credit history.
Mr. Baca. Because payday lending can only offer it up to 30
days, what is it? 30 days? Less than 30 days? And the only
others that I know of are long-term loans. Do you know anybody
else who offers long-term loans to individuals who may have bad
credit? Any of you on the panel?
Ms. Jackson. Oh, I can offer--
Mr. Baca. Loan sharks, right? Loan sharks. We don't want to
get a loan shark. We want them to establish credit, deal with
their credit scores as well, and this is what happens to many
individuals, they end up going to a loan shark because they can
only get $400 from a payday lender, they can get anywhere
between $500 to 3,000 which is the average cost, because when
it comes down to just going a grocery store, buying groceries,
it is almost $500 just to buy groceries not to mention any
other kind of payment that you have.
Ms. Jackson. Congressman, even in installment loaning, we
did have a witness here from Nebraska, and they do have 13
license installment lenders there. But it has to be a secured
loan, and it also has a 16 percent per annum, but because it is
a banking entity, they don't have to show their origination
fees or other fees as part of the calculation. We need a
bigger, honest dialogue about what the loans look like in
comparison to costs in APRs and fees, what is included and what
is not.
Mr. Baca. I know that my time has expired, but doesn't this
bill specifically allow chartered institutions to offer
products that will allow and promote building of savings of
credit and history scores?
Ms. Jackson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Baca. I agree with you; that is why there is bipartisan
support for this.
Chairwoman Capito. I couldn't tell by the way you posed
that question.
Mr. Huizenga?
Mr. Huizenga. Thanks, Madam Chairwoman, I am not quite sure
how I follow up that softball. Ms. Bishop, I do apologize. I
came in right after your testimony. But I want to have you
explore a little bit about what you believe is--whether it is a
threat somehow to your business, will it put the pawn industry
out of business, and just hear a little bit about that and get
some other opinions on that as well.
Ms. Bishop. We feel that it would create an unlevel playing
field in the market where you have a Federal charter holder who
is not subject to the same licensing regulations, fees, and
examination that an individual pawnbroker is on a daily basis
through their State, in my case, my State banking department,
my city license, my county license. In some States, there is a
requirement for continuing education for pawnbrokers. That
would not be required of a Federal charter.
Mr. Huizenga. This is purely bad lawyering maybe, not
knowing the answer to the question before you ask it, but my
impression is that it is not common to have a pawn owner own in
multiple States in that kind of thing, is that accurate?
Ms. Bishop. Most of our 1,800 to 2,000 members of the
National Pawnbrokers Association are small, independent,
family-owned businesses, maybe two or three shops, maybe up to
a dozen, and usually not across State lines. In some cases,
they do have shops in multiple States, but not usually.
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Berlau or Ms. Jackson or anybody else, do
you believe this is a threat to the pawn industry?
Mr. Berlau. Congressman--
Mr. Huizenga. I need you a little closer to the microphone
so we can hear you in the room, but not everybody--
Mr. Berlau. Congressman Huizenga, if I can offer an
analogy. Sometimes you have banks with just one branch who get
chartered by the Federal Government, the OCC, we hear First
National, others and sometimes there are very large State
banks, so I do not--and I scrutinize legislation like this for
what burden it places on small business, see what the burden is
on a small pawnshop or lender applying to the OCC and being
able to carry that charter and being able to offer some
innovative products, that small businesses, small lenders
develop.
Mr. Edwards. If I may respond, what this bill is a threat
to, it is a threat to financially fragile households staying
afloat.
Mr. Huizenga. Do you believe that the pawn industry has
that same threat? Have you seen Pawn Stars? Because if you are
talking about $7 on a $100 loan as being a threat, what about
walking in and saying you know what, I don't have time to wait
for it to get pawned, my $1,000 item, I have to sell it for
$500, because I understand the person owning the store has to
make a profit. And the only way for them to look at it is
pretty much doubling their money, is that not a threat?
Mr. Edwards. As I mentioned before, it is a direct threat
to the financial viability of low-income households.
Mr. Huizenga. Which is, pawning or--
Mr. Edwards. This bill.
Mr. Huizenga. Do you have a problem with the industry or a
problem with the bill?
Mr. Edwards. The way the bill is drafted, yes, sir, we have
a problem with this particular piece of legislation. It is not
so much the industry. What we are concerned about is, if loans
are made, they have to be sustainable loans, transparent loans,
loans that are not designed to perpetuate financial debt traps.
And what this legislation would do is it would grant the
charter holders essentially a national hall pass to go where
they want, and when they want, and do on a Federal level what
they haven't been able to do, or some instances, it has been
scatter shot on a State level.
Mr. Huizenga. But you would acknowledge that some States
have much tighter and some have much looser laws, correct?
Mr. Edwards. There are varying--amongst the 50 State
jurisdictions, there are varying laws. But this particular
piece of legislation would allow the charter holders to
circumvent those laws, and that is a problem because the States
have a keen interest in this, they are on the ground, they are
on the front lines combating some of the more toxic abusive
products. And they know what is best for their citizens.
Mr. Huizenga. So I assume, you like what happens in
Chairwoman Capito's State of West Virginia where it is not
allowed, but maybe don't like what is happening in another
State that has absolutely no restriction. How do we maybe
balance that out?
Mr. Edwards. I tell what you we like, we like to see
consumers in loans that they can afford, no balloon payments,
no loans with exorbitant APRs. Those are the things that are
not good for the consumers and make them worse off than they
were before they took out a loan.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Meeks?
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am sorry; I have
been listening to some of the hearing up in my office and
running around from meeting to meeting. But I felt compelled to
make sure that I get back here to ask a few questions. But
also, in listening, I think that I have lived the life, I sit
up here as a Member of Congress today, in a nice suit, et
cetera. But I come from public housing, my parents didn't have
a lot of money, and they lived from paycheck to paycheck. And
certain times, certain things would happen, they needed some
money and they had no options.
The option is to go out to a loan shark or someone else,
and if you don't pay it back, they are going to beat you in the
head, that is my experience. And I find that poor people
especially have no options when they are trying--they are smart
people, in fact, they know how to rob Peter to pay Paul. In my
household, that is what you did: robbed Peter to pay Paul to
make sure you could make it to the next day. The fact of the
matter is, if that wasn't the case, I might not be sitting here
today because certain times, my parents had to rob Peter to pay
Paul to help me get through school. If they didn't, the school
would have put me out if tuition wasn't paid. You have to
figure out how you get certain things done.
So that becomes extremely important because the whole idea,
I think, is to put the loan shark, as my good friend Mr. Baca
indicated, out of business. Now if you wanted to do something
that, let's say make all the banks, make all the banks give low
or small loans, they won't do it. Why? Because it is not in
their interest. They can't make money from it or whatever the
deal. Nobody talks about that, but if you made all the banks
give short-term loans to help individuals who needed to just
make it for a month or so, then we might not be here.
The reality is those banks don't exist. Therefore, if you
don't have a bill like this, there are no options. So the
person who is poor, who wants to rob Peter to pay Paul, has no
options and wants to do the right thing, so therefore they may
go to someone who ultimately is really bad for them.
So with the voice of knowing what my life has been, trying
to figure it out. Mr. Flores, let me bring you into the
discussion. If a bill like H.R. 6139 is not adopted, tell me,
do you know of any other viable approach for ensuring that
individuals like myself in the past, or my family, underserved
consumers, who are unable to obtain smaller loans from banks
who are typically currently have only an limited number of
relatively high-cost credit alternatives from non-bank lenders,
that are allowed by State laws and had a broad range of more
innovative and affordable credit laws in terms of their needs.
If we don't do this, if we don't pass something like this,
what other alternatives or options would someone like my family
have when I was growing up, that they would have today if we
don't pass a bill like this?
Mr. Flores. There are very few options. As a matter of
fact, on page 22 of my report, this for the five boroughs of
Manhattan, it shows where the bank branches are and are not,
and the bank branches are leaving the communities, the low- to
moderate-income communities where a lot of where your
constituents live. And so the only people who are there
providing loans are the alternative financial services
providers. And they cannot get the same service from State to
State because of the vagaries of State legislation.
And so we need to offer something that allows the options.
We are not mandating somebody to go out and get a loan, whether
it is an overdraft, a payday loan, or installment loan or title
loan. All we are saying is we are giving them options based
upon their specific needs to do what is in their best interest.
Mr. Meeks. Let me ask this question too, because I think I
heard the last panel, there was an OCC witness concerned about
the applicability of consumer protection laws and standards
under this bill, under H.R. 6139. Under this bill, and I open
this up to anyone, would NCCCs be subject to the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act? Would they be subject to the Truth in Lending
Act, or how about the Fair Credit and Billing Act? I throw it
out to anybody.
Ms. Jackson. Congressman, we are now. If you are a State
license lender, you are following these Federal laws and we
will continue to do so.
Mr. Edwards. Congressman, if I can briefly respond, as the
bill is drafted, it lists these credit companies which must
comport with some of the laws that you mentioned, which are
about 18 statutes that were transferred to the CFPB, but what
it does not mention specifically with respect to the CFPB is
UDAAP authority, and I think that is problematic because the
CFPB has invested with this particular authority to regulate,
to make sure that it stamps out any unfair deceptive abuses or
practices. And this bill specifically does not mention that and
that is problematic.
So if I could back up one second and respond to your
previous point about being a single-family household and not
having many credit options. I, too, grew up that way and my mom
often visited a pawnbroker, and sometimes the TV was there and
sometimes it wasn't, I missed Saturday morning cartoons and
that was it. But thankfully she did not seek out a payday
lender, it would have kept her and us in long-term debt.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Grimm?
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Just so I can get
some perspective on this, Ms. Bishop, maybe you can help me.
Approximately how many $2,000 loans does the average pawnbroker
make in a year?
Ms. Bishop. Thanks for that question. And this kind of goes
back to what your colleague spoke about, Pawn Stars and the
television shows. What you see on TV is not what happens every
day, and actually, our statistics are that on the average, pawn
loans are redeemed 85 to 90 percent of the time across the
country. They are not--not everybody is bringing in a Civil War
cannon to sell to somebody.
Mr. Grimm. I'm sorry, my time is really short. The
question, though, is how many $2,000 loans a year on average
would a pawn--
Ms. Bishop. It depends where you are located. In my
particular instance, a $1,000 loan would be a big loan for me.
In more metropolitan areas, say, New York and Los Angeles and
so forth, a $2,000 loan would not be out of the ordinary. How
many times a year, I have no--
Mr. Grimm. Percentage-wise compared--I am assuming where
you are, an average loan is probably $300 or $400.
Ms. Bishop. Actually nationwide, the average pawn
transaction is between $100 to $150.
Mr. Grimm. So compared to that, is it a very small
percentage nationwide?
Ms. Bishop. That would be making $2,000 loans?
Mr. Grimm. Yes.
Ms. Bishop. Yes.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. And I think that is a big part of what we
are here discussing today is that the mid-size loans, there is
a tremendous void, there is a complete lack of options for
people. And we just heard that is a small amount of what
pawnbrokers are doing.
Ms. Bishop. But it is not a small amount compared to the
licensing and everything that we have to do under our State
laws.
Mr. Grimm. Okay.
Ms. Bishop. We would still have to do things that a Federal
charter holder wouldn't.
Mr. Grimm. Do you think pawn loans should be the only
option for American consumers of modest means?
Ms. Bishop. No, sir.
Mr. Grimm. What other options does your company have for
consumers who need small loans but don't have any collateral?
Ms. Bishop. Our State legalizes payday loans, and it has
been that way for about 10 years. I am in a town of about 4,000
people. There are six payday stores in that town, there are
four community banks, and one credit union.
Mr. Grimm. Do you have your own company or do you just
represent the others?
Ms. Bishop. I have my own pawn store, yes, sir, Dollar
Pawn.
Mr. Grimm. Okay, at your pawn store, can I get a loan from
you if I have no collateral?
Ms. Bishop. You can get--I also have a payday loan license,
and you can get a payday loan, under State supervision from the
State of Alabama, their guidelines.
Mr. Grimm. Okay.
Ms. Bishop. And I pay for that license separately.
Mr. Grimm. Mr. Edwards, you mentioned before that you were
very concerned about the predatory nature of some of these
loans and that the States are in a position to manage that, but
does that mean the CFPB and the OCC can't do that?
Mr. Edwards. No, that does not mean that at all. The
concern here is that the OCC, under H.R. 6139, would have the
authority to approve products, to grant national charters, and
prescribe regulations for the charter holders. And that is a
concern because the CFPB has the authority under Dodd-Frank to
regulate these nondepositories.
Mr. Grimm. But the CFPB's job, even if that charter is
granted, is to make sure the entity that was given a charter
is, in fact, not harming the consumer with some of the
devastating things you said. Am I wrong? Am I misreading the
legislation?
Mr. Edwards. If your question is, is the specific mission
of the CFPB to protect consumers and then force Federal
consumer financial law, you are correct, Representative. But
what this bill will do, it completely circumvents the CFPB's
authority to do so with respect to certain nondepository
entities, and that is concerning, as well as preempt some of
the tough State consumer protection measures that are out
there.
Mr. Grimm. I disagree. I don't think it takes anything away
from the CFPB, and the language in the bill is very, very clear
on that, but my time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Renacci [presiding]. Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for appearing. Ms. Bishop, it has been revealed that
you have hands-on experience in the sense that you actually
operate a business. Is this correct?
Ms. Bishop. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. Let me just ask by way of a show of hands, are
there other persons who actually operate a business that will
be impacted, operate the actual business?
Ms. Jackson. I'm an employee of a business, a very large
business.
Mr. Green. Pretty large.
Ms. Jackson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. I am not trying to demean you; I appreciate what
you have been able to accomplish.
Ms. Jackson. A Texas-based business.
Mr. Green. Maybe I will do some follow-up on what you said
about a Texas-based business. Ms. Bishop, as the only person on
the panel who actually operates a business, I detected a sense
of urgency from you that I haven't sensed in the others, and I
assume some of it emanates from your concern for the life of
your business.
You have expressed some of these concerns. Are you of the
opinion that your business may have to go out of business if
this occurs? If you were downsized, would you lose employees?
What is the sense of urgency that I can sense in your
intonations and your demeanor?
Ms. Bishop. The sense of urgency, as I said in my
statement, is the creation of an unlevel playing field that
would be created by a Federal charter holder, where someone,
one of these mega providers could provide Internet loans, could
provide pawn loans on the Internet, payday loans on the
Internet, and maybe they would not have to have the same
licensing regulation examination and education requirements in
some areas. And it would put the independent small business
owner at a deficit.
Mr. Green. You mentioned education--the legislation does
not require education; in fact, it preempts these requirements
at a State level. What type of education are you or your
employees required to have?
Ms. Bishop. In some States, there is a continuing education
requirement for obtaining and keeping your pawn license. There
is also, in some States, and Texas is one of them, a
requirement that each employee of a pawn operation has to be
licensed by the State as well. So all of this would not be
subject to a Federal charter holder.
Mr. Green. Are you speaking today for other persons who
operate similar businesses, and do they have similar concerns?
Ms. Bishop. I am speaking for myself, and for the National
Pawnbrokers Association, yes, we are very concerned about the
position that it could place small independent family-owned
businesses in, and some of these businesses have been in
operation for generations.
Mr. Green. Are most of these small businesses less than 25
people? More than 25 people? 100 people? What are we talking
about when we say small business?
Ms. Bishop. I guess I am probably a good example. I have 5
employees, and that includes myself, and that can go up to
maybe 25, 30 employees in a larger store that maybe runs longer
hours of operation. It is an operational question, and location
as well.
Mr. Green. So a simple exemption for your business that
would exclude you from this would not suffice, because your
concern is the competitive disadvantage that you will find
yourself having to negotiate in if this passes. Is that a fair
statement?
Ms. Bishop. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. It is just not enough to say, okay, we will let
the pawnbrokers be exempt. Your concern is whether you will
have existence. Is that what you are telling me?
Ms. Bishop. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. And let me ask you now about how you have
through these--how many years have you been in business?
Ms. Bishop. Twenty-four.
Mr. Green. Twenty-four years.
Ms. Bishop. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. Do you think you know what is good for your
business? Do you think you have a good sense of what works best
for your business after 24 years?
Ms. Bishop. I would certainly hope so, or I still wouldn't
be there. I would have a show on TV.
Mr. Green. Thank you. I hope that you will continue to stay
in business.
I genuinely am trying to find some sense of where we should
go with all of this. And I say it to you sincerely, I have
tried to stay through the entire hearing. There were other
things that were tugging at me. But I want to get some sense of
what we really should do, and I thank you for your testimony
because you have a hands-on experience with this, and it means
a lot to me. Thank you very much.
Ms. Bishop. Thank you for your attention.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Renacci. I recognize Mr. Fincher for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Where Mr. Green left off to Ms. Bishop, why again would you
be at a disadvantage if this bill is passed? Specifically, what
is going to put you at a disadvantage to competitors?
Ms. Bishop. First of all, I pay well over $1,000 just for
my licenses.
Mr. Fincher. Your competitors would not pay that?
Ms. Bishop. They wouldn't pay State or local licensing, no,
sir. That is one thing right off the bat. Put a pencil to it.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. And you would have to pay that, and they
wouldn't?
Ms. Bishop. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fincher. Why wouldn't you just not pay it?
Ms. Bishop. Because I am not a Federal charter holder, and
if I am going to stay in business in my State, I have to be
licensed.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. So it just would be the license and the
fees. That is what would put you at a disadvantage. And how
much are those fees in a year?
Ms. Bishop. It could also be--in my particular case, with
one store, it is in excess of $1,000. It also could create--if
they can operate, a large Federal charter holder can operate
more efficiently and at less cost to them, they may be able to
undercut the fees and services that non-Federal charter holders
are able to offer. There is lots of potential for--there is
blue sky.
Mr. Fincher. I get it.
How many stores do you have?
Ms. Bishop. I have one.
Mr. Fincher. You have one. And what is your gross revenue
in a year?
Ms. Bishop. Approximately $400,000 to $500,000.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. And the fees are $1,000, your State fees
are $1,000?
Ms. Bishop. Yes.
Mr. Fincher. Yes, sir, Mr. Flores?
Mr. Flores. I think we are losing sight here of something,
and that is I understand small business, I have worked with a
lot of small banks and the threats that competition provides.
But it seems to me that the focus should be on the consumer and
what is best for that consumer. And if competition brings more
efficiency, lower costs, and lower fees to the consumer, then
who benefits?
Ms. Bishop. We are not afraid of competition, if it is
level.
Mr. Fincher. Let me say this, and then I am going to let
Ms. Jackson speak. The consumer should have a product offered
to them that is competitive, and they should be able to choose
for themselves. But also there is nothing wrong with
competition, and in the free market, in our system of
capitalism, where making a profit there is nothing wrong with,
it is something good. But we do need to make sure that we are
all playing by the same rules. This is kind of complicated.
Ms. Jackson, would you like to comment?
Ms. Jackson. One, Fran and I are good friends, and we have
served together and worked for the pawn industry, and we have
about 1,000 locations. But when it comes to pawn, we coexist
today, large lenders and small lenders. We also have the zoning
restrictions. Lots of cities don't want a pawn shop on every
corner, so you have that restriction, and if you are nationally
chartered, that is not going to go away.
The other thing is when you look at the OCC license
holders, a lot of them are the national banks, but the majority
of the license holders under the OCC are single banks in small
towns. So, it is like the National Bank of Tyler, the National
Bank of Gaston. It is up to the lender whether they want to be
State-regulated or federally-regulated.
And believe me, if we are licensed under the OCC, we will
have fees. We are going to have to pay for ourselves and all
the oversight. So those fees will be realized by the national
charters, just like they are for the banks today. Banks have to
pay a national fee to the OCC, or they are going to pay a State
license fee.
Mr. Berlau. Congressman Fincher, if it does cost less, or
if it would cost less to get a Federal charter than a State
license, the solution under this bill for--and I am not sure it
would be, and I think the focus should be consumers--the
solution for a small lender would be to apply for a Federal
charter. There are one-branch banks, small banks, lots of small
banks, that have Federal charters, like the First National
Bank, and there is nothing that I see in this bill imposing a
cost burden--indeed, the situation described was that it may
cost less--preventing a small pawn shop or lender from getting
a Federal charter under this bill.
Mr. Fincher. I am confident--again, you are successful in
your businesses--that in America you will find a way to make it
work, because that is who we are as a country. But, again, I
think we need to be careful, walk slow. But you will have the
choice to choose between becoming federally-chartered or
regulated by the State. And we just appreciate the testimony
today and thank you for your hard work.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
I want to thank the members of the panel. I think your
testimony was very informative.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for today's witnesses, which they may wish to submit
in writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain
open for 30 days for Members to submit written questions to
these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:13 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 24, 2012

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


