- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO IMPROVE THE STRUCTURE OF THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO IMPROVE
THE STRUCTURE OF THE CONSUMER
FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 6, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-24

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-862                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Vice    CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           JOE BACA, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 6, 2011................................................     1
Appendix:
April 6, 2011................................................    59

WITNESSES
Wednesday, April 6, 2011

Andersen, Leslie R., President and Chief Executive Officer, Bank
of Bennington, on behalf of the American Bankers Association
(ABA)..........................................................     9
Hunt, Richard, President, Consumer Bankers Association (CBA).....    45
Levitin, Adam J., Professor, Georgetown University Law Center....    47
Sharp, Jess, Executive Director, Center for Capital Markets
Competitiveness, U.S. Chamber of Commerce......................    12
Shelton, Hilary O., Director, NAACP Washington Bureau, and Senior
Vice President for Advocacy and Policy, NAACP..................    14
Smith, Lynette W., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Washington Gas Light Federal Credit Union, on behalf of the
National Association of Federal Credit Unions (NAFCU)..........    11
Staatz, Rod, President and Chief Executive Officer, SECU of
Maryland, on behalf of the Credit Union National Association
(CUNA).........................................................    43
Wilcox, Noah H., President and Chief Executive Officer, Grand
Rapids State Bank, on behalf of the Independent Community
Bankers of America (ICBA)......................................    42

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Andersen, Leslie R...........................................    60
Hunt, Richard................................................    71
Levitin, Adam J..............................................    79
Sharp, Jess..................................................    90
Shelton, Hilary O............................................   101
Smith, Lynette W.............................................   106
Staatz, Rod..................................................   119
Wilcox, Noah H...............................................   130

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Written statement of the American Financial Services
Association (AFSA).........................................   136
Smith, Lynette:
Additional information provided in response to questions from
Representatives Maloney and Carney.........................   140

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO IMPROVE
THE STRUCTURE OF THE CONSUMER
FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU

----------

Wednesday, April 6, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:25 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Royce, Manzullo,
McHenry, McCotter, Pearce, Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga,
Duffy, Renacci, Dold, Canseco; Maloney, Hinojosa, McCarthy of
New York, Miller of North Carolina, Scott, Velazquez, and
Carney.
Ex officio present: Representative Bachus.
Also present: Representative Green.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order. This
morning's hearing marks the third hearing that the Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit Subcommittee has held on the
oversight of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
We have before us today two panels who will comment on
legislation that members of this subcommittee have been working
on for the last month to make structural reforms to the CFPB.
The first measure is H.R. 1121, which changes the
leadership of the CFPB from a single director to a five-person
commission. In my view, this is a critical change to the
structure of the Bureau, and I would like to thank Chairman
Bachus for his lead on this legislation of which I am a
cosponsor.
This is not unprecedented for a regulatory agency. The
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodities Future
Trading Commission, and the Federal Trade Commission are
examples of regulatory agencies led by a commission. Most
notably, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, which
regulates the safety of thousands of non-consumer products, is
led by a five-member commission. The powers of the Bureau are
simply too broad for a single director, and the move to put the
commission in place I think puts an important check on power.
I would like to commend Mr. Duffy for his leadership on the
second bill we will be considering today, H.R. 1315. This
legislation makes important improvements to the Financial
Stability Oversight Council's ability to overturn a CFPB
regulation. Current law creates a situation in which the
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) only has the
authority to overturn a CFPB regulation if ``the regulation or
provision would put the safety and soundness of the United
States banking system or the stability of the financial system
of the United States at risk.'' Wow, that is a pretty high
standard there, I would say.
Current law also requires a two-thirds majority vote to
overturn a CFPB regulation. This simply sets the bar too high.
Consumer protection and safety and soundness should go hand-in-
hand.
Mr. Duffy is to be commended for his legislation, which
makes dramatic improvements by lowering the threshold for a
vote by changing it to ``regulation which is the subject of the
petition is inconsistent with the safe and sound operations of
United States financial institutions.''
In addition to lowering this threshold, Mr. Duffy's bill
changes the FSOC vote from a two-thirds majority to a simple
majority and excludes the director of the CFPB from voting on
CFPB regulations.
It is my intent for the two discussion drafts to serve as
an opportunity to explore two other issues within the structure
of the CFPB: the first delays the transfer of consumer
protection functions until there is a confirmed director; and
the second prevents the CFPB from sending personnel to
accompany credentialed regulators on examinations. These are
two critical discussions on the current structure of the CFPB
before the designated transfer date, and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
This is just the beginning of what will be an ongoing
dialogue on how to better reform the CFPB. The current
structure simply puts too much power into the hands of one
individual and does not allow for sufficient oversight of the
regulations put forth by this Bureau.
There have been recent statements made about the Bureau
being created as ``the voice for American families'' and the
willingness of the Bureau to stand up and stick up for those
families. The members of this subcommittee are elected by the
American people. It is our responsibility to protect the
freedoms and liberties of our constituents. We also have a
responsibility to ensure that regulations are in place to
properly protect consumers.
Finally, we have a responsibility to ensure that their
personal financial decisions are left up to them and not unduly
influenced by unelected bureaucrats who seek to limit consumer
choice.
I would now like to recognize the ranking minority member,
the gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney, for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. I would like to welcome the witnesses today,
and thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for calling this important
hearing.
I appreciate the opportunity to consider these legislative
proposals, but I take issue with the title of today's hearing,
``Legislative Proposals to Improve the Structure of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,'' because I disagree that
these proposals are meant to improve it. These proposals we are
considering today come from some of the members who last year
voted against the Dodd-Frank Financial Protection and Consumer
Protection Act which created the CFPB. Taken together, these
proposals will only serve to delay and disrupt the CFPB from
being able to fully do its job before it is even opened for
business on July 21st.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau was created in
response to the worst financial crisis since the Great
Depression. Any attempt to delay or weaken the CFPB could leave
American families, their communities, and the economy as a
whole exposed to many of the same risks that brought our
financial system to the brink of collapse.
According to the Majority, the four bills we are discussing
today are to create and promote greater accountability and
transparency at the CFPB, but that is precisely what the CFPB
is doing. The CFPB is working on how to make credit and other
financial products clearer and easier to understand so that
consumers have the information they need to make informed
decisions.
These moves, in my opinion, are an attempt to return to the
failed policies of the past: the same regulatory indifference;
the same blindness to real-world consequences. It is
reinstating the same mindset of deregulation that was firmly in
place in the prior Administration as the economy headed towards
disaster. It is as if all the loss, all the sorrow, all the
misery of the ``Great Recession'' never happened.
If you doubt the benefits of effective consumer protection,
then please take a look at what the Center for Responsible
Lending had to say about the effects of my Credit Card Bill of
Rights that was passed with broad bipartisan support in the
last Congress. The study shows that the Credit Card Act of 2009
has reversed much of the unclear pricing on credit cards
without leading to higher rates or more difficulty in getting
credit. Furthermore, the greater transparency about the real
costs of credit makes it less likely that consumers will get in
over their heads, something many believe was one of the
contributing factors to the great credit crisis. This is all
reflected in the fact that consumer complaints about credit
card company practices have dropped dramatically since the
implementation of my bill.
With the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, we can begin
to do for all financial products what the credit card bill did
for consumer credit cards--make the arena more competitive and
the products more fair, less deceptive, and more transparent so
that consumers can compare costs. These are all traits an
efficient free market system needs in order to thrive.
The Bureau is designed to be funded through the Federal
Reserve, just as all bank supervisory agencies are
independently funded, in order that it might be just that,
independent. This is vital in order to avoid the kind of
politicizing of its mission.
The claim that the CFPB will not be subject to oversight is
simply not based on reality. The CFPB director will testify
twice a year to Congress. The Board will report annually to
Congress on its budget and operating plan. It will submit
quarterly financial reports to the Office of Management and
Budget. The Government Accountability Office will do its own
audit. The Financial Stability Oversight Council will review
all CFPB regulations and can overturn them with a two-thirds
vote, an unprecedented power.
The Administrative Procedures Act allows for Federal courts
to review agency decisions. And Congress, as the majority party
in the House is attempting to do right now, can overturn
regulations.
Elizabeth Warren has made it clear that she favors free
market solutions, but like the vast majority of Americans she
is opposed to the use of deceptive, predatory, or
anticompetitive practices. I would like to end by quoting from
her recent address to the Consumer Union: ``We want to see
innovation, lots of innovation, but innovations need to be
around real product differences that consumers can see and
understand, not around misleading advertising and new tricks
buried in the fine print. Our goal is simple. We want the
credit markets to work better for consumers, for responsible
providers, and for the whole economy.''
Thank you, and I reserve my time in the event that others
have opening statements.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Bachus, for 1 minute for an opening statement.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you. What you just heard from the
gentlelady from New York is sort of what I think the press has
also said. That is their message, and their message is that
this is all about politics; we don't like consumer protection.
Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, my bill
is for a commission, which is what this House passed. This is
what we passed in Dodd-Frank. It was changed in conference to
allow one person to run the agency with total discretion. What
we are advancing is not politics, it is the way government has
always functioned, and that is not one person with unbridled
authority.
And let me say this: Professor Warren has done a great job
of really fooling the national media into thinking, oh, this
can easily be appealed. Nothing could be further from the
truth. Sean Duffy has introduced a bill which is as important
as the bill I am introducing, which tells you that you can't
even appeal a ruling unless the ruling would bring down the
whole financial system of the United States.
Now, how absurd is that? Someone has to file within 10 days
of the Consumer Protection Bureau issuing something. Ten days.
That is absurd. It is unheard of. And it is a supermajority,
not even two-thirds. It is 70 percent.
And I tell you what, no one has gone past this crazy story
about how we are just attacking Ms. Warren or that we don't
want consumer protection. I think the American people and I
know this Congress are too sophisticated to believe that, and
if they are able to hoodwink the American people, they pulled a
real sham here.
I am advancing the same language that everyone in this
House thought was the appropriate solution. It is what has been
discussed for years about pulling everything into one agency
and it being a commission. But someone in the dead of night
decided they could just do whatever they wanted to, whenever
they wanted to, and that the press would not tell the American
people. This is not about Elizabeth Warren. This is about
giving one person total unbridled authority and power.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Scott for 2 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and
welcome, panelists. This is indeed a very timely and a very
important hearing. I think there are essentially 2 basic points
that we have to explore today and make sure we get our hands
on.
One is, how do we adequately put forward the machinery that
will effectively do two things: protect the American consumer;
and make sure in the process of doing that, that consumer does
not lose valuable access to credit. Those are the two things we
have to do. And we have to explore, we have to really respond
to some of the fears that are out there and make sure that we
answer them before we move forward; that this effort does or
does not clamp down unfairly on the financial services industry
that has to both help consumers, while surely at the same time
make sure that access to credit is there. So I want to get some
answers to that.
I want to get some answers to these concerns, because we
can't do it without the financial services industry and we have
to make sure that they are not going to tighten up on credit if
such prompt procedures are in place.
And I think in so doing, we will do the American people a
great service.
Now, my friend, Chairman Bachus has an interesting bill.
Can we do this by committee? Can we do it by commission? If so,
what will be the political makeup of that commission? If it is
three, and you have two political parties, somebody is not
going to have a fairly good chair when the music stops in terms
of balance. I think that we have to be very thoughtful as we
move forward.
And again, Madam Chairwoman, I know my time is about up,
but the major point again I want to impress is what I am after
here is making sure we indeed protect the consumer, educate the
consumer against predatory practices, against abuses that have
caused so much of the problem that we are in today, while, at
the same time, ensuring that he does not lose that valuable
access to credit.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Royce for an opening
statement.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. The July 21st
deadline is quickly approaching here. And assuming a director
is eventually appointed, we will soon be left with an agency
unlike any other, given the way this was written. For the first
time, there will be a director who serves a set term, has sole
authority over the agency and its actions, and has access to
hundreds of millions of dollars outside of the appropriations
process. So it is a bad precedent. It would fundamentally
weaken our regulatory structure by moving safety and soundness
regulation to the back seat.
What I had offered earlier during the markup when this bill
became law was something that the prudential regulators wanted.
They have seen what happened with the oversight over the GSEs.
They thought it was a bad idea to move safety and soundness
regulation to the back seat. And frankly, this bill takes a
critical step by empowering the safety and soundness regulators
to have a greater say in the CFPB by lowering the threshold for
a rule to be struck down.
And I would also add, Mr. Scott raised the concerns about
access to credit, which I think is something we need to be
worried about. I think beyond that, this worry about tying the
hands of the regulators on this is a road we have been down
before, where Congress did this with respect to Fannie and
Freddie, and we had a very bad consequence out of it. So let us
give the prudential regulators a greater say in this process.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Miller for 2 minutes for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Yes, the CFPB is an agency unlike any another. It probably has
more checks on its authority, more accountability than any
other agency of the government. It certainly is not unique in
that it is not subject to the usual budget process. Every
regulator of the financial industry is funded separately,
rather than to have to come back to Congress, hat in hand, to
be turned away by the influence of the financial industry to
restrict their ability to do their job. In that way, they are
certainly not at all different from anybody else, except that
they have a cap on theirs that nobody else--none of the other
regulators have.
They are certainly not unique in that they have a single
director. The OCC, for instance, has a single director, and
that has made that a very powerful agency, which has worked
greatly to the benefit of the banking interest and greatly to
the disadvantage of consumers. So it is certainly not in that
respect at all unusual.
When the industry talks about safety and soundness, the
need to keep safety and soundness together, Congress did limit
the authority of the CFPB. The CFPB cannot require any bank to
offer any product. They can only prohibit practices that they
determine to be abusive of consumers. So when a bank says they
want to consider safety and soundness, what they are saying is,
in order to stay in business, they have to do things, they have
to do things the CFPB has determined cheat consumers, or the
language of the statute, I think, are unfair, deceptive or
abusive. They say that they have to be unfair, deceptive, or
abusive to stay in business. Maybe that bank needs to go out of
business.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. McHenry for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. This legislation
today we are looking at, it will go a long way to providing the
necessary oversight of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
in order to ensure that consumer protection rules can be
implemented without risking the safety and soundness of our
Nation's financial system.
Last November, the voters sent a clear message to
Washington. Massive new regulations are creating uncertainty
and crippling job creation. With that in mind, I believe the
legislation before us today is extremely necessary in order to
protect consumers, while also making certain that small
businesses and individuals aren't limited from accessing the
credit that they need.
While our economy is still fragile, this legislation will
remedy a flaw passed in the final Dodd-Frank piece of
legislation.
I would say to my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle, this idea that they created a very limited regulator,
while having 59 votes in the Senate and 60 percent of the House
of Representatives and a Democrat President, is absolutely
absurd. They were bragging about how powerful this regulator
was until after the election. We are trying to fix this problem
and go back to a more balanced approach at the CFPB.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Pearce for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I just wanted to
address some of the comments coming from our friends on the
other side of the aisle that innovations need to be somehow
controlled, those dangerous innovations. And I think back to
growing up in a family where the innovations, those scary
innovations in the phone industry, were stopped for decades, so
we grew up with this one black phone, a big heavy thing. As
soon as that was deregulated, those scary changes began to come
on to the market, and they call them cell phones and now iPods,
iPads, whatever.
And so as I think about choking down the financial sector,
it is going to do exactly what one of my other friends from the
other side said. It is going to limit access to consumers.
For the situations where someone does cheat or take money
away from someone, there is a remedy. Stick them in jail. When
people cheat somebody else, have an outcome. But we don't need
to choke down the entire financial services market in the name
of safety. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Huizenga for 1 minute for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate you
doing this today.
We are here today to discuss legislative proposals that
will create more transparency and accountability for what some
have labeled an independent agency--some of us would maybe
characterize it as a rogue agency--that Congress created last
year. And under this, Dodd-Frank, the CFPB, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, will have extensive authority to
issue all new Federal and financial regulations that affect
businesses and individuals, but with very little
accountability. To me, that is unacceptable.
If I am doing a bad job, I have to answer to the
constituents of the Second District in Michigan. If the
President is not effective, he has to go answer to people in an
election situation.
Who does the head of the CFPB report to? No one. That is
part of the problem.
And as a newly elected Member of this 112th Congress, and a
member of this important committee, I am here to work for that
change.
Madam Chairwoman, I again appreciate your willingness to
hold this hearing on this important issue. So thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize now Mr. Dold for 1 minute for the
purpose of giving an opening statement.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I want to thank
the witnesses for your time today.
Both before and after legislation is passed, Congress has
an obligation to identify and correct unintended negative
consequences that frequently arise from what many would say is
well-intended legislation.
What I would like is do is I would like to fast-forward,
because what we do today is going to have implications for many
years to come. So let us go forward 5 and 10 years. Let us say
the Administration is vastly different. We are empowering one
individual who has, I would say, an enormous amount of power.
What the legislation does today broadens that out. Instead of
one, we want to have five. This seems to me to be commonsense
legislation. Instead of vesting the power so much in one
individual, we are investing it in a board.
And then when it talks about veto authority, it is going to
be a simple majority, as opposed to two-thirds, which is a very
high standard to jump over.
So I look forward to your comments in terms of trying to
convince me on how this is not a good idea, why we need to
invest so much power in an individual. Given the consumer
credit industry's importance to our economic prosperity, the
CFPB broad regulatory mandate should exist within a structural
framework that improves transparency and accountability.
I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for giving me the time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Canseco for 1 minute for the
purpose of giving an opening statement.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Out of all the provisions included in the 2,300-page Dodd-
Frank bill, perhaps the biggest and most important question
surrounds the creation of the Consumer Protection Bureau. For
the first time, we have an agency whose primary mission is
supposed to be consumer protection, although it is unclear
exactly what the distinction is between consumer protection and
safety and soundness.
Aside from the agency's puzzling mission, there is a great
concern over its structure. Ignoring the precedents for
financial regulatory agencies, the Bureau is structured so that
it has a single director who will have great influence. This
means that one person can essentially determine what types of
mortgage products or credit cards Americans can have access to.
In its current state, it is also extremely difficult to
overturn a potentially damaging rule proposed by the Bureau. It
is also worth noting that the funding of this agency has been
carved completely out of the normal appropriations process. The
powers given to this agency seem to go out against the
traditions of accountability and openness, and it moves us
towards creating an American credit czar.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Finally, I would like to recognize Mr. Duffy for 1 minute
for the purpose of giving an opening statement.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Quickly, I think all of us here on the panel and this
committee agree that we want to protect consumers. I just think
we have a disagreement that this bill is actually going to
accomplish that goal. We have an incredibly high standard to
overturn a CFPB rule. Basically, what has to happen here is the
CFPB has to create a rule that is going to bring down the whole
financial system. And if that is the case, we need to go to
FSOC and get three-quarters of the vote, three-quarters of 10
votes on FSOC to overturn it.
The way the rule is written, or the law is written right
now, the director of the CFPB sits on FSOC. This is a super,
super, supermajority. It makes it incredibly difficult to
overturn a rule that comes from the CFPB that is going to be
damaging to the financial system.
I think my bill addresses this. It puts some perspective
back into oversight of the CFPB and brings some sanity to the
legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our opening statements. I would like to
welcome our witnesses. We have your full written testimony, and
you will be given 5 minutes to sort of summarize your
testimony. And we have a lot of eager questioners here, so we
would like to try to stick to the 5 minutes.
First of all, I would like to welcome Ms. Leslie Andersen,
president and chief executive officer of the Bank of
Bennington, on behalf of the American Bankers Association, for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LESLIE R. ANDERSEN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, BANK OF BENNINGTON, ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN BANKERS
ASSOCIATION (ABA)

Ms. Andersen. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to
testify today. ABA appreciates the chance to share ways to
improve the accountability of the new Bureau of Consumer
Financial Protection.
The banking industry fully supports effective consumer
protection. At the Bank of Bennington, we are proud of our 8
decades of service to our customers. No bank can be successful
without a long-term perspective like ours and without treating
customers fairly.
The new Bureau will certainly impose new obligations on all
banks, large and small, banks that had nothing to do with the
financial crisis and already have a long history of serving
consumers fairly in a competitive environment.
There are several features of the Bureau that make improved
accountability imperative. These include the problems brought
about by the extensive new powers of the agency, the unfettered
authority of the director to impose new rules, the separation
of consumer protection from bank safety and soundness, the gaps
in regulating non-banks, and the expanded and unaccountable
enforcement authority of prudential regulators and State
attorneys general.
We believe the bills that are the subject of this hearing
today are a start in the right direction, but certainly more
needs to be done. We have detailed recommendations to improve
the Bureau's accountability in our written testimony, but let
me highlight just a few.
ABA supports H.R. 1121, which would create a commission
responsible for the Bureau's actions. A board or a commission
structure is far better than giving the head of the Bureau sole
authority to make decisions that could fundamentally alter the
financial choices available for customers. It also provides the
needed balance and appropriate checks in the exercise of the
Bureau's significant authority.
ABA recommends that the commission include members with
consumer finance business experience and direct safety and
soundness regulatory expertise. Such expertise would provide an
important perspective as standards are set and enforcement
activities undertaken.
ABA also supports H.R. 1315, which would require a simple
majority vote of the Financial Stability Oversight Council to
set aside a Bureau rule. If a majority of the Nation's top
regulators believe a Bureau rule will have an adverse impact on
the banking system, that rule should not go forward.
Moreover, ABA also believes that a finding of systemic risk
is too narrow. The review standards should be recalibrated to
account for adverse consequences of Bureau actions that do not
rise to the level of systemic risk.
In addition to further accountability, we believe the
Bureau should direct its resources to the most glaring gap in
regulatory oversight: a failure to supervise and impose
enforcement actions on non-bank lenders committing consumer
protection violations. One simple suggestion is to mandate
transparency on the Bureau's non-bank expenditures.
We also strongly urge the Congress to eliminate the term
``abusive'' from the Bureau's prohibitions. This is the most
effective method of keeping the Bureau focused on the task of
reforming the authorities it has inherited from its predecessor
regulators. Then, the Bureau can shape those more-than-adequate
authorities into simpler, more effective, and less burdensome
consumer protections.
Finally, the Dodd-Frank Act gives license to pile on
additional State law requirements. It gives additional
authority to State attorneys general and prudential regulators
to interpret and enforce Bureau statutory authorities and the
rules as they see fit. If we are to hold the Bureau
accountable, we must also hold accountable all those who derive
authority from its existence. To do otherwise, by allowing new
rules to be written or applying new interpretations each time a
State border is crossed, would completely undermine the
reliance of all citizens on the Bureau's rules.
Chairwoman Capito, banks across this country will continue
to treat our customers right and do whatever we can to make
sure that they understand the terms of the loans they are
taking on and their obligations to us. Our task is made more
difficult by the many new hurdles that we will have to jump
over to serve our customers' most basic financial needs.
With only 22 employees, I worry about how my bank will
handle all the new compliance obligations that will flow from
the Bureau and from all other Dodd-Frank requirements. More
importantly, I worry about the added cost, time, and hassle for
my customers that these new rules will inevitably create. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Andersen can be found on
page 60 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you very much.
I would like to welcome and introduce our second witness,
Ms. Lynette W. Smith, president and chief executive officer of
the Washington Gas Light Federal Credit Union, on behalf of the
National Association of Federal Credit Unions. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF LYNETTE W. SMITH, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, WASHINGTON GAS LIGHT FEDERAL CREDIT UNION, ON BEHALF
OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FEDERAL CREDIT UNIONS (NAFCU)

Ms. Smith. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Lynette
Smith and I am testifying this morning on behalf of NAFCU. I
serve as the president and CEO of Washington Gas Light Federal
Credit Union in Springfield, Virginia.
Washington Gas has more than 6,800 members and over $80
million in assets. NAFCU is the only national organization
exclusively representing the interests of our Nation's Federal
credit unions, and we appreciate the opportunity to participate
in this hearing today concerning proposals to improve the
structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Credit unions were not the cause of this financial crisis,
and yet we are still substantially affected by a number of
provisions contained in the Dodd-Frank Act. For example, all
credit unions are subject to the rulemaking authority of the
new CFPB. The requirements in Dodd-Frank will create a number
of new and unnecessary compliance burdens for small credit
unions like mine.
It is with that in mind that NAFCU has long opposed the
CFPB's authority over credit unions. We believe that CFPB's
singular focus should be on regulating the unregulated entities
that contributed to the financial crisis.
Indications are that some of the first areas that the CFPB
may tackle include mortgage lending and credit card practices,
areas where we have already seen a number of changes in the
recent years. Although the debit interchange price cap remains
NAFCU's number one concern with the Dodd-Frank Act, I will
focus my concerns on the new CFPB.
First, NAFCU will urge the subcommittee to return authority
for rulemaking, examination, and enforcement of all credit
unions to the National Credit Union Administration.
Second, while we were pleased to see the Financial
Stability Oversight Council granted veto authority over some
proposed CFPB rules, we believe the current veto authority does
not go far enough. NAFCU supports legislation to modify the
threshold needed to veto a proposed rule.
Third, NAFCU supports H.R. 1121, legislation introduced by
Chairman Bachus and others, which would create a five-person
commission to govern the CFPB. We believe a Board has benefits
over one single director. At a minimum, NAFCU believes that the
CFPB must have a Senate-confirmed director before it becomes an
official, stand-alone Federal agency. We would support
legislation to delay the transfer date until a director is
confirmed.
Fourth, only three credit unions are above the current $10
billion threshold and would be subject to the examination and
enforcement authority of the CFPB. We believe it is a waste of
taxpayers' dollars for the CFPB to have credit union
examination teams for only three institutions, when NCUA has
been handling examining these institutions for decades.
Congress should transfer that authority back to NCUA.
Finally, there are a number of other areas where the CFPB
could be improved, and I have outlined those in my written
testimony.
In conclusion, I remain at a loss as to why my credit union
has been placed under a new regulatory regime. That being said,
we welcome a dialogue with Congress on possible changes to the
structure, governance, and authorities of the new CFPB.
I thank you for my opportunity to appear before you today
on behalf of NAFCU, and I would welcome any questions that you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smith can be found on page
106 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. Jess Sharp, executive director of
the Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness, the United
States Chamber of Commerce. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF JESS SHARP, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR CAPITAL
MARKETS COMPETITIVENESS, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Sharp. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito,
Ranking Member Maloney, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am Jess Sharp, the executive director for what
we call the CCMC--it is kind of a mouthful--at the Chamber of
Commerce. Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning
on behalf of the millions of companies and businesses that the
Chamber represents.
The Chamber firmly supports sound consumer protection
regulation that deters and punishes financial fraud and
predation and ensures that consumers receive clear, concise,
and accurate disclosures about financial products.
However, the ability of a regulatory agency to carry out
its mission successfully is influenced by, among other things,
organizational structure, coordination with other agencies, and
the ability to maintain over the long term a consistent,
effective approach. The unprecedented structure and authority
of the CFPB fails these longstanding commonsense tests.
The proposals that the subcommitee is considering today
provide an opportunity to address structural issues essential
to the success of the Bureau's mission.
I will start with Chairman Bachus' bill, H.R. 1121, which
would restructure the CFPB so that it is governed by a five-
member bipartisan commission rather than by a single director.
For four reasons, we strongly support this reform. First,
far from singling out the Bureau for special treatment, the
Bachus bill would conform the Bureau to other independent
Federal agencies, including those responsible for consumer
protection, like the FTC, for example. Today, almost all
independent agencies follow this model. Moreover, the decision
to place a single director in charge of the Bureau, far from
being essential to the original conception of this agency, as
Chairman Bachus pointed out in his opening statement, actually
was made quite late in the legislative game. The President's
original draft bill proposing a Consumer Protection Agency
included a commission, as did the bill that passed this House
in 2009.
Second, the Chamber believes that a commission will ensure
better impartial decision-making. We believe that collaborative
deliberation among a commission with diverse views, expertise,
and backgrounds will lead to better policy outcomes. By
contrast, leadership by an individual director is more likely
to lead to extreme swings in approach over the years.
The CFPB has a tough balancing act to perform as a
substantive matter. More stringent rules and stricter
enforcement will protect some credit users from fraud, as has
been pointed out, and we certainly agree with that. As has also
been pointed out, it could also lead to higher prices and
reduced access to credit with potentially significant adverse
implications for consumer well-being and economic growth. So
smart, evidence-based decision-making in this complex area
depends on full consideration of a diversity of inputs and
views.
The third point is that we believe that a commission
approach would minimize the risk of regulatory capture. In the
2008 Law Review article entitled, ``Making Credit Safer'' that
Professor Warren co-authored, she observed that a major
challenge in establishing a unified Federal regulator of
consumer credit products is the challenge of minimizing risk of
capture. The Chamber agrees and believes, again, that a multi-
member commission is the best way to address this risk.
Fourth and finally, on H.R. 1121, we just think that a
commission approach will ensure continuity and stability in a
way that a single director would not. A multi-member
commission, with staggered terms, ensures the continuous
presence of a significant number of experienced members at all
times and prevents any gaps in agency effectiveness. It would
also prevent significant policy shifts based on the political
wins.
Moving quickly to Mr. Duffy's bill, the Chamber supports
H.R. 1315 because it would enhance the FSOC's ability to serve
as the critical check on Bureau rulemaking that threatens the
financial system. If every prudential regulator opposed the
proposed CFPB regulation, then that regulation shouldn't stand.
And a majority requirement based on the vote of nine of FSOC's
members, because we are taking the Bureau out of the FSOC for
purposes of this provision, would permit that result.
I would like to just quickly also address the discussion
drafts that are before the committee before concluding. The
discussion drafts would do a couple of things, both in terms of
delaying--the first would delay the transfer of consumer
protection functions to the Bureau until a director has been
confirmed, and would remove the current authorization for
prudential regulators to include Bureau examiners in
examinations of large financial institutions prior to the
transfer date.
With respect to the first proposal, the Chamber agrees that
consumer protection functions should remain with their existing
agency until the leadership of the Bureau has been confirmed.
As for the second proposal, we also agree that it raises
concerns for the Bureau examiners to participate in
examinations of large financial institutions prior to the
transfer date and, accordingly, we would support legislation
along those lines as well.
So thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sharp can be found on page
90 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Sharp.
I would like to welcome Mr. Hilary Shelton as our final
witness on this panel. He is the director of the NAACP,
Washington Bureau, and senior vice president for advocacy and
policy. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF HILARY O. SHELTON, DIRECTOR, NAACP WASHINGTON
BUREAU, AND SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR ADVOCACY AND POLICY,
NAACP

Mr. Shelton. Thank you very much. And good morning,
Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and so many of my
good friends who are here on this subcommittee.
It is a pleasure and an honor to be here to share in your
discussion about improving the strength of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, the CFPB. We at the NAACP feel
very strongly that this nascent agency needs as much support as
possible so that it can reach its greatest potential to protect
the American public in ways that it has never been protected
before.
The NAACP feels strongly that a robust CFPB is not only
necessary for our Nation today; it is absolutely crucial. For
too long, too many consumers, disproportionately racial and
ethnic minority Americans, have been underserved and even
targeted by unfair and downright unscrupulous predatory
financial services. The result has dramatically diminished
opportunities for an ability to build wealth or, in too many
cases, to continue to own our homes, or even buy a car.
More than 4 years ago, I testified before the Senate
Banking Committee about predatory lending in the home mortgage
and refinancing market and the racial disparities that existed.
At that time I stated, ``Predatory lending is unequivocally a
major civil rights issue.'' As study after study conclusively
demonstrated, predatory lenders target African Americans,
Latinos, Asians and Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, the
elderly, and women at such a disproportionate rate that the
effect is devastating to not only individuals and families, but
whole communities as well. Predatory lending stymies families'
attempts at wealth-building and ruins people's lives.
Sadly, since that time, my words have been reinforced by
more studies and, more importantly and more tragically, there
have been catastrophic consequences for families,
neighborhoods, and whole communities as the foreclosure rate
among racial and ethnic minorities has disproportionately
skyrocketed.
In almost every other facet of financial services like home
mortgages, racial and ethnic minorities are targeted by
exploitive and unscrupulous lenders, and we continue to be
treated unfairly. My written testimony gives you two more
examples of this, payday lenders and credit scoring. But for
the sake of brevity, I will not elaborate on them right here
and now.
Madam Chairwoman, distinguished members of the
subcommittee, I could go on and on with examples and studies
which demonstrate undeniably that racial and ethnic minority
Americans are still treated disparately in a world of financial
services. As a result, racial and ethnic minority Americans are
faced with dramatically diminished opportunities to fulfill the
American dream and build any sort of wealth for the future. It
is because of this continuing disparity in treatment and the
blatant targeting of racial and ethnic minority communities by
exploitive financial services that the NAACP joined many other
national civil rights organizations, among others, in
applauding the creation of the CFPB under last year's Dodd-
Frank Act. As a matter of fact, many civil rights
organizations, including the NAACP, testified before this very
committee on the need for a single, robust, independent agency
charged with protecting consumers and ensuring that all
Americans have the same access to credit.
Under the old system, at least five Federal agencies played
a role in monitoring how financial institutions complied with
consumer and civil rights laws, while three Federal agencies
provided additional enforcement authority. There was not a
single entity charged with investigating or charged with
ensuring that all consumers were treated equally and fairly.
Under the new and improved system, as mandated by Dodd-
Frank for many financial institutions, consumers' financial
protection will now be the sole focus of a single agency, the
CFPB. Once fully operational, the CFPB will have a broad
authority to write rules, supervise a wide variety of financial
institutions, and enforce Federal fair lending and consumer
protection laws.
Most important to the NAACP, fair lending is explicitly
built in the CFPB's mission, structure, and research mandates.
Dodd-Frank clearly states that the CFPB is tasked with the
responsibilities to ``seek to implement and, where applicable,
enforce Federal consumer financial protection law consistently
for the purposes of ensuring that all consumers have access to
markets where consumer financial products and services, and the
markets that consumers financial products and services are
fair, transparent, and competitive.'' In short, a robust
function of CFPB will work through rulemaking, enforcement, and
research to ensure a more fair and equitable financial playing
field.
The NAACP is particularly pleased to note that the CFPB
will be looking at almost every aspect of financial services,
including mortgage lending, credit cards, overdraft fees, and
payday loans.
Madam Chairwoman, I recognize that the subject of this
hearing is four particular pieces of legislation intended to,
as the committee contends, strengthen the CFPB. I am very
interested in hearing the analysis of these four bills because
I would like to state unequivocally for the record that the
NAACP staunchly opposes any rules which may make weaken or
undermine the CFPB or otherwise impede it from reaching its
full potential.
Any proposals which would weaken the mission of the CFPB
would mean fewer protections for American consumers in general,
and racial and ethnic minorities in particular, as they attempt
to manage the often confusing world of finances, mortgages, and
credit. Emasculating the CFPB, before it even gets off the
ground, will result in a return to a system of inadequate
financial supervision that failed taxpayers, depositors,
investors, homeowners, and other consumers. Allowing continued
predatory lending to consumers and the targeting of particular
groups will once again allow greater risk to our financial
system. Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shelton can be found on page
101 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Shelton.
I would like to begin the questioning. I have a question
for Ms. Smith. We have heard reports that CFPB personnel have
already been accompanying prudential regulatory staff on
examinations. The issue here for me is, as we know, the
statutory date to begin the full implementation of the CFPB is
not until July. And I think for institutions' safety and
soundness and protection of financial data of their clients and
their customers, this could be problematic if you have
somebody, personnel accompanying who don't really have any kind
of regulatory authority or any enforcement authority. Do you
have a comment on that? And are you aware that this is
occurring?
Ms. Smith. Yes, I am aware. And we call it the ride-along
examination. So that would be detrimental, in my opinion, to
any credit union, regardless of size. The resources of a credit
union really need to be better served than doing double
examinations. So, for that reason, I feel that it would be a
problem. And I can speak for myself and what I experience when
a NCUA examines our credit union once a year. It was 18 months.
Now, it is once a year.
And also, I have to have a year-end audit examination by a
certified public accountant. Both take approximately 30 days to
complete, and take a lot of resources away from my credit
union, resources that I could use to better serve my members.
That needs to be our focus. That has been the credit union's
focus all along.
While smaller credit unions are supposed to be exempt from
this bill, as it is written in the testimony, we just feel that
this would be very problematic to the credit union industry as
a whole.
Chairwoman Capito. Yes. I think it presents a problem
whether it is a ride-along or whether it begins issues of
privacy issues with financial data and other issues of that
magnitude. And I appreciate the statement that you made that
when you get into the heavy regulatory burden, you are really
undermining what Mr. Shelton addressed in his statement, which
is how you get the consumer products and credits to the folks
who most desperately need it and who have been shut out
previously from greater access to credit.
Ms. Smith. And please keep in mind that in the last 2 or 3
years, I have been able to still continue to lend to members.
When this financial crisis hit, my doors were open and we were
lending every day.
Chairwoman Capito. I appreciate that.
I would like to ask Ms. Andersen, the carve-out for
community banks, you have 22 employees, I can see from your
statement, and it is of great concern to me as well that the
carve-out really doesn't exist for a banking institution of any
size, whether you are in the larger part that maybe fall under
the CFPB. But still, the rules and regulations are going to
influence your institution.
You have already talked about the resources. Have you had
to hire somebody? Do you anticipate that you are going to have
to hire somebody to meet all of the demands that would then
take, of course, resources from your bank that could be again
more adequately placed in seeking credit and helping your
communities? Could you address that issue?
Ms. Andersen. Yes. We have actually hired outside counsel
who is helping us look at the issues coming at us to try to be
prepared, so that has taken additional resources. We also don't
really have any one person in charge of compliance. Being a
small institution, with 21 employees, everybody has to wear a
compliance hat to serve our customers, and the more time and
effort that is expended on new regulations--we already have a
boatload--more regulations on top of what we have already takes
time away from our consumers and our customers and also our
ability to just be active in our communities.
Chairwoman Capito. On the issue of a commission as opposed
to an individual, to me, this just makes good common sense.
Obviously, we passed it in the House. When it was passed in the
House--and it was, as Mr. Sharp mentioned in his statement, it
was a change made towards the end of the completion of the
bill. And I think that we have seen now, with no statutory
person in place, no Presidential appointment at this point who
has to go through the confirmation procedure, I think it is
just problematic if we have no director; what are we going to
do, which is the point of one of my pieces of legislation. And
so I think we could solve this a lot easier if we would,
instead of having a singular person to head and have all the
power concentrated in that one person, if we spread it out over
a commission.
But my time is up, and I am going to ask the ranking member
if she would like to begin questioning.
Mrs. Maloney. I most certainly would. First of all, I would
like to thank the panelists for your thoughtful presentations.
And I would like to clarify for the record that the House-
passed bill started with the director and only became a
commission 2 years after the designated transfer date. The
House conferees rejected an amendment that would have
restructured the CFPB into a commission.
And I would like to place in the record the debate that was
very extensive around supporting the need for a strong consumer
protection regulator. Without objection, I will place that in
the record.
This is the model that we have now in government for
regulators. The Comptroller of the Currency, the head of the
Fed, the CFTC, OTC, all of them have a single regulator, not
commissions.
I would like to respond really to Ms. Smith's concern about
the shadow banking system, and that is what we pulled into the
CFPB to be reviewed. The commission would only lead to
gridlock, and, in my opinion, inaction that would only make it
more difficult to react to the regulatory disparity between
banks, credit unions, and the less regulated competitors. And I
agree, the regulated credit unions and the regulated banks did
not cause the problem. It was these unregulated areas.
And I would like to say that my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle say they want to reduce the size of
government, yet they want to change a single-director Bureau
into a five-member commission. President Obama is having
difficulty finding a director that he can get confirmed by the
Senate. One Senator can hold up a confirmation. If you had
five, you would have more difficulty in moving forward.
But my question, and I would like to begin with you, Mr.
Shelton, you stated that predatory lending was, in your
opinion, a civil rights issue. And it is believed by many that
the old system reacted too slowly during the subprime mortgage
boom, and that helped bring the economy to near collapse, which
is why the CFPB was included in the overall Dodd-Frank
financial reforms.
Too often, consumer concerns were not thought about as a
second thought, or a third thought, or they weren't thought
about at all. And it is believed by me and others that if we
had an agency such as the CFPB, they would have reacted more
quickly to the screams and cries for help that were coming in
from the communities across America.
So I would like to ask every member of the panel if you
think that the subprime mortgage boom that helped bring the
economy to near collapse, would the CFPB help to have prevented
that? The old system did not work, and we need to move forward
in a system that will prevent financial collapse in the future.
So first, Mr. Shelton, and then Mr. Sharp, and all the way
down to Ms. Andersen. Thank you.
Mr. Shelton. Thank you, Congresswoman. You are absolutely
correct. I am deeply concerned about a lot of the argument
being made here to withstall the implementation of the CFPB.
Quite frankly, the NAACP has done reports and testified before
this committee as well as the Senate Banking Committee on
numerous occasions. We have sat down with the heads of the
Comptroller of the Currency, the Fed, sat down with a number of
government agencies responsible for this particular oversight.
We did a report in 2007 to show you the slow movement of
the existing system and why it is the literal definition of
insanity to continue with the existing policy. Quite frankly,
we spoke in 2007--and I will leave the names of the very high-
ranking officials out of this so as not to embarrass them in
this particular case--we went to them and said we were
predicting in 2007 that African Americans who received subprime
loans in 2005 would go into foreclosure by the end of 2009. And
needless to say, we were underestimating the devastation that
was created by this lack of oversight and regulatory oversight
of our financial services programs. Indeed, more than 52
percent of subprime borrowers who were African American went
into foreclosure by the end of 2009. That is outrageous. We
need a process and a system that actually provides the kind of
protection that consumers need.
What we got at every step of the way is, when we asked them
what do you intend on doing, when we asked them to simply do
things like a moratorium on foreclosures, we were told that,
``We will allow the market to work it out. We have no plans
whatsoever, even though we see the concerns you are having are
2 years down the line.''
We need a nimble, effective process to provide that kind of
oversight and enforcement to protect the consumers first. If
you are protecting consumers, then we are not going to have the
kind of meltdown we are experiencing.
Mrs. Maloney. Madam Chairwoman, my time has expired, but I
would like to request that everyone place in writing their
response on whether or not the CFPB would have helped prevent
and protect consumers during the subprime crisis, comparing
that to what happened with the old system. Thank you very much,
and I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to say in terms
of growing government, I would remind the committee that the
CFPB will have over 1,000 employees. I would say that is a
large growth in government, some of them coming from existing
agencies, but many still remaining in their original agencies.
And the FDIC has recently announced that they are going to be
creating a new compliance division, there again growing
government further.
Mr. Royce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you. I think we have gotten it exactly
backwards. The bifurcated regulation that we have here with the
CFPB is exactly like the bifurcated regulation that we had with
respect to the GSEs. So if we had Congress coming in and
muscling the market and basically saying with the GSE Act that
you could overleverage, and here you had the safety and
soundness regulators, the prudential regulators who said no,
no, that is a mistake; 100 to one leverage. The goal is forcing
people to buy junk like Countrywide and holding that on the
books. You are going to do that just so that everybody can own
a house, whether they can make a payment or not? You are going
to put that kind of leverage into the system? You are going to
muscle those kind of goals to create a market for junk like
Countrywide out there?
That is the insanity. That is the insanity of duplicating
that kind of system and trumping the prudential regulator, yet
again, who wanted to regulate the GSEs for systemic risk. So
now here we have created, and I will ask this question of Mr.
Sharp, we have created a situation where we have made it
harder, even harder for the prudential regulator to have the
kind of say over safety and soundness they should have had. And
here what we have done under the FSOC, is they can only block
the CFPB regulations if two-thirds of its membership, which
includes the CFPB director, concludes that the regulation or
provision would put the safety and soundness of the United
States banking system or the stability of the financial system
of the United States at risk.
Mr. Sharp, do you think this standard is too broad and the
number of required votes needed to overturn too high to
effectively protect the financial system from onerous and
overreaching activism by the CFPB?
Mr. Sharp. Yes. The Chamber definitely believes the bar is
set too high. I think the critical point here is it seems like
Congress recognized that there was a potential for a problem
here. That is why this provision is in the bill. But the way it
was set up, it is a bar that it is not clear that any rule
could ever clear. Even if you have all 5 prudential regulators,
5 of the 10 members of the FSOC make a decision that a rule
could undermine safety and soundness, that is not enough. You
still have to convince everybody else. So if this is a safety
and soundness question, it seems like if you have unanimity
among the safety and soundness regulators, then that should
control.
Mr. Royce. And this is the aspect that concerns me, because
I have talked to all the prudential regulators and heard their
concerns, both during the markup of this bill and during the
conference on this legislation. Let me just ask you, how would
you improve upon this language, Mr. Sharp, if you might make
some suggestions?
Mr. Sharp. Sure. The language in the bill before us today?
Mr. Royce. Yes. How would you address this issue; in the
way Mr. Duffy addresses it with his bill, or how would you--
Mr. Sharp. Yes, I think the Duffy bill is a very good
solution. The only thing I would say, in addition to what is
before us here in the legislation, is the authority to review
and override CFPB actions, as I understand it, only applies to
regulations. We have heard from Professor Warren that her
inclination, at least at this point--and she is not obviously
the director--but at this point, speaking on behalf of the
Bureau, is not to regulate through regulations and to use
enforcement actions to sort of push for compliance.
Now, that is fine and that is one way of doing things, and
it wouldn't be the first time an agency did that. But if that
is the case, if that is the primary means of pushing for
compliance and for shaping the landscape, then those types of
actions should be, at least some of those actions, could be
broad and sweeping enough to have safety and soundness
implications, and it is probably a good idea for FSOC to have
the authority to review those as well.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Sharp.
I am going to ask Mr. Wilcox, in your testimony you express
support for Mr. Duffy's bill to strengthen the review of CFPB
rules, and you mentioned that the ICBA has proposed language to
take his bill a step further by allowing the FSOC to veto a
bill that would adversely impact a subset of the industry in a
disproportionate way. I would just ask you if you would want to
elaborate on your concerns there.
Mr. Wilcox is not on this panel, so I will ask that
question of Ms. Andersen.
Ms. Andersen. I cannot speak on behalf of the Independent
Community Bankers, so I am not quite sure how to answer your
question.
Mr. Royce. In that case, my time has almost expired, and I
will yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to recognize
Mrs. McCarthy for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you. Thank you very much
for having this hearing. And I find it very interesting. I keep
seeing every week the numbers in foreclosures. I keep seeing
the numbers of people losing their homes, many of them becoming
homeless. And I know then when we had all these hearings, going
back when we were working to see what we could do to protect
the consumers in the future, and here is something that we have
in place that hasn't really gone into place yet.
And I know there were concerns with the credit unions and
some of the banks, but we also know that Elizabeth Warren
stated in her testimony in March, and a few other times before
that, that the CFPB must consider the impact of proposed rules
on community banks and smaller credit unions, as well as
consult with Federal banking regulators, consider the written
objections raised during the consulting process.
We are forgetting why we are putting this together.
Everybody forgot about the consumer. And everybody can blame
everybody else, but nobody was there to protect the consumer.
No one.
So there are specific--and my question is to everybody.
There are specific requirements that the CFPB must adhere to in
carrying out their regulatory activities. Shouldn't Congress
allow the CFPB to become implemented before we start making
changes?
We have done this before. It is called technical changes as
we go down the road. Basically, almost every bill that passes
this House comes back for technical changes.
And then if there was a commission structure in place, what
would have happened if there wasn't agreement on how to respond
to a consumer threat or move forward on a proposed rule?
Wouldn't the consumer end up being disadvantaged from the
gridlock?
And that is what we were trying to prevent in the
beginning, gridlock. Because around here, everybody knows it,
Republican and Democrat, it takes forever to get something
done. And in the case of what happened for consumers across
this Nation, they are the ones who paid. They are the ones who
paid. They paid by losing their homes. They paid by losing
their jobs.
And what are we doing for them? In my opinion, we did
something for them, and we are doing nothing now.
Mr. Shelton, why don't you start?
Mr. Shelton. Thank you so much. And again, I am in full
agreement that to delay the implementation of these long-needed
protections of the American consumer is something that we have
to remember throughout this process.
The CFPB needs to have an opportunity to be fully
implemented to become fully operational. We need to move very
quickly. The NAACP sent a letter very recently to the President
asking for a nominee to serve as director of the CFPB. We think
that is extremely important. But slowing down this process
again brinks on the terms of insanity.
The revisionist history that we continue to hear, about why
it was so important to put this program in place in the
beginning, is something we must go back and look at. We
testified before and it stands today that we had people being
offered products they could not sustain.
The issue for us is twofold: one, the sustainability of
access to credit; and two, protecting consumers from the
predatory nature of some of these financial services
institutions. We need to move very quickly and decisively to
make sure both of those particular provisions are in place. We
see this as something that has been well debated, well
discussed, it has been legislated. The President has signed it
into law. Let us now implement this program and let the
American people enjoy the protections that the Bureau offers.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you. Anyone else? Ms.
Smith?
Ms. Smith. Thank you very much. We appreciate Elizabeth
Warren's statement, and would urge Congress to make sure the
concerns of small institutions like credit unions are taken
into account as the CFPB goes forward. Compliance burdens would
still be inevitable. Credit unions have a board regulator,
NCUA, and we are not the cause of the problem. So a board could
work.
And if I could just give you a personal testimony of what I
have experienced. When the predatory lenders were out there
doing 40-year mortgages, interest-only mortgages, my
examiners--before the regulation got out on NCUA in black and
white--were calling us on the phone and saying, ``Don't do it.
Don't do it.''
I just had another example last week, and it doesn't have
to do with lending. But NCUA is a source for our members to
complain. I had one member who complained about a $40
withdrawal from an ATM and she did not get the money. She wrote
the letter to NCUA and we--before I got the letter from NCUA, I
had already resolved it. But then I had to turn around and
respond back to NCUA. And this was in less than a week's time.
So I think NCUA does a good job at really keeping us on the
right track.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Let me just interject. I agree
with the credit unions and I also agree with our community
bankers. We tried to do whatever we could, many of us, as
during the regulation part, to protect them because we know
they did nothing wrong. But unfortunately, at times, everybody
is pulled in, and that is why we want to try to make sure that
we make it right for those who had nothing to do with the
economical failure.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Renacci for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I thank all of you for your testimony today. One thing I
heard consistent with all four of you was that you all support
sound and effective consumer protection. You said it in
different ways, but you all said that.
My question comes down--and I am going to ask all four of
you. The four pieces of legislation that we are talking about,
would any of you tell me how that weakens the ability for the
CFPB to have effective oversight on sound consumer protection?
Because you all talked about how the four pieces of legislation
were okay.
I want to know if there is anyone who could tell me how any
one of these four pieces of legislation weaken the ability. We
can start with--
Ms. Andersen. I don't think they do weaken consumer
protection. Consumers and small businesses are the lifeblood of
traditional banks. We take care of them. If we don't take care
of them, we don't survive. What these changes will do will
expand our ability to continue to take care of our customers.
A commission is far better than having one single person
have the authority over deciding what products I should be
delivering to my customers in Bennington, Nebraska. I have a
hard time believing that somebody in Washington, D.C., one
person, one single person, understands the needs of my
community.
Mr. Renacci. And again, I understand your--you guys have
all indicated your thoughts on how these help. I want to hear
if any of you can tell me where it has weakened any one of
these pieces of legislation.
Mr. Shelton. I would certainly argue that it slows the
process. One of the things we also experienced were products
that were being offered very quickly, and not being able to
respond quickly enough to be able to address the damages that
were created by many of the predatory lending packages we ended
up fighting.
If you end up, quite frankly, with the arguments to be made
that having a commissioner, an oversight along those lines, and
not allowing one person to actually provide the leadership in
this particular case, also understand there are checks and
balances for that one person that could very well slow the
necessary oversight and enforcement that this agency must be
responsible for.
Quite frankly, when you look at these pieces of
legislation, all I am seeing are things that will slow down the
process and not add value to the process of oversight and
protection.
Mr. Renacci. If it slows it down and it gets it right, we
are still in the right place, as long as it protects.
Mr. Shelton. If you can establish it somehow did it right;
but, quite frankly, what we have seen so far does not establish
that.
Mr. Renacci. Ms. Smith, when it comes to credit unions, and
I have had a number of credit unions come visit me in my
district, credit unions do provide services to low- and
moderate-income families and households, correct?
Ms. Smith. That is correct.
Mr. Renacci. Do you see a director--one of my concerns
about having one director who maybe doesn't like credit unions
or maybe doesn't like the way credit unions are going, that it
may affect the ability to service low- and moderate-income
families.
Ms. Smith. Absolutely. In answering your first question, we
do think that it would strengthen, so we are in favor of it.
But in answer to your second question--could you repeat it
again, please?
Mr. Renacci. I said if you had a director, one of the
problems with having a single director is they may say that
credit unions don't provide service. My biggest concern is that
credit unions do provide service to low- and moderate-income
families. The question was, if you saw a director who was
taking this agency in a direction that would hurt your credit
unions, would you be able to provide services to low- and
moderate-income families?
Ms. Smith. No. It would really put a damper on the services
that I could provide. So I am very concerned. I don't feel that
one person--I am in favor of five. I think you will have a
broader array. I think there would be some confusion, too, to
having an examination, a dual examination, so to speak. I think
there would be confusion at my board of directors level, staff
management. We wouldn't know who we really ultimately reported
to.
Mr. Renacci. And, Ms. Andersen, moving on, you had some
interesting comments in your testimony about some of the other
overreaching things that the States could provide. Could you go
into a little more detail on that? You talked about statutory
language prohibiting States from imposing additional consumer
protection.
I would just like to hear a little more about that.
Ms. Andersen. I think it is imperative that we have common
regulation. We can't have different regulation in one State
over another, because most all of us do business in more than
one State. I am located in Nebraska, relatively close to Iowa.
I have farmers that I do business with who own land in both
States. We have customers who have vacation homes in Florida,
and we need to have one common regulatory guide so we
understand the rules of the road clear across the country.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Miller for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you.
Critics of the OCC, including me, think that the OCC has
been the most captured of the regulators, the most permissive
of the regulators, and the OCC's permissiveness to the banks
that they regulated contributed greatly to the financial crisis
of a few years ago, just 2\1/2\ years ago. And a big part of
that was their assertion of preemption; that banks that were
subject to the OCC, regulated by the OCC, would not be subject
to State laws. And there are a lot of States who saw what was
going on right under their eyes. State legislators saw it,
tried to pass laws prohibiting it, and the OCC kept them from
applying their laws, particularly with respect to mortgages and
predatory subprime mortgages. The failure of States to be able
to act contributed greatly to the subprime crisis and the
financial crisis.
Mr. Sharp, should the OCC's assertion of preemption be
subject to review by the FSOC, and, if not, why not?
Mr. Sharp. I am not here to testify today about the OCC.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. It is obviously parallel. Why
not the same rule? If it affects the safety and soundness of
the system, why should that not be subject to review by the
FSOC?
Mr. Sharp. They are a safety and soundness regulator,
whereas the CFPB is not. That is why the concern is greater in
the CFPB context, because they exist outside safety and
soundness.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. How about just subject to the
APA, the notice and comment periods for assertions of
preemption? If CFPB is going to be subject to the APA, why
should OCC not be subject to the APA?
Mr. Sharp. I don't have a good answer for you, but I would
be happy to provide one in writing, if you prefer.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. The Dodd-Frank Act, the CFPB
statute as initially proposed by the Obama Administration,
would have required plain vanilla products be offered side-by-
side. There was an uproar in the financial sector. It was awful
to think that they would be required to sell something they
didn't want to sell, and the truth was the consumer advocates
didn't love it all that much either, so it got dropped fairly
quickly.
To make the point clear, Republicans offered an amendment
in committee, and Democrats accepted it, that said clearly the
CFPB would not have the authority to require any financial
institution to offer any given practice. They could not
require, they could only forbid. They could forbid practices
that were abusive to consumers or deceptive or unfair. They
could not require them to do something that was good for
consumers. And further, it is clear that the CFPB does not have
any authority to set interest rates, so you can price products
however you want to. If they are a greater risk, you can price
them accordingly.
Can you give me an example, Ms. Andersen, of a consumer
practice that you have to do, that you are afraid that the CFPB
might forbid as abusive or deceptive or unfair, that you have
to do to stay in business?
Ms. Andersen. To stay in business, I have to serve my
community, and in serving my community, I can develop products
for the consumers in my community that are helpful. One great
example of this is we have a large Burmese refugee community in
our area, and we worked with our regulator and developed a
product for them that allows them to buy homes. They couldn't
qualify--generally speaking, they can't qualify for a
traditional secondary market loan because they haven't lived in
the United States for 2 years, and don't have 2 years of tax
returns, so that kicks them out of traditional secondary market
lending.
We developed a program of financial education and a loan
program for them to purchase a house, they have downpayment
money, and move forward.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Leaving aside the
unlikelihood that the CFPB would forbid that, because it sounds
very wholesome, do you have to do that to stay in business?
Ms. Andersen. I have to serve my community to stay in
business, and I need to serve the needs of my community. And I
don't believe that one person in Washington can understand the
needs of my community and the services that I need to provide
for them.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. Sharp, can you give me an
example of a consumer practice that you are afraid the CFPB
might strike down as abusive and say you can't do that, but a
financial institution would have to do that to stay in
business?
Mr. Sharp. I can't give you an instance of a particular
product. Again, the uncertainty is what is so concerning. We
don't know what ``abusive'' means. We don't know if unfair,
deceptive, and abusive is sort of an escalation, if you can
fully disclose the characteristics of a product and still be
considered abusive. These are the things--it is a term without
much definition, more than was given in the statute, and we
don't know what it means, so--
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
Mr. McHenry for 5 minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Now, to Ms. Andersen and Ms. Smith, with the passage of
Dodd-Frank and with the CFPB, for instance, do these additional
regulatory burdens add to the cost of compliance?
Ms. Smith. If I could speak first, 2 years ago, because of
the unemployment rate, I was able to hire an attorney, a lawyer
who just got out of law school, and I started her off at a
salary of $40,000 and I had her do policies. But, lo and
behold, 2 years later, she is my compliance officer and it
takes up a lot of her time; she spends 90 percent of her time
just doing compliance for the credit union.
So what has happened now, and I could speak from the heart,
is I don't know how long I am going to keep her, because
compliance is becoming larger--compliance is becoming such a
big deal of importance to the credit union industry and to
financial institutions that I can't compete with the larger
credit unions in salary. So, yes, I do have financial costs
that I have had to incur.
In addition to that, because of the recent credit card
changes and the real estate changes, I have had to spend over
$10,000 in the last 2 years just to update forms to keep up.
Mr. McHenry. How large is your credit union?
Ms. Smith. $80 million.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Andersen?
Ms. Andersen. We have had significant increased costs. We
have had significant increased costs just over the past few
years of changes in regulations totally separate from Dodd-
Frank and from the CFPB. Those regulations aren't in place yet,
but we are getting ready for them. We see them coming. We know
that the costs are going to be there and be a lot more
expensive. We have to figure out a way to pay for them, and we
are a $60 million bank, much smaller.
Mr. McHenry. Do you think these regulations, to both of
you, do you think that these regulations will affect smaller
institutions at a greater, I guess, cost basis per dollar that
you have in your institution, as opposed to the large
institutions?
Ms. Smith. Yes, they will. When I came into the credit
union industry over 20 years ago, there were over 12,000 credit
unions. Now, there are roughly under 8,000. I think we will see
that number go down. I am really concerned about the credit
union industry and its survival, because we have always been
the lender of last resort. I can speak to that personally on
what I am doing at Washington Gas Light Federal Credit Union.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Andersen?
Ms. Andersen. Yes, I would agree completely. As I said, we
don't have one person in charge of compliance. We may be having
to move that way, hire yet an additional person, or take more
time away from my community, which I really don't want to do.
Mr. McHenry. How many employees do you have, Ms. Andersen?
Ms. Andersen. Twenty-two.
Mr. McHenry. So you are talking about adding a full-time
compliance person with what you see coming down the road?
Ms. Andersen. Yes.
Ms. Smith. I have 17, and that does include one compliance
person.
Mr. McHenry. Oh, Lord. So if I can just ask a general yes-
or-or-no question here--first Ms. Andersen and then you, Ms.
Smith--did these regulations increase access to credit and
reduce the cost of credit? Yes or no?
Ms. Andersen. No.
Ms. Smith. I would say no.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Sharp?
Mr. Sharp. I would agree. No.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Shelton?
Mr. Shelton. I would say yes.
Mr. McHenry. How so? We have two market participants who
say no and then--
Mr. Shelton. I am sorry, Congressman. What I am hearing is
an argument over having to comply with these regulations, with
having someone who is responsible for making sure the
regulations provide the protection the American people need.
And, quite frankly, what we saw under the lack of regulation
was the American people were left hanging.
Mr. McHenry. To reclaim my time, my time is about to
expire, this idea that there is a lack of regulation is
absolutely absurd. These financial institutions--Ms. Andersen,
did you lack regulations 5 years ago?
Ms. Andersen. No, sir.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Smith?
Ms. Smith. No, sir.
Mr. McHenry. Interesting. Because the argument here--if I
may finish--the argument here is that somehow there were no
regulations, right?
Ms. Andersen, so did you cause the crisis that we just
faced?
Ms. Andersen. No, sir, I did not.
Mr. McHenry. Wow, that is interesting. You are a regulated
entity. How many regulators do you have as a small financial
institution?
Ms. Andersen. I am regulated by the State of Nebraska and
the Federal Reserve.
Mr. McHenry. In addition to what you see coming down the
line in Washington, you will see further regulations. Okay.
Ms. Andersen. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. I certainly
appreciate your making the point that this drives up the cost
of lending and reduces access to credit. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Scott for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Scott. Yes, thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
Let me start with you, Ms. Andersen, and Ms. Smith. Can you
give me some examples of how the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau and its function will dry up access to credit? This is a
major concern that many of you in the financial services
industry have raised, that if we do this, it will dry up
credit. Could you tell us how?
Ms. Andersen. I believe that it will stifle innovation and
it will make banks concerned about how they are going to deal
with their consumers and go forward, and that it will dry up
credit.
Ms. Smith. I will have to put more resources into
compliance, and if you are 17 employees strong, lending could
suffer as a result of that.
Mr. Scott. But you would agree that there is some question
here of a fear of the unknown. There is an uncertainty here. We
do not know; is that a fair assumption? I think we really,
really need to, in order to wade through this in a fair way,
fair to the financial services industry, is to have concrete
examples, if you could give them, on how putting forward these
protection agents for consumer protection would dry up access
for credit to the very people we are trying to protect. I think
that is the real core of the issue.
Ms. Andersen. Speaking from experience, and, granted, we
don't know exactly what the new Bureau will do, but speaking
from experience, I can give you an example.
The Federal Reserve has recently issued new rules on
overdraft protection. Those rules require significant resources
from a bank the size of mine. We had an overdraft protection
program in place to serve our customers prior to the issuance
of those new rules. We have discontinued that program, so our
customers have suffered. But we have discontinued that program
because we are too small to absorb the costs involved with the
new rulemaking.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Ms. Andersen. And our customers now are paying overdraft
fees, because we are bouncing more checks, and they are paying
fees at the merchant because we bounced the check, and they are
having their names posted behind the checkout stand saying,
``Don't take a check from this person.'' So our customers are
suffering.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Yes, Ms. Smith?
Ms. Smith. I cannot say that there is not an unknown. Of
course there is an unknown. But the CFPB has said, ``credit
cards and mortgages,'' and they are two areas where my credit
union has had to dedicate significant resources in the past 2
years. And I guess my concern is, it is working. We have made
revisions to the mortgages and to the credit cards in the last
2 years. To have it redone does not help. In my opinion, it is
a waste of time.
Mr. Scott. We gnawed on this for quite a bit of time last
year when we were working on this bill. We went through this
entire process and this issue. I think it is one that we will
continue to move forward on, because that is the issue.
But I would like to get a word in, Mr. Shelton. I, too,
have some concerns about this commission, because as you know,
I represent Atlanta and Georgia, and we have had a series of
problems in terms of predatory lending. And I know my friend in
the banking community said she doesn't like to use the word
``abusive'' and would like to get that out. I can understand
that. But in fact, these were very abusive practices of
predatory lending, fleet finance, going all the way back to
that. So I share that.
My concern with the commission is that the very nature of
the reason we got so deep into this problem in the downturn of
the economy was what happened in the housing bubble falling was
we could not act to move to correct these situations quickly
enough.
My fear is that a commission would only detour that. It
would only add to the slowing down of the process. So I think
we still have to work on this issue here some more.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. I would like to recognize Mr. Pearce for
5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Andersen, in the previous questions, the question was:
Do you know of anything that would dry up credit to real
people? Now, I heard you talking about the Burmese. Don't they
qualify as ``real people?''
Ms. Andersen. I certainly think so.
Mr. Pearce. And wouldn't the rules dry up credit to those
real people?
Ms. Andersen. They absolutely would.
Mr. Pearce. Okay.
Ms. Smith, do you all charge a different amount, different
rates of interest to any of your consumers? Let us say you have
350 people who have 30-year mortgages for houses. And maybe you
don't lend money for houses, but let us say you did. Do you
have different interest rates for any of your customers?
Ms. Smith. No, we do not.
Mr. Pearce. So everybody gets one interest rate?
Ms. Smith. Everybody gets one interest rate on a mortgage
loan. We offer second mortgage loans.
Mr. Pearce. If they have not paid their bills in the past,
you are going to try to lean out and give them a little credit;
you don't add just a little bit?
Ms. Smith. If it is an unsecured or an automobile loan, it
is risk-rated.
Mr. Pearce. So some people pay a little bit higher?
Ms. Smith. Yes, they do.
Mr. Pearce. Now, Mr. Shelton, in your testimony when you
said you wanted the same access to credit, is this then what
you are saying; people are going to have different amounts of
mortgage payments, different amounts of interest rate? Does
that qualify in your books as the same access to credit?
Mr. Shelton. Certainly. As we are talking about interest
rates, we know that there are some aspects of the market that
are high risk. I understand the importance of the prime market,
quite frankly.
Mr. Pearce. But you basically don't disagree with the idea
that risk should be related; just that when they are picking
out people out of the community and targeting them with fast
talk and fancy products and stuff like that. But your objection
is not to a market which differentiates between people who are
bad risks? That is my question.
Mr. Shelton. Not bad risks, no, sir.
Mr. Pearce. You don't mind them paying more interest. That
is not in your objections, right?
Mr. Shelton. Certainly, risk assessments have to be made.
Risk assessments have to be balanced and fair.
Mr. Pearce. That is fine. What I would like to really
concentrate on was my friend from North Carolina began to
change the concept about what the CFPB is going to do, and that
is where the great alarm is.
You noticed that most people in the testimony, in the
hearing statements here, say that the idea of the CFPB is to
protect the American people, to protect the consumer. And yet
we suddenly eased the argument over: Do you have to do this to
stay in business?
Now, that is significantly different than protecting the
consumer. Yet, I think Mr. Miller is giving us a heads-up as to
where this thing is really going. Do you really need that to
stay in business? And if you can't answer it to the
affirmative, I think you are going to be disavowed from
creating those products that really do deal with your
communities, like Ms. Andersen suggested, that we have a very
unusual circumstance that is never going to come to the
attention of a Federal regulator. There are 50 States. There
are thousands and hundreds of thousands of communities, and the
chance of them looking at this one little deal are not great.
It is this we are going to only consider what you have to do to
stay in business, and you don't have to do that and we are not
going to approve it.
We see that every day in the Federal Government. They don't
give approvals that are required. Right now, we are killing
jobs off the coast of Florida, off the coast of Louisiana, by
not giving permits that are required. There is no law that
keeps them from doing it. We just didn't give those permits, so
about 100,000 people are now out of a job; 33 $5 billion
platforms are beginning to steam away at 4 knots per hour,
which means they have to really have a serious desire to move
to Africa and South America. Those were simply not allowing
them to proceed ahead.
So as we visualize this protection of our consumers, I will
tell you where the real access to credit is going to be denied,
that my friend Mr. Scott was asking about. What is going to
happen is that a product is not going to be approved because it
maybe can't differentiate between whether or not it is race-
based. The product is simply going to be disallowed and the
people who desperately need access to that credit are not going
to have it. I can see that circumstance arising.
Mr. Shelton, do you have a comment? Go ahead.
Mr. Shelton. I would just say that I think the real issue
here is whether or not these would be abusive products. I know
the term ``abusive'' becomes problematic. However, when you
look at some of the products that the Financial Protection
Bureau was set up to address in the first place, we are talking
about products like exploding ARMs. You are talking about
trying to prevent people being charged an interest rate under
another name at rates of 465 percent and higher. Indeed, we are
talking about an oversight to provide some protection of
American consumers from the kind of predatory nature of many of
these products that we are trying to prevent.
Mr. Pearce. I understand that. It is just that we do have
regulator agencies that were supposed to be doing that, but
they did not do it.
Mr. Shelton. But they didn't.
Mr. Pearce. This next regulatory agency won't--my time is
gone.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Carney for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I would like to pick up on this discussion about the effect
of putting together the Bureau here on your bank practices, and
in particular the testimony which you gave earlier that the
Dodd-Frank bill itself would impose new hurdles and difficult
conditions in the operation of your facilities. I would like to
know if you can be more specific about that.
I am not as concerned about one director or a five-person
board, all that kind of stuff, in setting up this regulatory
agency. I am more concerned about some of the testimony that
you gave about provisions that would--if you could be specific,
everybody agrees that there ought to be consumer protections,
it sounds like. At least that is what everybody prefaced their
remarks with. They were very concerned about some of the
predatory and abusive practices that we know occur in the
marketplace.
So there are two things that really caught my attention.
One was the specific reference to specific things in Dodd-Frank
that are new requirements that would impact your businesses;
and the second was gaps that exist for nonbank lenders.
If you could, either Ms. Smith or Ms. Andersen, just detail
those things for me, please?
Ms. Andersen. The legislation looks like we are going to
have about 252 new regulations; roughly, by estimates, 5,000
new pages of regulations to deal with. Again, I have 22
employees. That is a lot of pages of regulation for us to
understand, implement, and comply with.
Specifics, I can--I am happy to get you that answer later.
But I do have one specific thing.
Mr. Carney. If there are specifics beyond just the fear of
the unknown, which we have talked about, if there are some
specifics, I would like to know those. Some of the specifics
aren't known because there is still rulemaking going on.
Ms. Andersen. Requiring the registration at the SEC of
municipal advisers is one of those potential issues. I think
the final rules aren't written on that yet, but the way it
looks at the moment, anybody who has any contact with
municipalities, so it could be a teller. The town clerk comes
into my bank and has money to deposit and the teller says,
``You know, if you put it over in this account, you might earn
a little more interest than if you put it in this account,''
would qualify as a municipal adviser, and that person would
then be required to register with the SEC and be regulated by
the SEC.
Anybody who serves on those boards, if they are not elected
and they are providing advice, in small communities, the people
who provide financial advice to the schools and to the
foundations are very often the banker, and the banker would
have to then be registered with the SEC.
Mr. Carney. Anything else?
Ms. Andersen. That is the one that comes to mind right now.
I can get others for you. And the second part of your
question--
Mr. Carney. That doesn't sound very onerous. It just sounds
kind of ridiculous.
Ms. Andersen. It is onerous to have another regulator
involved. That means the SEC can then come into my bank and
regulate me. The annual fees to register are excessive. It is
just one more layer of regulation.
Mr. Carney. Thank you.
Ms. Smith. One regulation that comes to mind is the
interchange price fee cap. I think my credit union will
definitely be devastated by the loss of the revenue from the
Fed's proposed debit interchange fee rule. Although we fall
under the so-called exemptions, because we are a lot less than
$10 billion, I believe that forces as a result of this
provision will drive--
Mr. Carney. If I can cut you off, because we have been
running out of time, we have had a lengthy discussion about
interchange. There are lots of things going on there.
Ms. Smith. Okay. But we can submit more information to you
at a later date.
[The additional information referenced can be found on page
140 of the appendix.]
Mr. Carney. Mr. Shelton, is there anything else you would
like to add to the discussion about some of the concerns? I
appreciate the concerns that you have talked about and I share
those concerns. I am just wondering, the balance here that we
are trying to strike between appropriate regulation and
addressing the abusive practices, the predatory lending that
concerns you and your organization.
Mr. Shelton. Certainly, through the thorough investigation
done by this committee, by the full committee, by the Senate
Banking Committee, on the challenges and the problems of the
lack of regulation, prompt us to make sure that these new
regulations are put in place. Again, we are trying to avoid the
insanity issue here. We need to do things differently because
what we did before did not work. What we are seeing here are
things where it is clear it will improve the process and add to
the protection, and hopefully the access to capital where
American people did not receive very much.
Mr. Carney. Thank you. We are out of time.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Westmoreland for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Shelton, in your testimony you quoted a spring of 2000
article that suggested that--I believe it says you asked the
gentleman who wrote the article if credit scoring resulted in
higher rejection rates for certain racial and ethnic minorities
than for Whites, and his response was simply, ``yes.''
Are you saying that the credit bureaus are being unfair
because of race and ethnicities, or are you saying that banks
and credit unions have different scores for different
categories of people?
Mr. Shelton. No. Actually what I was referring to was the
companies that actually do this credit scoring process, the
FICOs and other organizations along those lines, had pretty
much what we call a ``black box.'' That black box is one that
takes into consideration certain issues and concerns about the
person who is applying for the credit and assigns a score
accordingly.
What we argued was that, however, there were some racial
and actually ethnic disparities in how they actually come to
those scorings, and they won't tell us exactly what that is. In
essence, you put it in the hands of so many Americans, a
process which is considered proprietary. They argue that they
don't have to tell us exactly how they come to the score
because that would otherwise affect their business. That is
what we were talking about.
Mr. Westmoreland. So you are not saying that Ms. Andersen
or Ms. Smith or any of those are taking somebody who has a 650
credit score and rejecting them based on their race or
ethnicity rather than the credit score?
Mr. Shelton. What we saw was a different standard being
applied for racial and ethnic minorities than for White
Americans. Quite frankly, those who were in the same income
class, at the same risk factors, those at the same level of
property and so forth, and the same level of education, were
actually being steered into subprime loans, if you were African
American or otherwise a person of color, than were actually
eligible for a prime loan. That is what we were talking about
at that point.
Mr. Westmoreland. With the same credit score?
Mr. Shelton. In some cases, with the same credit score as
well.
Mr. Westmoreland. Ms. Smith, is that true?
Ms. Smith. That is not. At my credit union, that is not
true.
Mr. Westmoreland. Ms. Andersen, is that true?
Ms. Andersen. No, that is not true at my bank either.
Mr. Shelton. I would be delighted to offer for the record a
copy of the report with a full analysis. I can't say their
particular small--
Mr. Westmoreland. I don't really want to see a 2000 report.
This is 2011.
Mr. Shelton. We will give you an updated copy.
Mr. Westmoreland. Do you think the CFPB is going to help
get everybody equal credit scores?
Mr. Shelton. It will help make sure that everyone is scored
fairly. And that is the issue here, making sure the same issues
are taken into consideration and preventing the kind of
misdirection of those who should have gotten a better interest
rate, fees, and so forth.
Mr. Westmoreland. Do you have some specifics of the
accusations that you are making against some of the credit
scoring folks?
Mr. Shelton. We do.
Mr. Westmoreland. I would like to see that, too.
Mr. Shelton. We will send it to you.
Mr. Westmoreland. The next thing you mention, in the next
paragraph actually, is you are talking about how even after the
Fair Housing Act, after the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, after
the Mortgage Disclosure Act, after the Community Reinvestment
Act, that racial and ethnic minorities are still treated
disproportionately in the world of financial services. So you
think the CFPB or Dodd-Frank is going to straighten that out?
Mr. Shelton. It is certainly our hope.
Mr. Westmoreland. Okay. Could you give me an example of
what it would take for them to do to straighten it out?
Mr. Shelton. It is clearly the increase of oversight. What
we experienced before, again, we were convinced the chief
regulatory agency--
Mr. Westmoreland. What type of oversight? Are they going to
be doing--because I know to get a certain loan now, you have to
do consumer financing, education, how to buy a house. So I want
a specific from you about how this is going to help.
Mr. Shelton. It should outlaw--
Mr. Westmoreland. Other than oversight.
Mr. Shelton. It should outlaw exploding ARMs. We knew that
there were Americans who were being sent into financial
packages they couldn't sustain. Anytime you have a product that
would give you a mortgage that you couldn't support in the
first place, but at the introductory rate, what we had was
people being given mortgages at 4 percent for the first 2
years, increasing that by 2 percent every year for the next 5
years, and then dropping the escrow so people couldn't afford
to sustain them.
Mr. Westmoreland. I was in the construction business, but
that was not because of somebody's ethnicity or anything else.
They made those stupid loans to a lot of people.
Mr. Shelton. Yes, they did; but for some reason, they
targeted--
Mr. Westmoreland. And that was due, a lot of it, to the
Community Reinvestment Act.
Mr. Shelton. I disagree with that.
Mr. Westmoreland. I appreciate all of you being here. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
the unanimous consent that I might participate.
I think that we should talk about legitimate concerns. I
believe that the interchange fee is a legitimate concern. I
think we have to do something about it. I think that
flexibility with products is a legitimate concern. We will have
to do something about it. I believe that personnel issues for
small lenders, this is a legitimate concern. We have to do
something about it.
But there are also other legitimate concerns that we have
to do something about--3/27s, 3 years of a teaser rate that you
qualify for, the adjusted rate that you do not qualify for, or
27 years of a rate that might move up or down--2/28s, the same
thing. A little bit more onerous. Yield spread premium. Qualify
for a prime rate, given a rate higher than the prime rate,
never told that you qualified for the prime rate. Pushed into
the subprime market. We need to do something about it. Teaser
rates that coincide with prepayment penalty. Legitimate issues.
We need to do something about them.
Naked shorts. I don't mean to sound X-rated, but for those
of you who understand these things, people playing the market
and not having the ability to cover.
Credit default swaps in an insidious way. There are some
ways to have credit default swaps that are meaningful. But when
you take it to the level of doing what we used to call
participating in the numbers racket, where a number runner--
many of you don't know about this. I am a little bit older than
most of you, but we used to have these guys come through the
neighborhood. They would sell something called numbers. And the
number runner, if he had a big hit on one number, meaning a lot
of people bought that number, he would go to a fellow bookie
and say, ``Listen, I have a big run on number 7 this week. I
will give you $10,000 and if number 7 hits, you split the loss
with me. If it doesn't hit, you keep the $10,000.'' They
literally found a way to legitimize that kind of behavior in an
insidious way.
We have to do something about it. So we have all of these
issues that are legitimate and we have to do something about
them. And because time is of the essence, I will ask but one
question, perhaps a follow-up, but one question.
Are any of you contending that we need to do away with the
CFPB, the Consumer Protection Financial Bureau? Are any of you
contending we need to end it?
Mr. Shelton, are you contending that we need to do away
with it?
Mr. Shelton. Absolutely not, sir.
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that he says ``no.''
Yes, sir?
Mr. Sharp. No, sir, we are not.
Mr. Green. Ma'am?
Ms. Smith. No, sir.
Ms. Andersen. No, sir.
Mr. Green. Since we are not going to end it, and I think
most people in this room agree--and, by the the way, I plan to
work with my friends on the other side. I think they will
attest to the fact that even though sometimes it is difficult
for them to do it, we still work together, we try as best as we
can. I plan to work with them. I plan to work with people who
are seated at the table and behind the table to try to get some
of these things resolved.
That is what this really is about: How can we mend it?
Because as was indicated by the ranking member, I believe, all
major legislation faces challenges. The only piece of major
legislation that we will ever pass that will not face a
challenge, that will be perfect, is the one that I will draft.
So now, given that I am not drafting all of this
legislation, it will all have to be mended. And that is the
challenge. We have to find a way to mend it, rather than end
it, so that all of these legitimate issues can be addressed.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you for the time. I yield back and
beg that I be excused because I am late for another meeting.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Sharp, in your testimony, your written testimony, you
talk about some discussion that Professor Warren had in some of
her documents and some of her writings with regards to her
opinion of a commission versus a board. And I think that is
what Chairman Bachus' bill is all about, is we are looking at
trying to go from a single person to a commission here.
In your discussion, you talk about about a 2007 article,
that Professor Warren believes that it probably clearly shows a
Consumer Product Safety Agency is a cost-effective way to set
up an agency. Another comment you made is in a 2008 Law Review
article, that she indicates that a major challenge in
establishing a Federal regulator, like what she is trying to do
or they are trying to do, is minimizing the risk of capture,
which means that only one person can have the total control
over a thing and capture all of what is going on.
Can you elaborate just a little bit on that, since that is
really the focus of what this committee should be talking about
today?
Mr. Sharp. Certainly. For more than 100 years, there has
been a strong preference for regulatory agencies, particularly
independent regulatory agencies; that there be bipartisan
representation; that there be multi-member leadership. In fact,
I am glad actually that Mr. Green asked the question, is
anybody on the panel here asking or proposing that the CFPB go
away; and the answer unanimously was no, it is important. Also,
there were a number of questions about what in particular are
we concerned about in the credit markets. Unfortunately, the
answer for the most part is, we don't know.
So what is the best way to prevent serious unintended
consequences down the road as this new agency begins to put out
regulations? In our view, the best way to mitigate that at the
top, early on here, before we begin to create problems, is to
establish a structure, a framework, a way of doing business at
this new agency that incorporates a diversity of views. Again,
it appears that Ms. Warren in previous positions has agreed
that structure is sound.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think that is important from the
standpoint that she, quite frankly, is probably the leading
candidate, and she agrees with what we are trying to do here
today, and I think that is an important point to make.
The second point I want to make is the the other day when
she was here, I asked her about the cost/benefit of the
regulations that are proposed by all the different groups, as
well as something her testimony was suggesting we should take a
look at, the cost/benefit of the regulations that she is
overseeing. I asked her the question, I said, ``Okay, give me
an example of when the cost is too much for a regulation.'' I
never got an answer.
We talked about cost quite a bit today with Ms. Andersen
and Ms. Smith, and I think it is important to know--can you
tell me right off the top of your head, or just a ballpark
figure, what the cost of compliance is and how much it has
increased in the last couple of years and what you anticipate
with this new bill--just the percentage of your income?
Ms. Smith. If I can go first, I do have a full-time
employee. So it probably is costing me about $80,000.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay, so 1 out of 17. So you are probably
looking at, what, a 6 percent increase; 6 percent of your cost
increase is a result of compliance, fair, roughly?
Ms. Smith. Approximately.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Probably similar to Ms. Andersen?
Ms. Andersen. Very similar. I would estimate we have about
1\1/2\ people committed to compliance.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think it is important to understand,
Congressman McHenry a while ago made a great point with regard
to small institutions like yourselves make it difficult when
you have to spread that much cost over all of your income and
all of the products you have, because you don't have quite the
portfolio that the large institutions do to spread those costs
out.
As a result, it makes it more difficult for you to be in
business. And I think it is important to understand that by
increasing these costs, it also increases the danger of--you
need to continue to be viable, especially when you have to look
at 5,000 new pages of regulations. You may have to hire an
attorney to actually go through and make sure that you are
complying with all of this.
I think this is where this leads to, is this game of
``gotcha'' with the examination forces. They come in with all
these new rules and regulations. And I think you, Ms. Andersen,
made the comment about the small banks being endangered, or I
think something like that with regard to these compliance
costs. I think that this is--this goes back again to answering
one of the other questions I think that somebody asked earlier
with regards to access to credit. I think part of this is not
only it hurts in several respects, number one, it is the fear
of compliance. Because if you are going to get fined by not
complying with something, I think you will hesitate to make
those loans and provide those services. I think just the cost
of compliance increases in general hurt, overall, the access to
credit.
I am out of time. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
At this time, I would like to excuse Ms. Andersen from the
panel. She has a flight, I believe, that she needs to catch. So
we have a couple more questioners we are going to go through,
but I wanted to thank you for your testimony. When you need to
leave, just go ahead and make your exit. But I wanted to be
sure and thank you.
Ms. Andersen. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Huizenga for 5 minutes for
questions?
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I actually don't
plan on taking that much time.
I had been in real estate and developing back a number of
years ago. My family is still involved in the construction
industry, what little there is in Michigan these days,
unfortunately. But one of the questions that I had was when I
was in real estate, I was taught people are not black, they are
not white, they are not red, they are not yellow; they are
green. And they are green because, can they afford things?
That really to me I think is the crux of this as we we are
talking about this. We are talking about whether people can
afford to purchase the homes that they have. We talk about what
has happened in the market. I have watched it very, very
closely, and no State has been hit harder than Michigan in
this.
Some of it may be generational. I am 42, and I think I am
on my fourth house now. Mom and Dad are in their second house
and they had half of their downpayment saved up when they
bought it. Natalie and I weren't quite that far along.
You are all smiling, you are all nodding your heads,
because I think it is a familiar story.
In so many ways, we have just sort of overextended
ourselves as we have been pursuing what we thought was the
American dream. It is the American dream to own your little
piece of America, and so often that is in a home.
We have seen that destroyed in many ways, because, whether
it is greed or what we thought was a necessity, I am very
concerned about that. I am concerned about those stories. And I
too want to hear those stories, whether we can point to
specific instances of people being pushed into products that
they should not have been. That is very concerning to me.
But I think we are at a watershed here. How do we make sure
that we get people products that they can use? Because I also
know that it used to not work very well, because there were so
many artificial limits on people's ability to go own a home. We
had thresholds that were very difficult to achieve in many
ways. So I think we have both a cultural as well as a
regulatory structural problem as we are trying to go forward on
that.
What I am curious about is whether you think the
structure--you all have said you believe that the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau is something that shouldn't go
away. Maybe the follow-up question to that is the structure,
because that is really what we are talking about here with Mr.
Duffy and others' proposals here. You believe that the
structure of that particular program or Bureau needs to be that
one person.
Now, we have had the leading contender, Mrs. Warren,
Professor Warren, here. According to news reports this morning,
coming out of Michigan, my former Governor, Governor Granholm,
is also being apparently looked at for that position. Having
worked with her for 6 years, she is a wonderful lady. Very
smart. I want to make sure that we have a Bureau on that,
whether it is her or whether it is Professor Warren or somebody
else.
But I am curious. Can you answer as to whether you believe
that somehow the structure of this would be impacted, whether
it be a three-person or a five-person board versus this one
particular person?
Ms. Andersen, I don't know if you would care to answer
that?
Ms. Andersen. I think that the structure, restructuring and
having a board or a commission, makes a lot more sense. You are
able to have a broader view, broader representation, especially
assuming that board consists of people who have safety and
soundness regulation experience as well as consumer advocacy
experience.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
Ms. Smith?
Ms. Smith. Yes, I agree. We do want to see a five-member
board in place. I don't feel that one person should run that
organization.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
Mr. Sharp?
Mr. Sharp. We definitely agree. A commission is superior to
just having a single director.
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Shelton, do you care to answer that?
Mr. Shelton. Yes, sir. What we see in this particular case
is this person actually has the authority to convene smaller
groups of advisors to address the concerns that are before
them. We see no problem with having one director in this
particular case with the authority to convene the kinds of
groups to help provide support for the initiatives the agency
is going to be responsible for implementing.
Mr. Huizenga. Do you believe it is superior having that one
person versus having a three-person commission?
Mr. Shelton. At this particular time, I think having one
person gives you that dexterity, that flexibility to move very
quickly. One of the things that has also been very clear to us
is that many of these products end up popping up almost like a
whack-a-mole, and we have to be prepared to knock them down as
quickly as we can. And having one person at the head means
there is one person being held accountable for the agency.
Chairwoman Capito. The time of the gentleman is up. I think
we are edging up towards a vote, so I want to make sure I get
the panel and all the questioning.
So, Mr. Duffy.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you. To kind of follow up on that, Mr.
Shelton, then would you say that with the FDIC, that should
also be just a one-person director; maybe the National Credit
Union Administration, that should also be a one-person
director? The SEC--one person--director?
Mr. Shelton. Those particular agencies, quite frankly, have
more than one person and have been ineffective.
Mr. Duffy. So you would advocate that we should have a one-
person director?
Mr. Shelton. I am advocating having someone who can
actually carry out the responsibilities of protecting the
American people.
Mr. Duffy. If we look outside of banking, we can look to
the Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission, both consumer protection agencies that use
commissions as well. Are they also ineffective?
Mr. Shelton. Let me just say that, very well, if you wanted
to address those agencies, we would be happy to come back and
and testify.
Mr. Duffy. But they are ineffective. So you think we should
restructure the government so these agencies have one director?
Mr. Shelton. We believe it would be a major improvement
over the system we have right now.
Mr. Duffy. Ms. Smith, was your credit union one of the
contributing factors to the financial crisis?
Ms. Smith. No, we were not.
Mr. Duffy. You heard a lot about predatory lending today.
Were you engaged in predatory lending?
Ms. Smith. No, I was not.
Mr. Duffy. I guess I was going to ask Ms. Andersen the same
question. I assume her answer would have been the same. But as
we have gone through these Dodd-Frank regulations, is it fair
to say that the regulations on your credit union have increased
dramatically?
Ms. Smith. Yes, they have.
Mr. Duffy. And with the new regulations that are going to
come from the CFPB, they will also continue to increase with
regulation, right?
Ms. Smith. Yes, they will.
Mr. Duffy. And you are not opposed to smart regulations in
banking, are you?
Ms. Smith. No, I am not. I just feel the unregulated should
be regulated.
Mr. Duffy. But overburdensome regulation increases costs,
doesn't it?
Ms. Smith. Correct.
Mr. Duffy. And if you look at economies of scale, it makes
it more difficult for a small bank or a credit union to compete
against the big banks, doesn't it?
Ms. Smith. Yes, it does.
Mr. Duffy. You don't have the economies of scale, right?
Ms. Smith. Right.
Mr. Duffy. And in the end it drives up costs for your
consumers, right? And you didn't have anything to do with the
financial crisis or anything to do with predatory lending?
Ms. Smith. No, sir.
Mr. Duffy. But your consumers are paying the price for it?
Ms. Smith. Yes, they are.
Mr. Duffy. In regard to what we are talking about with
regard to predatory lending, Mr. Shelton, I agree with you, it
is atrocious what happened in the marketplace. You and I are on
the same page with that and it has to be addressed, and you
will find no argument from me with regard to that.
I want to talk about how the CFPB has been set up, however.
I look at the review process. To have a situation where
basically the only way FSOC can review a rule from the CFPB is
if we have a systemic risk in the marketplace, in the financial
system. The burden is incredibly high, isn't it? Would you
agree with that?
Mr. Shelton. I am still not seeing a problem.
Mr. Duffy. So you are okay with that, an incredibly high
burden, where the only way to review it is with systemic risk
to the system.
Mr. Shelton. I would love to hear the argument as to why
that is problematic.
Mr. Duffy. I guess I would say, shouldn't we say at some
point if consumer protection is an affront to safety and
soundness, shouldn't we have the FSOC then review those
situations as well, even though it doesn't create a systemic
risk in the whole financial industry?
Mr. Shelton. Perhaps.
Mr. Duffy. Okay, good. We are on the same page then.
Mr. Shelton. Perhaps.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. And if you look at the review process, the
FSOC is a 10-person board. Ms. Warren or the director of the
CFPB is one of the ten. Do you think the director of the Bureau
should be one of the 10 who votes on the FSOC?
Mr. Shelton. I see no problem with that. The continuity, I
think, would be extremely important to any deliberations by
that body.
Mr. Duffy. Do you think they are going to be impartial? Do
you think the director is going to be impartial on that board?
Mr. Shelton. I think more importantly they will be
informed, and that is extremely important in a situation like
this.
Mr. Duffy. You can be informed without having a vote,
right? You can still present your case, but not be a voting
member, right?
Mr. Shelton. But even this body doesn't do an assessment of
how a government agency is performing its responsibilities
without bringing the heads of that agency before it. Quite
frankly, you want that intervention, you want that involvement
in making your deliberations.
Mr. Duffy. And you can do that without giving the director
a vote. And this is my concern.
Mr. Shelton. But it is only one out of how many?
Mr. Duffy. Ten.
Mr. Shelton. One out of ten.
Mr. Duffy. One out of ten. And we need a two-thirds
majority to pass it. And with that two-thirds majority, one of
the voting members is the director of the Bureau. So this is a
supermajority. Doesn't it make sense to say if--and we are all
on the same page, we want consumer protection.
Mr. Shelton. Yes, we do.
Mr. Duffy. And we also have a concern for safety and
soundness. And if there is an affront to safety and soundness,
why don't we go to FSOC, take the Bureau director out of play
of FSOC, and have a 5-4 majority to overrule the ruling from
the CFPB?
Mr. Shelton. That has been their overview, that has been
their responsibility, and, quite frankly, they haven't carried
it out.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Canseco for 5 minutes.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am sorry that
Ms. Andersen from the Bennington Bank is not here to answer
some questions that I have. But I think that I can start out by
saying that I feel that there is a strong impact that the CFPB
regulatory authority could have on banks' ability to assess and
to adjust credit risk on an ongoing basis, because badly
implemented consumer financial protection regulations could
hinder a bank's ability to maintain prudent credit underwriting
standards.
But with that said, Ms. Smith, in your industry do you feel
that is true with regards to maintaining your credit risk and
the balance on your credit?
Ms. Smith. Yes, I do.
Mr. Canseco. Mr. Sharp, in my district in San Antonio,
Texas, we have an enormous number of start-up companies,
whether it is biotech or tech or other technology firms, and a
lot of them as start-up companies find that their sources of
credit are sometimes a little bit diminished, so they go to
their own personal credit to obtain that primary financing. I
noticed that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has estimated that 47
percent of small business owners use personal and not business
lines of credit in order to grow their businesses and create
jobs.
Because the CFPB essentially extracts consumer protection
guidelines from other agencies and makes consumer protection
its primary objective, do you feel there is a risk that small
businesses and small business owners who are looking to create
jobs and to build their businesses will be viewed as
overextended consumers and be denied that credit?
Mr. Sharp. Yes, sir, we do have that concern. In fact, I
believe that figure is even a Small Business Administration
figure as well, not an internal Chamber number. I believe this
is the number that comes from the government.
But, yes, that is a very big concern of ours. It is not
just individual access to credit that could be harmed through
this process. Again, there is a very delicate balance that
needs to be struck. But, as you point out, so many small
businesses, particularly in their infancy, rely on consumer
products to get their businesses off the ground. And if
individual credit is harmed or constrained or limited, there is
a knock-on effect on the small business world, and that is a
concern for us.
Mr. Canseco. Do you feel there is a strong distinction to
be made between consumer protection and safety and soundness?
Mr. Sharp. Yes. You can't have one without the other, for
sure.
Mr. Canseco. Ms. Smith?
Ms. Smith. I do concur.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. All right, the gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank the panel for their testimony and
their response to questions. I appreciate your participation. I
want to dismiss the first panel.
I am going to ask the second panel to assemble. We are
going to run over and make our vote, but Mr. Renacci may come
back and assume the chair so we can go ahead and move the
testimony forward.
Thank you all very much.
[recess]
Mr. Renacci. [presiding] The hearing will resume. I would
like to introduce our second panel of witnesses.
First, we will hear from Mr. Noah Wilcox for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NOAH H. WILCOX, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, GRAND RAPIDS STATE BANK, ON BEHALF OF THE INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY BANKERS OF AMERICA (ICBA)

Mr. Wilcox. Thank you. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee, my name is Noah
Wilcox, and I am a fourth-generation banker. I am president and
CEO of Grand Rapids State Bank and a member of the executive
committee of the Independent Community Bankers of America.
Grand Rapids State Bank is a State-chartered bank with $236
million in assets, located in Grand Rapids, Minnesota. I am
pleased to represent community bankers and ICBA's nearly 5,000
members at this important hearing today.
Community bankers are deeply rooted in the communities they
serve. Because we cannot compete with megabanks on margins or
economies of scale, we focus instead on the individualized
needs of our customers. We practice relationship banking, not
one-off transactional banking. Our customers are our friends
and neighbors, and any given loan or other service is part of a
long-term relationship. Our reputations in our communities are
paramount and are a condition of our success.
Community bankers have an overriding incentive to treat
each customer well and earn their trust. The Dodd-Frank Act
exempts community banks with less than $10 million in assets
from primary examination by the CFPB. Because we will be
subject to CFPB rules and to examination on a sampling basis,
we have a keen interest in improving the structure and the
procedures of the Bureau and the quality of the rules that they
issue.
We support Chairman Bachus' recently introduced bill, H.R.
1121, which would restructure the CFPB so that it is governed
by a five-member commission rather than a single director.
Commission governance would allow for a variety of views and
expertise on issues before the Bureau, and thus build in a
system of checks and balances that a single director form of
governance simply cannot match. The commission model, which has
worked well for the FDIC, the SEC, and the FTC, would help
ensure that the actions of the CFPB are measured, nonpartisan,
and result in balanced high-quality rules and effective
consumer protection.
Consistent with our support for a commission structure,
ICBA supports efforts to strengthen prudential regulatory
review of CFPB rules, which is extremely limited under the
Dodd-Frank Act. ICBA supports Congressman Duffy's bill, H.R.
1315, which would change the voting requirement for an FSOC
veto from a two-thirds vote to a simple majority, excluding the
CFPB director.
The proposal would also change the standard to allow for a
veto of a rule that is inconsistent with the safe and sound
operations of the United States financial institutions. The
current rule standard puts at risk the safety and soundness of
the banking system or stability of the financial system as a
whole. This is nearly impossible to meet, and would let stand
rules that are extraordinarily harmful to banks and consumers.
While this change would improve CFPB rulemaking, ICBA has
proposed language that would further broaden the standard to
allow FSOC to veto a rule that could adversely impact a subset
of the industry in a disproportionate way. We believe this
standard would give prudential regulators a more meaningful
role in CFPB rule writing.
The CFPB's far-reaching impact over the financial sector,
consumers, and the economy should be matched by the highest
standard of accountability. Ultimately, accountability for the
actions of the CFPB resides with its director, appointed by the
President and confirmed by the Senate. This basic mechanism of
good governance would be undermined if the CFPB were to be
operative before its director is confirmed by the Senate. For
this reason, ICBA supports Chairwoman Capito's discussion draft
that would postpone transfer of functions to the CFPB until its
director is confirmed.
The final discussion draft on which I will comment would
prevent the CFPB from participating in the examination of large
banks on a sampling basis before the transfer of functions to
the CFPB. We appreciate your caution about CFPB exams. Though
this legislation would not affect community banks such as mine,
we agree that sampling exams are not an innocuous exercise, and
have requested relief from sampling exams of banks with less
than $10 billion in assets after the transfer of functions. The
so-called ``ride-along'' provision allows the CFPB, at their
discretion, to have input into every aspect of a small bank
exam. Eliminating this authority would allow the CFPB to focus
its resources on the examination of entities that pose a
greater risk to consumers.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. ICBA
is fully committed to developing effective and practical
consumer protection for our customers, for customers of our
competitors, and for the safety and soundness of the financial
system. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilcox can be found on page
130 of the appendix.]
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Wilcox.
Our next witness, Mr. Rod Staatz, president and chief
executive officer, SECU of Maryland, on behalf of the Credit
Union National Association, is recognized for the purpose of
making a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROD STAATZ, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
SECU OF MARYLAND, ON BEHALF OF THE CREDIT UNION NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION (CUNA)

Mr. Staatz. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I am Rod Staatz, president and CEO of SECU of Maryland, and a
member of CUNA's board of directors.
Credit unions are the best way for consumers to conduct
their financial services. However, credit unions are facing
tremendous regulatory burdens that will only get worse as Dodd-
Frank is implemented. Relieving credit unions' regulatory
burdens so that they are able to serve their members in a safe
and sound manner is our objective.
CUNA has consistently stated that consumers of financial
products, especially those provided by unregulated entities,
need greater protections. We believe that a consumer financial
protection agency could be an effective way to achieve that
protection, provided the agency does not impose unnecessary
regulatory burdens on credit unions and takes an active role in
improving disclosures for customers.
In order for such an agency to work, consumer protection
legislation must be consolidated and streamlined. It should not
add to the burdens of credit unions that have been regulated
for decades and performed very well.
The subcommittee has given consideration to several of our
concerns regarding Dodd-Frank, specifically, debit interchange
regulations. We appreciate the opportunity to testify today
regarding the structure of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau. We have had a number of conversations with the staff at
Treasury, which is working to establish the Bureau. We are
encouraged by the staff's outreach, and especially by the
establishment of the Office of Community Banks and Credit
Unions.
Still, credit unions remain concerned that regulatory
change could work to the detriment of our members. We have been
asked to present our views on H.R. 1121. This legislation would
replace the director with a five-person commission. If Congress
decides to pursue this legislation, we would encourage the size
of the commission be expanded to include appropriate industry
and regulator representation, including a seat specifically for
a person with experience related to credit unions. This would
enhance the quality of regulations promulgated by the Bureau by
ensuring that both the consumer and industry perspectives are
represented.
CUNA supports the intent of H.R. 1315 to achieve rules that
balance consumer protection with safety and soundness. More
specifically, we support the provision that would reduce, from
two-thirds to a majority, the threshold for the FSOC to take
action to set aside a Bureau rule.
H.R. 1315 also makes changes to the conditions under which
the council can stay or set-aside Bureau regulations. What is
missing from that statute is the ability of the financial
regulators to review Bureau regulation in the context of
overall regulatory burden. We could support legislation to
allow a rule to be set aside if the council determines it would
be unreasonably burdensome for financial institutions and that
burden to financial institutions outweighs the benefit to
consumers.
We have been asked to present our views on two discussion
drafts related to the Bureau's authorities prior to the
appointment of a director. We believe that much more important
than details of how and when the Bureau ramps up is how it will
function once fully operational. We believe the Bureau should
conduct its consumer protection mission in a manner that
minimizes regulatory burden on financial institutions. Credit
unions have not been the subject of widespread consumer
complaints, and credit unions have prudential regulators at the
State and Federal level that are in a position to enforce
consumer protection laws.
We ask that Congress permit and encourage the Bureau to
assign the examination of larger institutions which have not
had a history of consumer abuses to their prudential
regulators.
We would like to recommend improvements to other areas of
Title 10. We ask Congress to index the examination threshold
for inflation. Without indexing these thresholds, significant
erosion of the exemptions will occur in a relatively short
period of time.
We ask Congress to require the Bureau to report to Congress
annually on steps they have taken to reduce regulatory burden,
and hold a hearing to review the report and consider whether
further action is needed.
We also urge the subcommittee to work with the Bureau to
establish a meaningful exemption process for credit unions
under Section 1022.
Let me be clear. We are not advocating for the elimination
of consumer protection regulation. Rather, we seek a regulatory
approach in which consumer protection is maximized and
regulatory burden is minimized.
On behalf of America's credit unions and 93 million
members, thank you very much for the opportunity to testify.
And I am pleased to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Staatz can be found on page
119 of the appendix.]
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Mr. Staatz.
The next witness, Mr. Richard Hunt, president of the
Consumer Banker's Association, is recognized for the purpose of
making a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD HUNT, PRESIDENT, CONSUMER BANKERS
ASSOCIATION (CBA)

Mr. Hunt. Hi, and a very good afternoon. Chairwoman Capito,
Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. My
name is Richard Hunt, and I am serving as president of the
Consumer Bankers Association.
CBA is the national trade association for retail banking,
fulfilling the financial needs of American consumers and small
businesses. Retail banking is where the CFPB will now focus its
broad authorities. We have had a long history of supporting
improved consumer protection. It is no secret we opposed the
creation of the CFPB. We believe the benefits are outweighed by
the problems that arise in separating the agency from
prudential banking regulators.
Nevertheless, CBA is focused on helping our members prepare
for this new agency which will be their primary regulator, and
we have met on numerous occasions with those setting up the
Bureau.
We also acknowledge the Bureau will provide some benefits,
such as providing the first real opportunity to level the
playing field and have comprehensive Federal oversight of tens
of thousands of underregulated, nondepository financial
providers.
We also support the simplification of TILA and RESPA
disclosures. If there is a theme to our comments, it is
uncertainty. Uncertainty creates risk, limits innovation, and
does not promote competition, which, in the end, hurts
consumers and small businesses alike. This current transition
period, the absence of a confirmed director, and the power of
this new Bureau has created a time of great uncertainty for
retail banking.
Though the Bureau is required to coordinate with other
agencies to promote consistent regulatory treatment, this
concept is ill-defined. If another agency objects to a rule for
any reason, the Bureau is charged only with noting the
objection and its final issuance. In short, there is nothing in
Dodd-Frank requiring the director of the Bureau to defer to the
views of the prudential regulator, and there is virtually
nothing to stop rules from being enacted that might cause
serious harm to banks or even small businesses or consumers.
To minimize concern that a single powerful director might
adapt rules with harmful and unintended consequences, we would
support a commission-led model. A commission provides an
opportunity for alternative prospectives to be discussed and
has been effective at a number of Federal agencies, including
the Federal Reserve, the FTC, the FDIC, and the SEC.
I will point out, Madam Chairwoman, even the Consumer
Product Safety Commission, which was the model for the CFPB, is
headed by a commission. Now, some have said the Bureau is
checked by the veto authority of the Financial Stability
Oversight Council, FSOC. That is factually correct, but not
realistic.
There are two main concerns: first, the supermajority
needed to overturn a rule; and second, the threshold for making
such a decision. Currently, 7 out of the 10 FSOC members must
vote for a stay or a veto. Since one of the 10 members is the
actual director of the CFPB, which would certainly not vote
against itself, 7 of the remaining 9 would have to vote for a
stay in order to set aside a rule. That is nearly impossible.
Also, would it be prudent for the CFTC, who has no
expertise in consumer retail banking regulation, having to
decide rules regarding deposit products?
In all due respect, that would be like my telling someone
how to comb their hair, both out of their league.
As for the threshold, the so-called veto is really more of
a catastrophic insurance policy to protect only against a rule
that would threaten the safety and soundness of the U.S.
banking industry or the stability of a financial system as a
whole.
While it is good to also have a backstop against draconian
rules, it does not address routine safety and soundness risk
for a financial institution. It would only come into play in
the most extreme situations. This threshold should be broadened
to include a substantial impact on individual financial
institutions.
We also believe the authority to supervise large financial
institutions and to issue regulations should not be transferred
to the Bureau until a director has been confirmed by the
Senate.
In closing, yes, we support a commission-led CFPB, but in
the absence of any structural changes, and because the CFPB
will not have any authority to regulate nondepository
institutions until a director is in place, which, of course,
leaves us with the current unlevel and unfair playing field, we
would urge the appointment and confirmation of a director who
possesses a strong, comprehensive understanding of the banking
industry and the management skills needed to lead a $500
million-plus agency.
CBA will continue to work with Members of Congress and the
Bureau on these issues, and I look forward to answering any
questions you may have. Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hunt can be found on page 71
of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final witness is Professor Adam J. Levitin, Georgetown
University Law Center. And you are being recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ADAM J. LEVITIN, PROFESSOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY
LAW CENTER

Mr. Levitin. Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Adam Levitin. I am a
professor of law at Georgetown University. I am here today as
an expert on consumer finance and as a scholar whose work is
deeply concerned with the financial security of American
families.
The bills being considered at this hearing would appear to
be legislative tweaks to the structure of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. But let us not mistake what this
hearing is really about.
The issue presented by this hearing is whether Congress
cares more about increasing the profits of banks or protecting
the financial security of American families. Which is more
important? Banks or families? That is the question.
The new CFPB has not yet had a chance to get up and
running, yet already we are seeing attempts to strangle the new
agency in its crib. If you want to understand what this hearing
is about, look at who is here at this witness table. There are
three bankers and me. On the previous panel, there were three
bankers and Mr. Shelton from the NAACP. Ask yourself who here
likes the CFPB and who does not. The banks are opposed to the
CFPB and want to see it hobbled, if not eliminated.
But it is families, Main Street, and the real economy who
like the CFPB and want someone looking out for them, making
sure that banks don't run wild like they did in the run-up to
the financial crisis, because the other bank regulators, the
prudential regulators, failed us and we were stuck with the
bill.
Again, does the subcommittee care more about the interest
of banks or about American families? Now, I am aware that
members of the committee are concerned that the CFPB will
exercise its authority capriciously. This concern is misplaced.
Despite what you will hear from the banks in the Chamber,
the CFPB is more accountable than any other agency in the
Federal Government, period. No other Federal agency has as many
limitations on its powers as the CFPB. The CFPB is subject to
the Administrative Procedures Act, notice and comment
rulemaking, and hearing adjudication provisions. The CFPB's
actions are subject to judicial review. The CFPB is one of only
three Federal agencies that are subject to OIRA small business
flexibility review, which would cover some of the concerns of
small financial institutions.
The CFPB has numerous statutory limitations on its
rulemaking power and must make detailed findings if it wishes
to exercise the power to declare certain acts or practices
unfair, deceptive, or abusive. The CFPB is prohibited from
imposing usury caps or from regulating nonfinancial businesses.
The CFPB is the only Federal bank regulator subject to a
budgetary cap. Every other Federal bank regulator is not going
through appropriations and does not have a cap. The CFPB has a
cap.
Now, the banks in the Chamber may think that this cap is
too high because they will enable the CFPB to be too effective;
but I have never heard them complain about the lack of
budgetary controls on the Fed, on the OCC, on the OTS or the
FDIC. They only seem concerned about budgetary independence
when it involves an agency tasked with prioritizing American
families, not banks.
The CFPB is the only Federal bank regulator whose actions
are subject to a veto by the Financial Stability Oversight
Council, a veto that is frankly of dubious constitutionality.
Curiously, I have not heard any calls to subject the Fed or the
OCC to similar vetos. And perhaps most crucially, the CFPD is
subject to oversight by Congress. As this subcommittee's
actions have already shown, that is no small matter. No matter
how the banks spin it, there is no escaping the fact that no
other Federal regulator is subject to comparable oversight and
limitations on its action.
Now, turning to the bills at hand, Representative Bachus'
bill would replace the single CFPB director with a five-person
commission. Put differently, the Bachus bill proposes paying
five people to do one person's job, and then giving each of
those five a staff, and paying for office space for all of
them. This is classic big government bloat and waste. What is
more, by having five people doing one person's job,
accountability, which seems to be the overriding concern about
the CPFB, will be diminished and leadership will become less
effective. There is no reason to adopt a five-person
commission. If a single director is good enough for the OCC, it
is good enough for the CFPB.
Representative Duffy's bill would lower the threshold for
the Financial Stability Oversight Council to veto CFPB
rulemaking. It is frankly astonishing that anyone would propose
to strengthen the FCC or the FSOC's veto. The bank regulators
given the veto are the very ones who failed to ensure both bank
safety and soundness and consumer protection. In the private
sector, these regulators would be out of a job. They would not
be rewarded with a veto.
The Duffy bill would require a veto if the CPFB rulemaking
were inconsistent with bank safety and soundness. Now, bank
safety and soundness is a technical term. Let me explain it to
the committee. It means profitability. At its core, it is
nothing more than profitability, and it is axiomatic that a
bank can only be safe and sound if it is profitable.
But consumer protection is sometimes at loggerheads with
bank profits. The only reason to engage in predatory lending,
for example, is because it is profitable. Banks don't do it out
of spite. What this means is that any CFPB rulemaking that
affected bank profitability would be inconsistent with safety
and soundness and thus subject to a veto. Thus, under the Duffy
bill, the Credit Card Act of 2009 and Title 14 of Dodd-Frank,
which reforms the mortgage lending industry, could not be
implemented because they would both affect bank profitability
and be inconsistent with safety and soundness.
In conclusion, the bills before this committee today seek
to improve the CFPB by destroying it, by rendering it
ineffective and incapable of performing the mission which
Congress tasked it with: protecting American families by
ensuring they get the information necessary to make informed
decisions about their finances, and that financial products
help consumers rather than induce financial distress. I urge
you not to delay or diminish the CFPB's effectiveness.
[The prepared statement of Professor Levitin can be found
on page 79 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I want to thank all the witnesses, and I would like to
begin the questioning. I would like to pivot off of Professor
Levitin's initial--it kind of shocked me a little bit to say
that the choices here are between banks and families.
We heard Ms. Andersen in the first panel state
unequivocally that her customers, service to her customers is
the lifeblood of her institution, and she provides--and she
gave us I think some very good examples of targeted help. She
talked about the Burmese refugees and other folks that they
have been been able to target in their own community. So I
would dispute that the choice is between banks or families.
But I would like to give Mr. Wilcox a chance to weigh in on
that statement as a banker.
Mr. Wilcox. Sure. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito. I
appreciate that opportunity.
I would like to start by suggesting that there is a
difference between banks and community banks. My bank is a $236
million community bank and, as I noted in my opening testimony,
our success is dependent on the people that we take care of.
You will not find community banks around this country that have
taken advantage of the people that they see at the grocery
store, go to church with, and otherwise see around town. That
is simply not the case. Our success is dependent upon the
success of the people that we serve, and the vibrancy of the
community that we operate in. And so that stewardship of the
community is paramount to the success of community bankers from
coast to coast.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to ask Mr. Hunt
to respond. I will say this about you, Professor, you changed
my whole line of questioning when you made your statement.
I would like to ask, on this question, that profitability
equals safety and soundness, what does safety and soundness
mean to you?
Mr. Hunt. Making sure that the bank is healthy to provide
the needed financial services to their consumers. They are not
exclusive. You must have safety and soundness and you must have
consumer protection. We have never advocated less consumer
protection whatsoever. I am from Louisiana and we have a saying
in Louisiana, ``If Mama's not happy, nobody's happy.''
Chairwoman Capito. I like it.
Mr. Hunt. Thank you. If the customer is not happy, the bank
does not survive. Period. If we do not protect consumers
getting loans, then they are going to go to another bank. There
are 7,100 banks in the United States. It is pure competition
out there. We know they can virtually go across the street, so
it is imperative that we have an agency that is worried about
safety and soundness and consumer protection.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Staatz, do you have a comment on
that in terms of the credit union in terms of the profitability
equals safety and soundness or banks--I suppose that could be
slash, credit unions, if the choice is banks, credit unions or
families? Because credit unions are families. We know they are
members. If you would like to make a statement.
Mr. Staatz. Absolutely. We exist for those members. They
own us. We have to perform for them each and every day. At the
end of the day, there has to be a little profit to make sure
that we are safe and we are sound, but we examine for them. And
just like our banker friends here, you have to perform for
them. We are in the community and we are directly responsible
to them.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would like to also respond,
one of the bills is expanding--and I am on this bill--expanding
from one to five in a commission. And I think we have plenty of
testimony that shows that works for other government agencies,
and there are some instances where there is a singular director
at the top at the helm.
But to say that creating a commission contributes to
bloated waste, when this bill creates 1,000 people in a new
consumer financial protection agency--and as we are finding and
I would like to dig deeper on this, the way Professor Warren
has laid it out for us is that she has gone to all these
different agencies and said, okay, all the consumer protection
is now going to be under this same organization within the Fed;
but what we are finding is yes, there is another thousand
people there, some of them are coming from these agencies, but
the agencies are still keeping parts of their consumer
protection and consumer investigative parts within that agency,
duplicative government, and then the FDIC is going to create
their own oversight to make sure that Mr. Wilcox's bank is,
whatever rules and regulations the CFPB put forward, that they
can answer for that.
So I am not sure that the lines that were drawn,
supposedly, in this bill are going to exist if the behavior of
the regulators that are in place now--the consumer protection
is in place in different agencies now, are still existing
there, a new agency here, and then another new oversight within
the FDIC or at least someone watching over there. So with that,
I will let Mrs. Maloney begin her questioning.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank all of the panelists for
being here. Professor Levitin, some of my colleagues have
indicated their concern, if you heard the testimonies earlier,
that the CFPB will be an agency with unprecedented authority
and reach. And in your statement, you said that it has more
limitations on its power than any other Federal agency. So can
you expand on these limitations?
I listened to my colleagues all day long about how it has
unprecedented reach. Yet, you say there are more limitations.
Would you clarify for us, please?
Mr. Levitin. With pleasure. We can compare the CFPB both to
Federal agencies in general and to other bank regulators in
particular. We tend to structure bank regulators differently
than other agencies. One thing we do with other bank regulators
is we take their budgets and we take them out of the
appropriations process. And the reason we are concerned about
that is we don't want political influence over safety and
soundness issues. The thinking with the CFPB's budget was,
similarly, we don't want political influence over consumer
protection. It is too important to make it exposed to the
political process within the election cycle.
The CFPB, unlike any of the other Federal bank regulators,
has a cap on its budget. The OCC, if the OCC wants to increase
its budget, it just increases assessments that it charges on
banks. The OCC doesn't come to Congress for a budget.
Similarly, the Federal Reserve, if it wants to increase its
budget, just warms up the printing press. The CFPB, though, is
capped at a percentage of the Federal Reserve's operating
budget and has no ability to set what that operating budget is.
It sinks and swims with the Fed. And I think that is actually a
very good structure because it says that we are going to make
sure the consumer protection is at least going to be ``X''
percent of bank regulation.
Now, compared with other Federal regulatory agencies, the
CFPB is the only agency around where there is a veto over its
authority. Congress tried to structure a similar thing with the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, PCAOB, with giving
the SEC a veto. And within the last year actually the Supreme
Court said that the PCAOB structure was unconstitutional. That
was really not specifically on the veto but on some other
aspects of the structure, but it certainly raises questions
about the constitutionality of the veto.
There is no other agency that is subject to a veto. No one
can veto the OCC's actions. Actually, by statute, the Treasury
Secretary is forbidden from telling the OCC to take action or
not to take action. If you want to find the rogue regulator, it
is the OCC; it is not going to be the CFPB. And on top of this,
we have a whole range of regular safeguards on administrative
agencies. And a lot of the complaints I am hearing from the
committee are complaints about the administrative state in
general, not about the CFPB.
There are reasons to be uncomfortable about delegation of
authority to unelected officials. But we do this all the time.
And we have things like the Administrative Procedures Act,
which has notice and comment rulemaking provisions so that
everyone has a chance to be heard about rulemaking. And we have
a judicial review making sure that agencies do not exceed the
scope of their statutory authority.
We have these features and they apply to the CFPB just like
they apply to any other agency. So when you look at the sum
picture there, the CFPB really is subject to more restrictions
than any other Federal regulatory agency.
Mrs. Maloney. As you know, there are four bills under
consideration today and under debate. What do you believe the
aggregate effect of these proposals would be on the CFPB?
Mr. Levitin. If these bills were passed it would delay the
implementation of the CFPB and render the CFPB significantly
less effective and less accountable.
Mrs. Maloney. And Mr. Hunt, I was voting, so I didn't hear
his testimony, but I read it. And he, in his testimony, wrote
that the FSOC veto system, as designed under current law, a
veto would be nearly an impossible hurdle to meet. Do you
agree? Mr. Levitin?
Mr. Hunt. I do.
Mr. Levitin. The current FSOC veto standard is a high
threshold, without a doubt. But it is worth considering what
the alternative that is being proposed is. And then also the
further alternative being suggested I think, by--I can't
remember which of the community banking lobbies is proposing
it, but there is a further extension of it that is being
proposed.
The current threshold is undoubtedly a high threshold to
meet, and I think that is actually the right threshold; that we
want to make sure that there is not, that we are not seeing
regulations that cause systemic risk. But a threshold that
simply says ``safety'' and ``affect safety and soundness'' is
such a low threshold that pretty much every CFPB rulemaking
will be subject to challenge.
Let me give you an example. In August 2008, the Comptroller
of the Currency, John Dugan, wrote a letter to the Federal
Reserve objecting to certain proposed Federal Reserve
regulations that would have restricted credit card rate-
jacking, a topic that I know was of particular concern to you.
Among the complaints--
Chairwoman Capito. If you could kind of make it quick--
Mrs. Maloney. I request a few extra seconds so he may
complete his statement.
Mr. Levitin. Among the concerns that Comptroller Dugan
raised was that it would be inconsistent with safety and
soundness. A couple of months later, Congress went ahead and
passed the Credit Card Act of 2009 which took those Federal
Reserve regulations and raised them a notch. So basically, the
bank regulators are likely to call anything inconsistent with
safety and soundness to the extent that it negatively impacts
the profitability of banks by raising compliance costs, etc.
I think that the current threshold is probably the right
place, and we certainly should not think about extending it to
where, what the community bank is arguing because, given the
economies of scale in the banking industry, every regulation
has a disproportionate impact on small banks. That is the
nature of the business, to be big; and being big gives
advantages.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Professor Levitin, you actually did change my direction of
questioning, too. You talked about bank profitability and you
said--I think one of your comments was that is what this is all
about, bank profitability versus safety and soundness. Do you
believe that a bank losing money is better off going forward
and providing safety and soundness to its customers?
Mr. Levitin. I apologize if you misunderstood my comments.
What I said is bank safety and soundness means profitability;
therefore, that a bank that is not profitable is not safe and
sound. But a bank that is less profitable, but still
profitable, is safe and sound. If a bank is only earning $1
billion a year, not a billion and a half, it is still
profitable and it is still safe and sound. I think it is
important to make that distinction, that less profitable as
opposed to unprofitable. The exact level of the bank profits I
don't think should be a concern at all of the government as
long as banks are profitable. But the exact levels, they should
not be a concern for any of us. That is the marketplace.
Mr. Renacci. You do agree, though, that some of the Dodd-
Frank provisions will take away some of the profitability of
the banks?
Mr. Levitin. Without a doubt, to the extent that predatory
lending practices have been very profitable for banks, and
Dodd-Frank is going to curtail those, probably quite rightly.
And you know to that extent, yes, it affects safety and
soundness if you say that it is affecting profitability. But a
bank that is not able to lend on a fair and on a nondeceptive
basis shouldn't be in business.
And I don't think any of the banks here at this table are
doing that. And I want to emphasize that, that the issue really
here is not about community banks and credit unions. There are
some bad actors in both of those spaces, but generally they are
the salt of the Earth. The problem is the large banks, and we
don't have any of the large banks on the panel today. And it
worries me sometimes to see small banks toeing the line for the
large banks.
Mr. Renacci. That is interesting.
Mr. Wilcox, would you agree that some of these regulations
will reduce your profitability and also reduce your ability to
create jobs?
Mr. Wilcox. I would say without any question it will. It
has already. We are still feeling the fallout of the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act. This Dodd-Frank thing is just getting started
and we are seeing the first bits of that come out. And
certainly to the extent that there is an exemption in the
regulatory process, some of those things filter down and become
interpreted and are used in the regulatory process, certainly
will challenge earnings and very well could create an issue
with how do you continue to grow jobs and operate in a safe and
sound and profitable manner.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Staatz, wouldn't you agree that some of
this profitability that you are losing will be also a reduction
of potential jobs?
Mr. Staatz. Without question.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Hunt?
Mr. Hunt. Sure. Absolutely, it will. The cost of compliance
will go up. It will be a tremendous burden. We are already
heavily regulated to begin with. Going forward, if you don't
mind just going back to the veto question, the only way a veto
can be sustained is if it threatens the safety and soundness of
the banking system or the entire United States economy.
Now, who is going to determine that threshold? What will
determine the safety and soundness of a bank or the entire
financial economy going forward?
And I know I mentioned earlier in my testimony about the
CFTC, but also the SEC, the CFTC, and the Federal Housing
Agency has a seat at the table to determine retail banking.
They have nothing to do with retail banking, no expertise
whatsoever. That is why we would like to see 5 out of 9, not 7
out of 10 when it comes to a veto.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
Mr. Levitin, you said that you felt pretty strongly about a
single director. Does it make sense, then, to consolidate all
the Federal consumer financial protection powers at the Bureau
on the designated transfer date if there is no director?
Mr. Levitin. Actually, subtitle (f) of Title 11 of the
Dodd-Frank Act, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Act,
does say that if there is no director who has been appointed by
the President on the designated transfer date, the powers go to
the Treasury Secretary as director. So we would have a Treasury
Secretary who has been confirmed by the Senate, exercising the
powers, at least under subtitle (f).
Mr. Renacci. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. I would have to say that if
that does in fact happen, and the responsibilities go to the
Secretary of the Treasury, I would question, is that not
postponing, delaying, throwing the whole thing into a more
chaotic position? Which is why I believe we ought to, and part
of my discussion draft, this is something that concerned me
because of the length of time it takes to confirm anybody into
one of these positions.
Mr. Manzullo?
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Professor, since you have made the statement that none of
the people at the table, the credit unions and the community
bankers, are responsible for this meltdown and crisis we have
in banking, I would take it then that you would agree that they
should be exempt from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Mr. Levitin. No, quite to the contrary. First, I was making
a specific estimate about the members at this table. There are
bad eggs in the community banker space and the credit union
space. And we should also note that there have have a lot of
community banks and credit unions that failed. And that is
not--
Mr. Manzullo. I understand that. And I want to reclaim my
time because it wasn't until October 1, 2010, that the Federal
Reserve published its final rule that said--are you ready for
this, guys?--``If you make a mortgage application, you must
have written proof of your income.'' To me, that is just so
amazing, so elementary.
Mr. Staatz, Mr. Hunt, Mr. Wilcox, you have always had that
provision; isn't that correct? Whenever you made a loan on
anything?
Mr. Staatz. In practice, absolutely.
Mr. Manzullo. Absolutely. And so here we have the Fed,
which has jurisdiction over most of the banks, by the time you
figure out what they do, that had the authority all along, that
could have stopped this stupid blunder in real estate. They had
the authority to do that all along and they didn't do it. Why
should we trust yet another organization with 1,000 new
employees, untested, untried, in theory?
Mr. Levitin. Here is why. The CFPB has a single mission and
it will be judged on whether it succeeds in protecting
consumers. The Fed has multiple missions and they conflict.
Mr. Manzullo. But the CFPB would never be judged by the
people elected in this country, and those are the Members of
Congress. And I find your statement to be absolutely
astounding, especially in light of the fact that you were
Special Counsel on the TARP, where you said that you find it
offensive that this agency would be subjected to the
appropriation process and therefore politicized.
For goodness sakes, Article 1 of the Constitution gives the
power of the purse to the United States Congress. We are
directly elected by people who want to see oversight on behalf
of these agencies, and yet you make the statement that, thank
goodness we have the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau that
is immune from this process. I am just shocked at that. But I
want to go on.
Mr. Levitin. If you are shocked, I would note that
unfortunately there are--there is a vigorous lobbying process
which is present in this room.
Mr. Manzullo. Oh, come on. You know what? These are little
guys.
Mr. Levitin. There are big guys, too, who are not in the
room here.
Mr. Manzullo. I have been through a thousand real estate
transactions and I practiced law just before RESPA came in. And
I would charge sometimes $75 to $100 to close a real estate
transaction, and I could close it in 20 minutes. Along came
RESPA, and there are 7 full-time employees at HUD who continue
to work on RESPA and screw it up. And now you go there, and you
have disclosure like this--one agency on top of the other, and
all one had to do to stop the meltdown was to say, you can't
give a loan unless you have written proof of your earnings.
Government doesn't work in these situations. RESPA hasn't
helped one individual, it hasn't saved anything, because
ultimately all people want to know is, how much does it cost me
a month? And you are going to have more regulations, more
rules, and you don't look to the practitioners, people who have
been through this thing from little bitty houses all the way
through shopping centers, people who have worked in towns with
credit unions and community bankers like these little guys
here. And is there something wrong with the fact that they
belong to an association, that they have a lobby? They are not
entitled to be represented in Washington?
Mr. Levitin. No one has made that argument.
Mr. Manzullo. Sir, that is what you were saying.
Mr. Levitin. No, I beg your pardon, sir. That is not the
argument I am making. The argument that I am making is that the
democratic process does have, sometimes, influence by campaign
contributions, and that we may want to be concerned about
ensuring that consumer protection is insulated from financial
interests.
Mr. Manzullo. Sir, there isn't anything in this town that
is insulated from anything. And the people who try to insulate
themselves are the ones who isolate themselves and go beyond
the reach of what Americans want to do. This whole argument, if
I could finish--
Chairwoman Capito. You can finish.
Mr. Manzullo. Because I have been waiting a long time.
Chairwoman Capito. You have.
Mr. Manzullo. This whole argument that somehow the Consumer
Finance Protection Bureau is above and beyond, has this great
halo that is better than all these organizations, these people
here, seated to your right, on a daily basis, do several
things. The first thing they do is they always check to make
sure that the people with whom they have a financial
transaction can afford it. They don't need government to do
that. They sit down and look at income tax returns. They look
at what their earnings are and they give them advice on what to
do.
And somewhere out there you have some people who really
took advantage of the system, who allowed people to buy homes
when they couldn't make the first downpayment, people who were
allowed to--they even called them ``cheater loans'' where that
practice went on, and the Fed winked at it. They could have
stopped it. Where an existing government agency that was
insulated from politics, and that is the Fed, had the authority
to stop all of this, and they didn't do anything, and you
expect us to believe the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
is going to do anything better than what the Fed could have
done. That is not going to happen.
Mr. Levitin. I think in light of that, giving the Fed
partial veto authority over the CFPB makes absolutely no sense.
But I think it is important to note that the Fed, one of the
reasons the Fed failed to act was it had conflicting missions.
It was told to do safety and soundness and to do--
Mr. Manzullo. There was no conflicting mission. The mission
there was was to keep the government from collapsing. And they
failed, just as the CFPB will also fail.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Canseco, do you have questions?
Mr. Canseco. Yes, ma'am.
Mr. Hunt, in your testimony you noted that the requirement
for the Bureau to promote consistent regulatory treatment is
ill-defined. Could you explain why you feel this is ill-
defined?
Mr. Hunt. I think I was referring to the ``UDAAP''
provision, where they create the new ``A'' in ``UDAP,'' and
that is abusive. We don't know if abusive means when they
charge a checking account now at a bank, or if that means the
interchange fee. We think it is totally inconsistent.
And yes, I will admit to you a lot of it is fear, and that
is why we have all the little mouse prints that people have
said, mouse traps, trips, and everything else, because we have
fear of litigation and fear of being fined by our regulators.
We do everything we can to promote products that are beneficial
to the consumer, to the customer, but at the same time we have
one eye looking at our regulator and at civil lawsuits going
forward. So we have to make sure that the UDAAP provision is
used correctly, since it is a new addition to the entire Dodd-
Frank bill, an addition to unfair and deceptive.
Mr. Canseco. Are you concerned that your small banks and
other financial institutions will eventually find themselves
caught in a trap with one Federal agency trying to restrict
their profits on certain products and another agency telling
them to increase their capital base?
Mr. Hunt. Oh, absolutely. We have about three coming up
here real soon. That is going to take effect in a couple of
years. Quite frankly, sir, we are concerned about everything
these days. For instance, look at overdraft. You had the FDIC
come out with their guidelines. You had the Fed come out with
their guidelines. And what is to prohibit the CFPB from coming
out with their new guidelines as well? It is very important
that we have the ability to continue to give consistent
products to our customers without fear of retribution from the
regulators.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you. And Mr. Staatz, in your testimony
you advocate for replacing the CFPB director with a commission
larger than what has been proposed. You envisioned this
commission to have seats on the board that are designated for
industry representatives, including a seat specifically for an
individual with experience related to credit unions. Would you
mind elaborating on your suggestion and underlying concerns?
Mr. Staatz. First of all, as I said in the oral testimony
that I gave today as well, one of our bigger concerns is undue
burdensome regulation. Earlier today, I heard about all the
horrors that went on during the past few years. Obviously, we
as credit unions are not part of that. We are involved in it,
have to help clean it up, but weren't part of that. And I would
think that any of the structures that were talked about today,
under any of these structures we could move very quickly to ban
those sorts of products, those that were truly abusive.
But I guess our problem is, when does it move from abusive
into some bureaucrat's idea of what may or may not be right for
the consumer? And so we would like somebody with industry
experience to kind of buffer, when it starts to cross the line
from is it abusive to just somebody's idea of a better way of
doing business. And we think that is why somebody from the
industry should be part of oversight in that manner.
Mr. Canseco. What criteria from the industry would you
suggest that person or those individuals have? Should they be a
bank president? Should they be a small bank president? Should
they be credit union presidents? Should they be payday lender
presidents?
Mr. Staatz. To the latter, absolutely not payday lenders. I
would suggest that obviously from our viewpoint, we believe
that credit unions should be represented. Why? Because of who
we are and who we represent. As a matter of fact, maybe the
CFPB could learn a few more things by spending more time with
credit unions and figuring out how we serve members and maybe
that could be the model. But again, that sort of expertise
might help all of us.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, sir. I yield back, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman has yielded back. And that
concludes the testimony from this panel. I thank you for your
testimony and for your responses to our questions.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to those
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:34 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 6, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6862.082


