- CYBERSECURITY: THREATS TO THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY: THREATS
TO THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 14, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-60

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-601                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio, Vice         CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE BACA, California
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
September 14, 2011...........................................     1
Appendix:
September 14, 2011...........................................    53

WITNESSES
Thursday, September 14, 2011

Garcia, Greg, Partnership Executive for Cybersecurity and
Identity Management, Bank of America...........................    41
Nelson, William B., President and Chief Executive Officer, the
Financial Services Information Sharing & Analysis Center (FS-
ISAC)..........................................................    34
Rotenberg, Marc, Executive Director, the Electronic Privacy
Information Center (EPIC)......................................    45
Sartin, A. Bryan, Director, Investigative Response, Verizon......    36
Schaffer, Greg, Acting Deputy Under Secretary, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security..............................................    10
Shannon, Gregory E., Chief Scientist, Carnegie Mellon
University's Software Engineering Institute CERT Program.......    43
Smith, A.T., Assistant Director, United States Secret Service....     7
Snow, Gordon M., Assistant Director, Cyber Division, Federal
Bureau of Investigation........................................     8
Tillett, Brian, Chief Security Strategist, Public Sector Group,
Symantec.......................................................    38

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Garcia, Greg.................................................    54
Nelson, William B............................................    64
Rotenberg, Marc..............................................    88
Sartin, A. Bryan.............................................   101
Schaffer, Greg...............................................   111
Shannon, Gregory E...........................................   118
Smith, A.T...................................................   131
Snow, Gordon M...............................................   137
Tillett, Brian...............................................   149

CYBERSECURITY: THREATS
TO THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

----------

Thursday, September 14, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, Renacci, McHenry,
Pearce, Luetkemeyer, Duffy, Canseco, Grimm, Fincher; Maloney,
Watt, Baca, Scott, and Carney.
Ex officio present: Representative Bachus.
Also present: Representative Al Green of Texas.
Chairwoman Capito. This hearing will come to order.
This will be our first hearing in the Financial
Institutions Subcommittee since the August recess. I would like
to remind Members to try to abide by the 5-minute rule when
questioning witnesses so all Members will have sufficient time
to ask questions. I am sure we will have more Members coming in
as the hearing goes on.
Today's hearing will provide members of this subcommittee
the opportunity to better understand the challenges financial
institutions and their customers face from cyber threats. This
year alone, there have been numerous security breaches and
attacks on private companies, Federal agencies, and financial
institutions. Actually, I think I might include myself in one
of those; I think my card got caught up in one of these.
Reports estimate that more than $1 trillion is lost annually to
cyber attacks and that, on average, a security breach costs a
small business approximately $7 million.
These threats are especially acute and worrisome in the
financial services industry. In June of this year, Citigroup
reported that sensitive account information for 200,000
customers had been compromised by hackers. Statistics show that
most of these attacks originate in Eastern European countries
that were once part of the Soviet Union. Unfortunately, most of
these nations do not regard the actions of the hackers to be a
crime so it is very difficult to bring these criminals to
justice.
The technological advances that provide hackers with the
ability to carry out these attacks also make it very difficult
to track the actions of the hackers. In order to effectively
combat these hackers, it is critical for financial institutions
to share information with other institutions as well as Federal
law enforcement agencies.
The Administration and Congress are actively working
together on ways to better protect our Nation's businesses and
citizens from these attacks, and today's hearing is just one
component of this work.
I look forward to hearing from both witness panels this
morning. Their testimony and candid conversation will provide
Members with a better understanding of this very complex issue.
I am especially interested to hear from our witnesses about
the creation of the Office of Financial Research, as has been
called for by the Dodd-Frank Act. I have serious reservations
about the creation of this new bureaucracy, and I am most
concerned with the potential for new cyber threats surrounding
the information the Office of Financial Research would be
compiling. By compiling sensitive financial information into
one Federal agency, are we just making it easier for hackers to
attack us? Certainly, that is a question to ask today.
I would like to also say that I am disappointed that the
OCC was unable to provide a witness for us here. As the primary
supervisory body for many of our Nation's largest financial
institutions, their participation is very critical. I hope and
I am sure they recognize the role that they play in this
conversation and will become an active participant.
I would like to recognize the ranking minority member, the
gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney, for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
And welcome to our witnesses today.
This is an incredibly important issue and an incredibly
important challenge before our Nation. The security of our
financial system is so important, especially in this digital
age where consumers have unprecedented access to financial
information, online banking, and trading platforms. They need
to know that their personal information is protected and that
the systems they access are being protected from large-scale
hacking operations.
Like the chairwoman, I also have had my identity stolen, so
this is a challenge that we face in our personal lives, as do
many of our constituents. Not only is it a threat to our
financial institutions, where I understand roughly 22 percent
of the hacking is taking place in financial institutions, but
it is also our military complexes, our government--every area
that we have sensitive information and our intellectual
property. So it is critical in all of these areas to protect
our information.
I am very pleased that we have impressive panels of
witnesses today to discuss the threats to the financial
services sector. Threats are growing more real as cyber
terrorists become more sophisticated, but our response to these
threats has also evolved and grown. And I am hopeful that we
are better at it than they are and that we are better at
protecting our people than they are.
I will just say, spying has always been part of our lives
on this planet. Usually, people got into some costume and hid
their identity and came in and tried to gain information, but
now one just sits at a computer someplace and can access
information, and it is a huge threat to our institutions and to
our government.
I would like to hear today how we are cooperating with our
international allies who also face this challenge. Are we
sharing information? Are we working together? And are we
working together between the financial private sector and our
government? I know there is proprietary information in the
private sector; I know that there is classified information on
the government area. But we need to sit down and, in an
organized way, work to share this information so that we are
stronger in fighting and working together for cybersecurity.
There is one thing we know: Every entity that uses a
digital framework or platform is vulnerable. There is no such
thing as a completely secure network. And the cost to secure
these systems is extremely high, both in terms of protecting
against hacking incidents and combating them when they happen.
President Obama has stated that the cyber threat, ``is one
of the most serious economic and national security challenges
we face as a Nation'' and that America's economic prosperity in
the 21st Century will depend on cybersecurity. I would also say
that our national security depends on cybersecurity.
Just this month, the Department of Homeland Security issued
a bulletin warning that the hacking collective known as
``Anonymous'' was planning to target financial services
companies and their employees who are ``ideologically
dissatisfied and sympathetic'' to their cause, to give them
information and access. Although this group has not launched a
wide-scale attack, we know they are attempting to increase
their level of sophistication.
This hearing today is an informational one, as we attempt
to gather intelligence about the threats to cybersecurity, law
enforcement's response, and the impact a cyber attack could
have on the financial sector and consumers. But there are a
number of legislative proposals already before this Congress,
mainly before the Commerce Committee, and they are out there to
address the data security and cyber threats. And the
Administration has put forward a broad proposal aimed at
cybersecurity broadly, not just in the financial sector. The
goal is twofold: improve our resilience to cyber incidents; and
reduce the cyber threat.
In this hearing, I hope we can better educate ourselves
about specific threats in the financial sector and whether
there are things that can and should be done to specifically
protect financial institutions from cyber threats and to
protect the consumers who access financial institutions online.
I believe that in a deeply divided Congress, this is one area
where we can come together and work with great determination to
give the resources and come up with the answers to protect our
industries and our individuals.
Since it is the week after 9/11, I just want to share with
you that when we worked to create the 9/11 Commission that came
forward with the report that outlined 51 recommendations of how
to make this Nation safer, their number one recommendation was
the need to reform our intelligence system, that our best
defense against another terrorist attack was better
intelligence. And we have brought together our FBI, our CIA, 17
different intelligence agencies to work together under one
Director, sharing information down to the local level with New
York City and other cities where we have an anti-terrorism task
force. And I believe that this sharing of information is one of
the reasons that we were able to thwart 12 different attempts,
just in the case of New York, to hurt us since 9/11.
I hope we have that same type of sharing and coming
together between all of the agencies to combat this very, very
serious threat to our national security and to our economic
security and to our individual privacy. And I look forward to
working with the chairwoman and everyone else on both sides of
the aisle to make our country more effective, more secure, and
a leader in cybersecurity and protecting our information.
One of the things that we have in this country is the
talent of our individuals, our intellectual property. We have
to protect that. And I look forward to hearing from the public
sector and the private sector, whom I hope are working together
in sharing this information, on how you are moving forward to
help our great country.
I thank you for your work. I thank you for this hearing.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize the chairman of the full
Financial Services Committee, Mr. Bachus, for 3 minutes.
Chairman Bachus. I thank the chairwoman.
The Financial Services Committee is presented with many
important, complex issues and challenges: financial regulation;
the health of our economy; the Nation's housing policy; and
increasing exports, to name just a few. All of these affect us
daily. Another issue that is maybe not talked about as much is
cybersecurity, which affects each and every one of us and the
companies we deal with every day, whether we realize it or not.
And each of us is dependent on good cybersecurity. Chances
are that everyone in this room knows someone who has been the
victim of a hacker or has had their identity stolen or their
credit cards used for purposes they did not approve or even
know about. I have had that happen to me, personally. Because
of good cybersecurity by one of our banks, about 2 years ago I
was called and told that they had stopped my credit card
because they felt there were unauthorized purchases, and, in
fact, there were. So they were right on top of it.
The financial services industry, actually, has led the
Nation and has really been, I think, at the forefront of
developing ways to enhance cybersecurity, and that is because
they have been a huge target for cyber crime. The International
Monetary Fund and Citigroup, just this last month were targets
of sophisticated computer networks offshore trying to crack
their systems. Even the Central Intelligence Agency has been a
target, and the U.S. Senate recently. So it is just amazing.
At the same time that we are meeting this challenge,
government budget cuts have resulted in fewer resources being
available to not only our Federal but State and local law
enforcement agencies in combating cyber crime. One critical
thing is training personnel to deal with it.
And I want to close by commending one of our witnesses,
A.T. Smith, and the Secret Service. One of the most outstanding
resources that the Secret Service has developed is the National
Computer Forensic Institute. We actually had a hearing there in
June where we heard from State and local law enforcement
officers from all over the country, prosecutors and judges who
had been trained there, and as a result of their training,
successfully prosecuted cybersecurity cases. In fact, in two
recent very high-profile cases, people who were trained at that
center actually were forensic witnesses who helped convict
individuals.
So I want to say to you and the Secret Service, Director
Smith, thank you. Thank you very much for a job well done.
And I would commend anyone to visit that center. Sometimes,
we criticize the efforts of our government or the agencies, but
if you want to see a success story, that is one place to go.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to recognize Mr. Scott for 3 minutes for the
purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, distinguished chairwoman.
This is an important and very timely hearing. Just 3 days
ago, we all recognized the 10th anniversary of the September
11th terrorist attacks on the United States. And along with
remembering the victims of that day and the survivors of that
day, we have reflected upon what has truly changed and what has
continued to evolve so much over the last 10 years. In the past
10 years, in terms of national security and the ability to
predict future threats to our country, we have certainly
improved. We have been watchful; we have not let our guard
down.
This concern has become increasingly relevant as we become
more increasingly dependent upon digital devices and methods of
communications in general. And as our society becomes more
reliant on technology, security experts have brought to light
potential vulnerabilities in our technological infrastructure.
As many of you may know, the computer networks of our CIA have
been breached. The computer networks of the Department of
Defense have been breached. And even Federal Reserve Chairman
Ben Bernanke--his computers have been hacked and breached.
That is why this is so important. And it is so good to have
our key national security and intelligence experts here with us
today, and especially in the law enforcement area.
I think it is particularly important that we address about
two or three major questions that I certainly have a great
interest in. For example, do Federal law enforcement agencies
share information about cyber attacks that are experienced by
one financial company, or one company, to help other companies
to protect their networks? And how can information-sharing be
improved between government agencies responsible for
cybersecurity and the critical infrastructure of the financial
sector? And then, how does the Federal Government compare to
what the private sector is doing?
This must be a shared experience, and I am hopeful that
Congress will address these threats to cybersecurity
appropriately and effectively by means of legislation and that
we do it quickly. A number of proposals have been discussed
already, namely measures that would strengthen the law
enforcement of cyber crimes or provide the Department of
Homeland Security with some oversight of Federal IT and
critical infrastructure security. Whether such changes are made
piecemeal or as part of a comprehensive bill, we must address
these weaknesses in our digital infrastructure right away,
quickly, immediately, with all deliberate speed.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I would like to recognize Mr. Canseco for 1 minute for an
opening statement.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
holding this very important hearing.
As we will hear from our witnesses today, one of the
greatest continuing threats to our country are cyber criminals
who target our government, financial institutions, and private
American citizens. These attacks threaten both our national
security and the stability of our financial systems.
I represent a large portion of San Antonio, Texas, a city
which has earned the moniker of ``Cyber City, USA'' for the
numerous collaborative efforts that take place there between
industry, military, and academia to deter cyber crime.
While I applaud the efforts by those in San Antonio and
from agencies such as the Secret Service in preventing a number
of attacks, we must recognize this is an ongoing and evolving
threat that requires a great amount of vigilance to combat. And
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on this
important matter.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
And our final opening statement, Mr. Grimm from New York,
for 1 minute.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you for
calling a hearing on cyber crime and the threat it poses to our
financial system.
As a former FBI agent, I am well aware of the threat cyber
crime poses to individuals, institutions, and, most
importantly, our national security. It is estimated that each
year, cyber crime costs the United States $114 billion, with
$37 billion of that coming from identity theft alone. This is a
cost that is ultimately borne by every U.S. citizen in one form
or another.
While many people assume the threat from cyber crime is
financial, there has been a growing risk that hostile
governments can use emerging cyber warfare techniques to steal
vital secrets from the United States and weaken our position in
the world. Therefore, I am very interested in hearing what our
panelists see as the latest threats that are emerging in this
field and what we can do here in Congress to assist in staying
one step ahead of those who wish to harm both financial
institutions and our national security.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
That concludes our opening statements.
I would like to welcome the first panel for the purpose of
giving a 5-minute opening statement. We have your written
statements submitted for the record.
We will start with Mr. A.T. Smith, who is the Assistant
Director of the United States Secret Service.
Welcome, Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF A.T. SMITH, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, UNITED STATES
SECRET SERVICE

Mr. Smith. Thank you. And good morning, Chairwoman Capito
and Ranking Member Maloney as well as the distinguished members
of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
participate in this morning's hearing.
One of the significant challenges in analyzing threats that
cyber criminals pose to the financial sector lies in the
diversity of the online criminal community. For example,
criminals may choose to come together around a particular set
of Internet-based chat rooms or Web-based carding forums.
Diversity is also reflected in the group's interests and aims.
However, there is always one common goal among them: financial
gain.
Two of the hallmarks that distinguish effective online
criminal groups are organizational structure and access to
well-developed criminal infrastructure. One of the trends in
online criminality first began to merge approximately a decade
ago. In the early days, online forums were established by
hacking groups or by groups of carders. Today, many of these
forums have a strong representation of members from the Eastern
Europe theater, although membership in these groups often spans
the globe.
Some of these online forums developed into marketplaces for
criminal goods and services. By 2004, forums such as
DumpsMarket, CarderPortal, Shadowcrew, and CarderPlanet were
already well-developed criminal marketplaces. In reality, these
sites serve as a business platform for a fusion of criminal
communities which provide reliable criminal services to all
members.
In collaboration with Verizon on the ``2011 Data Breach
Investigations Report,'' the Secret Service has worked to
identify emerging threats, educate Internet users, and evaluate
new technologies that work to prevent and to mitigate attacks
against critical computer networks. The results show that two
noticeable trends in cyber crime involve the ongoing targeting
of point-of-sale terminals as well as the compromise of online
financial accounts, often through malware.
Compared to recent history, it appears that while more data
breaches occurred in 2010, the amount of compromised data
decreased due to the size of those compromised databases. This
change demonstrates the willingness of the criminal groups to
go after the smaller, easier targets. In light of recent
arrests and prosecutions following intrusions into the
financial services firms, criminals may now be weighing the
reward versus the risk.
There has been a noticeable increase in account takeovers
that result in fraudulent transfers from the victim's account
to an account under the control of the perpetrator. This
increase can be directly tied to the continued rise of malware
variants created to capture log-in credentials and financial
Web sites. The Secret Service and the financial services
community are working together to combat this growing trend.
The FS-ISAC has teamed up with the Secret Service, the
Department of the Treasury, the Department of Justice, and many
other agencies to create the Account Takeover Task Force, which
focuses on prevention, detection, and response to account
takeovers.
The Secret Service continues to combat these crimes by
adapting our investigative methodologies. Our success is due,
in part, to effective collaboration that we have established
with the private sector, the law enforcement community, and
academia, and our 31 electronic crimes task forces. To date,
the Secret Service has currently over 1,400 agents, trained in
various levels of computer forensics, serving throughout our
142 domestic and 24 international offices. In fact, we value
this training so highly that the basic level is now
incorporated into part of the curriculum for all new agents.
In partnership with DHS, the Secret Service has established
the National Computer Forensics Institute that Chairman Bachus
mentioned a moment ago, and with NPPD to provide a national
standard of training for a variety of electronic crimes
investigations.
In collaboration with S&T, the Secret Service, the CERT
Insider Threat Center, and the Department of the Treasury are
all working to update the ``Insider Threat Study.'' This study
was the first of its kind, combining both psychologists from
the Secret Service and technical experts from CERT to examine
insider cases both from a behavioral and a technical
perspective. The new study will focus solely on cases that
occurred in the banking and finance sector and will be released
later this year.
Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member Maloney, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, the Secret Service is committed to
our mission of safeguarding the Nation's financial
infrastructure and will continue to aggressively investigate
cyber and computer-related crimes to protect the American
consumer and our institutions from harm.
This concludes my prepared statement. Thank you again for
the opportunity to have the Secret Service at this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Director Smith can be
found on page 131 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Our second witness is Mr. Gordon Snow, Assistant Director,
Cyber Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GORDON M. SNOW, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, CYBER
DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

Mr. Snow. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. I am pleased to
appear before you today to discuss cyber threats against the
financial sector and how the FBI is working to protect
businesses and American consumers.
As you know, industries continue to adopt Internet-based
commerce systems while cyber criminals continue to advance
their organization, professionalism, and sophistication. Do-it-
yourself cyber crime toolkits have lowered entry barriers for
new cyber criminals, making it easy to exploit systems and
steal information to be used for financial gain.
Criminal activity is increasingly taking root in countries
with emerging broadband infrastructure, making it even more
difficult to determine attribution and prosecute the criminals.
Malicious code is more rampant than ever, and average computer
users continue to have difficulties installing the security
patches that would prevent and protect their systems.
For businesses and financial institutions, the implications
are significant. There is a critical need for a major change in
the way we think about cybersecurity and protecting our systems
against cyber crime. Cybersecurity can no longer be just an
afterthought. It must become part of the financial sector's
intelligence, planning, and commerce strategy.
The FBI is currently investigating over 400 reported cases
of corporate account takeovers in which cyber criminals have
initiated unauthorized, automated clearinghouse wire transfers
from the bank accounts of U.S. businesses. These cases involve
the attempted theft of over $255 million and have resulted in
the actual loss of approximately $85 million.
In 2010, the village of Summit, a town of 10,000 citizens
outside of Chicago, was the victim of a cyber intrusion
resulting in unauthorized ACH transfers totaling $100,000. When
an authorized individual logged in to the town's bank account,
the individual was redirected to a site alerting her the bank's
Web site was experiencing technical difficulties. During this
redirection, the criminal used the victim's valid credentials
to initiate transactions. The town was able to recover only
$30,000 from these transfers.
Cyber criminals are also targeting the networks of large
payment processors. In November 2008, a U.S. payment processor
discovered that hackers had breached the company's network and
compromised the personal data of over 1\1/2\ million customers.
Approximately 1 million Social Security numbers were also
exposed. The criminals used the stolen data to create
counterfeit debit cards and withdrew more than $9 million from
ATMs worldwide.
Securities and brokerage firms are also at risk of
exploitation. In February 2011, the parent company of NASDAQ
confirmed that they had been the victim of a security breach in
the ``Director's Desk'' Web application, a system that was not
directly linked to their trading platforms but was used by
senior executives and directors to share sensitive information.
Although our cyber adversaries' capabilities are at an all-
time high, combating this challenge is a top priority of the
FBI and the entire government. Thanks to Congress and the
Administration, we are devoting significant resources to this
threat. Our partnerships with industry, academia, and across
all of government have led to a dramatic improvement in our
ability to combat the threat. With cyber squads in each of our
56 field offices and more than 1,000 advanced cyber-trained FBI
agents, analysts, and forensic examiners, we have increased the
capabilities of our employees by selectively seeking candidates
with technical skills and continually updating our cyber
training.
The FBI is also adapting to the ever-evolving technology
used by cyber criminals. Intelligence drives operations in the
FBI, and the Bureau is working in creative ways with all our
partners to address the cybersecurity threat. We currently have
FBI agents embedded full-time in foreign police agencies to
assist with cyber investigations. These cyber personnel have
identified cyber organized crime groups targeting U.S.
interests and have supported other FBI efforts.
The FBI has worked with a number of regulatory agencies to
determine the scope of the financial cyber crime threat,
develop mitigation strategies, and provide public service
announcements where appropriate. The FBI partners with criminal
investigators from the United States Secret Service and other
law enforcement agencies, along with members of industry
government entities such as the National Electronic Payments
Association and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.
The FBI has been able to mitigate a number of fraud matters
by sharing identified threat data amongst financial-sector
partners. A good example of this cooperation is the FBI's
identification of a bank fraud trend in which U.S. banks were
unaware that they were being defrauded by businesses in another
country. As a result of the FBI intelligence analysis, a joint
FBI/Financial Services-Information Sharing and Analysis Center
document was drafted and sent to the FS-ISAC's membership,
alerting them of these crimes and providing recommendations on
how to protect themselves from falling victim to the same
scheme.
Another recent success was the combined efforts of the FBI
and the Department of Justice and industry subject matter
expects to take down the Coreflood botnet. This botnet infected
user computers and stole banking credentials and other
sensitive information. In this instance, government and private
industry worked together to provide an innovative response to a
cyber threat. Not only was the botnet shut down through a
temporary restraining order, the government was authorized to
respond to signals sent from infected computers in the United
States in order to stop the Coreflood software from running.
This prevented further harm to hundreds of thousands of
unsuspecting users of infected computers in the United States.
We at the FBI are faced with an enormous task fighting
cyber crime. We are gaining traction, but we need the full
support of every stakeholder. A successful fight against cyber
crime will require a combination of people, processes, and
technologies across multiple entities. We look forward to
working with the subcommittee and Congress as a whole to
determine a successful course and outcome.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Director Snow can be
found on page 137 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final witness on this panel is Mr. Greg Schaffer,
Acting Deputy Under Secretary, Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome, Mr. Schaffer.

STATEMENT OF GREG SCHAFFER, ACTING DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Vice Chairman Renacci and Ranking Member Maloney, for having me
here to testify about DHS's efforts to reduce risk from
cybersecurity issues to the banking and finance sector.
It is really quite hard to identify a security issue today
that is more pressing than cybersecurity. Indeed, this is an
area that raises issues of national security, homeland
security, and economic security for our country.
The reality is that we are increasingly under attack in a
dangerous cyber environment. The attacks are more targeted,
more sophisticated, and more serious than they have been in the
past. Our adversaries are stealing sensitive information, both
from government and from industry, and they are taking away our
comparative economic advantage as they do so, as well as
jeopardizing individual privacy.
More disturbing, as more and more of our infrastructure is
attached to these networks, we know that our adversaries are
capable of targeting and impacting the elements of critical
infrastructure that underpin our financial systems and other
critical infrastructure. Major financial institutions and those
resources that they depend on, like communications and the
electric grid, are all subject to attack. And, indeed, this is
not conjecture. This is happening on a daily basis, with
hackers probing and attempting to impact critical
infrastructure entities. Moreover, because our financial
institutions are critical to our Nation's economic security and
handle large sums of money, they are, needless to say, targeted
for many of these attacks.
In response to these growing and persistent issues, the
Department of Homeland Security, along with our Federal
partners, are working collaboratively with the financial
institutions to assist in defending and securing our Nation's
most essential networks. This public-private partnership is
extremely important to our success in protecting our
infrastructure. No single technology, no single entity in
government or in industry can solve this problem alone. This is
truly a shared responsibility.
The National Protection and Programs Directorate, or NPPD,
within DHS has several cybersecurity roles. First, we protect
the Federal Executive Branch civilian networks, or the dot-gov
space. Second, in partnership with our private-sector partners
and others within government, we lead the protection of
critical infrastructure, working with industry to provide
technical expertise, to broaden risk-assessment capability, to
develop mitigation strategies, incident response capabilities,
and generally reduce risk. We are responsible for coordinating
national incident response capabilities, working with law
enforcement agencies, the intelligence community, the defense
community, and Homeland Security resources across the Nation.
And, generally, we are tasked with raising awareness of
cybersecurity issues across-the-board.
Financial sector initiatives that we are working today are
diverse and many. Our relationship with critical infrastructure
stakeholders has matured over the course of the last several
years, so we are not just thinking about information-sharing
for the purpose of information-sharing, but operational risk
reduction through information that is really actionable by
those entities that receive it.
For example, we are now working with the private sector,
literally living on the watch floor at the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center. The
financial services sector, as well as other sectors, are
placing resources on the watch floor so that we are breathing
the same air and learning about incidents as they happen and
able to respond to them together as a team. The financial
sector's presence really enhances the analysis, warning, and
response capabilities associated with critical information
systems.
We are also working with the financial services
information-sharing pilot, the FS-ISAC, the Financial Services
Information Sharing & Analysis Center, to share information
between DOD, DHS, and the financial services sector. Government
has provided over 2,800 informational products to the financial
services sector and received over 394 submissions over the
course of the pilot. And, indeed, that pilot has shown us, and
we have learned, that both government and industry have
information of value to each other that we would not have if we
were not working in collaboration. Based on the success of the
pilot thus far, we plan to extend this to several other
industry sectors over the course of the coming year.
We have a resiliency review pilot ongoing, as well. We are
working in two phases to work with the sector in order to do
assessments of their cybersecurity resiliency as well as
looking for malicious actors on their networks. We provide a
range of technical assistance to actors when they request it.
And, indeed, over the course of the last year, we have provided
assistance to several institutions in the financial sector.
I thank you again for the opportunity to provide you with
testimony this morning and stand ready to answer your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Acting Deputy Under Secretary
Schaffer can be found on page 111 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you. Thank you all.
And I will begin the questioning with a question of Mr.
Snow.
You mentioned ``botnet.'' Can you explain that to me and
what that means for an individual computer user? Because that
is where somebody can use my computer to go in and compromise
other people's financial data; am I understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Snow. Correct. And the simplistic way to look at it is,
it is a network of computers run by a malicious actor that acts
autonomously. So your computer could be under the control of
another individual to run this bot. The bot herder would be the
name of the individual. He would run this bot that could be a
series of a million, 2 million computers that are controlled by
command-and-control servers, one or many, depending on the size
of the network.
And those computers would work on their own. For instance,
in the Coreflood botnet, as soon as you open a browsing window
or added in personally identifiable information, the key-logger
would grab that information. And then, periodically, the way
the malware was set up is it would send it to the command-and-
control server under the control of the criminal actor, who
would use that information for whatever purpose they deemed
appropriate--selling it online, using it to profit, and other
things.
Chairwoman Capito. So when we, as individual computer
users, log on and we think we have security-ware on our
computer, that may be a myth for some--for most of us,
probably?
Mr. Snow. It may not be a myth if you are paying a
subscription. You may actually have your security antivirus
there. The myth portion of it is just that it may not have the
signature or be able to identify that bot.
For instance, in the Coreflood botnet, it was almost every
48 hours or 72 hours, there was an update sent to the botnet so
that the antivirus signature would be behind the power curve.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay.
So that was kind of one of my impressions, just listening
to all three of you, is that it is so difficult to stay one
step ahead. Because as soon as you change your technique to
discover, then they change their technique to be undiscovered.
And, obviously, they are very bright computer folks, with bad
intentions at the same time.
Mr. Snow. Correct. And the point that you brought up about
the individual is very salient. The individual, even if they
are trying to practice good hygiene on the computer, trying to
update their software, trying to look for indications that
there may be a problem, may never see that. And, in addition,
that malware may disable their antivirus.
Chairwoman Capito. Let me ask you about--and this is for
anybody--mobile payments. We are learning that we are going to
be going--and, actually, I saw this at the airport the other
day, where, instead of having a physical boarding pass, they
used their mobile phone as the boarding pass.
Do you see this as another chance to weaken the security
system? Is it going to be harder to control mobile payments,
and is that going to open up a whole new world?
Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Clearly, I am not an expert on that, but what I
have learned is that, as you said, as the technology moves
forward, that is going to become more in vogue, probably, to be
used.
It probably has some negatives. One of the positives might
be that if you are using your mobile phone to make an online
payment or withdraw from an ATM, the GPS mechanism may actually
be able to detect, if you are making that withdrawal in
Washington, D.C., that you are, in fact, there, as opposed to
trying to make a withdrawal from Paris, France, if you will.
So I think there are probably a lot more technical
advantages to it than disadvantages, but, as you said, there
will be people out there who will continue to try to breach it
in one way or the other.
Chairwoman Capito. Would anybody else like to comment on
that?
Mr. Schaffer?
Mr. Schaffer. Madam Chairwoman, I would simply add that, as
we see new technologies come to the fore, the most important
thing is that we focus on the security aspects before those go
into wide usage. In other words, there are risks associated
with all new technologies. If they are implemented in a secure
way, they can be made secure and made to function in a way that
serves the purpose of the institutions that are bringing them
to the fore.
But if we don't focus on that in advance, if we are not
paying attention, the more complex the technology, the more
opportunities there are for some of these malicious actors to
take advantage of them. And so it is critically important that
we don't try to bolt security on afterwards when we find out
there is a problem, that we think about it as we go to market.
Chairwoman Capito. Right. Right.
One of the questions in my mind as I read through your
testimony--there are a lot of commissions. And you mentioned,
Mr. Schaffer, in your testimony, collaboration with the private
sector. Obviously, the FBI and the Secret Service are
collaborating.
This is a judgment question on your part. I don't know if
this is something you want to get into, but are you satisfied
with the information-sharing that is going across different
agencies? How can we improve that?
And, obviously, this is an international forum. Does that
present challenges to certain agencies? You mentioned that the
Secret Service has international offices, but I didn't know
jurisdictionally if that is a problem.
Mr. Schaffer. Ma'am, I would say that we are in a better
place today in terms of information-sharing than we have been
in the 15 to 17 years I have been in this space, both in
government, where we have broad collaboration and methodologies
that are laid down in things like the National Cyber Incident
Response Plan that help us to coordinate our activity as these
events occur, and in the private sector, the opportunities for
people to literally be on the watch floors with us and then
have that information shared.
Do we need more information-sharing? I wouldn't say--I
would suspect that all of us would say we always need to have
this information flowing as aggressively as possible, and there
is more that can be done. But we have certainly made a lot of
progress.
Mr. Snow. I agree wholeheartedly with Mr. Schaffer. But I
would state that one of the things that I think we are missing
here is the timeliness with which the information is shared. We
have to go from manual speed to network speed.
If we are talking about a JTTF information exchange, for
instance, we have might have a person or individual; we notify
those people, and we work that case. In this instance, this
threat comes at us in nanoseconds. It keeps on moving. If I
wait until the time that I see A.T. or Pablo Martinez or Jeff
Irvine to exchange that information, we have probably already
lost the battle. We need to be able to figure out how we can do
that in realtime.
Chairwoman Capito. All right. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney?
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you for your testimony.
And since this is our first meeting since 9/11, and we
rarely have the Secret Service, the FBI, and Homeland Security
before us, I would like to collectively congratulate you and
thank you, on behalf of my constituents and New York City and
probably the whole country for your excellent work in locating
Osama bin Laden. Thank you.
On this we all agree, that cybersecurity is a threat to our
economic security. So I would just like to ask you
collectively, what keeps you up nights? What are you most
concerned about? What do you feel we really have to do to be
prepared?
And this is a Financial Services Committee hearing, but are
the attacks different for financial institutions or, say,
domestic military contractors and the government or the Stock
Exchange? Is there something that is unique about financial
institutions?
Also, are you collecting where it is coming from? Is it
primarily foreign countries, such as Russia, possibly China,
India? Where is it coming from? Is it government-sponsored in
other countries or is the threat from other competitors against
financial institutions or just plain American criminals trying
to steal identities?
I was struck with your testimony, Mr. Smith, so I wanted to
particularly respond to your statement that there are
increasing levels of collaboration among cyber criminals,
particularly in the online space. What steps are we taking,
collectively, to work with our international law enforcement
against these sort of collaborative international efforts to
hack into the information systems of America?
Again, thank you for your work. And what can Congress do to
help you? That is it.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, ma'am.
With regard to the description that you gave, I would say
that it is all of those things that you outlined. There are
definitely malicious actors out there. There are groups who do
this sort of thing. And, as I said in the testimony earlier, we
see quite a bit of that activity in the European theater.
What we have done in the Secret Service, and just to
follow-up on what Mr. Snow said a moment ago, we are sharing
information better than we ever have. Whether it is through the
NCIJTF or the FS-ISACs or just collaborating on best practices,
if you will, we are better at that than I believe we ever have
been.
In terms of the Secret Service and what we have tried to do
to fight this issue that we see largely in that theater that I
described, we use our liaison efforts in our foreign offices,
24 of them around the world, to make sure that we are in
constant touch with the law enforcement entities in those
countries. We have recently opened a small Secret Service
office in Tallinn, Estonia, which, again, for a number of years
has been a hotbed of this type of cyber crime. We have also
tried to expand our footprint in other places; we recently have
just opened an office in Beijing, China.
So, to address all of those kinds of things that you
described, whether it is individuals or organized criminal
groups, we have moved in those directions.
Mrs. Maloney. But when you said Eastern European, are they
operating out of Europe? Are they operating out of America?
Mr. Smith. Probably both. We have had some significant
cases where we have arrested people in the Eastern European
countries. And, again, that is usually done through the
assistance of the host government, the law enforcement entities
in those countries. So a little of both, quite frankly.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
And, Mr. Snow, would you like to comment on what keeps you
up at night, what are you most concerned about, and what do you
feel we should be doing more of?
Mr. Snow. Currently, what keeps me up at night is my 9-
month-old. But the--
Mrs. Maloney. That is a happy occasion.
Mr. Snow. The threat that keeps me up the most is just a
concern of how we are actually looking at the problem and
attacking it.
For instance, if we look at the standards, the industry
standards, across networks in all organizations, whether it is
government, private sector or public sector, I don't think they
are very high. We talk a lot about the advanced persistent
threat. It may be persistent because it is still resident in
the system, but I don't know that the techniques that we are
using, to use a high school analogy, is the varsity team that
is coming in. It is the freshman team who is walking in with
phishing emails and getting a socially engineered attack that
allows the malware to move laterally across the systems.
Mrs. Maloney. Is the attack different for different
institutions, say, a military contractor or the government? Do
they use a different system than going after financial
information? And how much of it is competitors trying to get
information?
Mr. Snow. It is a great--
Mrs. Maloney. Or is it just criminal?
Mr. Snow. Right. It is a great question. And I think if you
would have asked me that question about 2 years ago, I would
have said there are many variations and different levels of
types of information they are looking for. Currently, though,
they are so successful, they are looking for all information.
So whether it is a clear defense contractor, whether it is a
banking institution, whether it is a national security concern
or issue, they are looking for the same things, using the same
techniques, to pull everything that they can pull off of it.
I would want to ensure that we are moving in a more
realtime fashion. I know that we always have privacy and civil
libertarian concerns. At the FBI, we take protecting people's
civil liberties and their rights and their privacy very
seriously. And, at the same time, I look at a system that has
been developed to freely share information. It wasn't developed
to work on a commerce-type issue or to have people ride on it
without any identification. So I would want to have a structure
that does two things: one, that offers assurance that those
pieces and the parts of the network are protected; and two,
that I have some way to look at the identity of somebody taking
an action on that system.
Mrs. Maloney. Great. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Chairman Bachus is recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Chairman Bachus. Thank you.
I read your written testimony last night. As many members
of this committee may or may not know, we actually have a
detailee from the Secret Service. And I hope most of the
Members and the general public would simply be overwhelmed with
the level of the threat of cybersecurity. There is a great need
to educate the public.
And one question I might ask--and you touched on this, all
of you--is that these are very sophisticated enterprises that
are conducting most of this. Most people kind of have a
tendency to think of these as sort of like the Nigerian scheme,
where there is some guy sitting in a room in Nigeria, but that
is really not the case. That goes on, but this is a much
higher, more sophisticated level.
Many of the people who are conducting these have been
trained, have master's degrees, have 30 years of experience in
the government in another country or working for a technology
company in these countries. And they are well-funded; they are
multimillion-dollar organizations. I think you have done an
incredible job.
When we talk about funding, that is one thing that worries
me. Last year alone, I think there was $7 billion or $8 billion
worth of fraud that was prevented. And the amount of
information--I know, Mr. Smith, in your testimony, you pointed
out that you had to review more information--or 4 times as many
terabytes as are in the Library of Congress archives to get
this information.
Another collateral benefit is that we solve other type
crimes, because the training that goes into this for your
agents and your expertise that is developed in this area allows
you to--you can apply it in terrorism. You can actually apply
it in missing children, some of the training, just across-the-
board--child predators.
A number of cases have been solved by training that was
received at the National Computer Forensic Institution where
local law enforcement went back or judges were able to
successfully prosecute people and make the right ruling.
Because what you have to successfully do to get a prosecution
is you have to be able to successfully extract it from the
computer, the information, find it, which is not easy. Then you
have to be able to preserve the chain of evidence, and then you
have to successfully introduce it in a prosecution. That
sometimes has been the problem, that you had the information,
but somewhere the chain of evidence was broken, and some sharp
criminal defense lawyer was able to take advantage of that.
Mr. Snow, you mentioned Pablo Martinez, who is the
Assistant Special Agent in Charge, and then I guess Deputy
Assistant Director Jeff Irvine, who I think is in charge of--
what is it--34 offices overseas? Somewhere in that
neighborhood?
Mr. Smith. Twenty-four, yes, sir.
Chairman Bachus. Would you two gentlemen stand up? I want
to commend you all for your efforts. And I think probably, each
day, the efforts of you and your organizations--and thank you--
really keep us all from being ripped off.
And the banks have done a tremendous--the financial
institutions are spending millions and millions of dollars in
this effort, and the collaboration is so important. And, as I
said, the collateral benefit. There is almost no crime today
that is committed without the involvement of either a cell
phone or a computer or a handheld device. So it is pretty
astounding.
My time--I have 11 seconds left, so I just want to say, job
well done. And it is an incredibly difficult job.
And I would say to the banks--I know you are on the second
panel--I do think it would help if the public and the financial
institutions would accept the fact that we may need to go to a
protocol of getting into your account with two or three
different levels. And I have seen evidence that the financial
institutions are doing that. One simple password is becoming
pretty archaic now.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Watt for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And let me applaud the chairwoman and ranking member for
convening this hearing, and thank these gentlemen for the work
that they are doing in this area.
After spending all of the last term of Congress learning
about derivatives and CDOs and all of those complex financial
matters as chairman of the Domestic Monetary Policy
Subcommittee over here, I had an interesting choice at the
beginning of this term of Congress and chose to go over and
spend most of my time on the Judiciary Committee as the ranking
member of the Intellectual Property Subcommittee.
Some of these gentlemen have testified over there about the
nature of these problems, because now we are learning about
rogue and bogus Web sites, and online piracy, and theft of
music and movies, and knock-off drugs and auto parts and
military equipment, and just about everything that you can
obtain legally can be obtained illegally online, which is all
part and parcel of this whole cybersecurity issue.
Chairman Bachus was right, because a lot more theft--we
used to think of bank robberies taking place by people walking
into a bank with a gun, but all the robberies of banks and
accounts are taking place electronically now. Almost nobody
walks in with a gun anymore to do that. But the scope of it is
mind-boggling, and the technology has made it so easy to steal
music and everything else out there, and a lot of control of
this is offshore.
So, the magnitude of this problem has made this a national
emergency, really an international emergency, that these
gentlemen are describing the national component of. But under
that there is a commercial component, an industrial component,
a banking component that is staggering in its magnitude.
On one aspect of that, we are about to introduce a bill in
the Judiciary Committee, a bipartisan bill. One of the reasons
I chose to go over to Judiciary at this time, at least the
intellectual part of it is more bipartisan than the Financial
Services Committee used to be. It is about the only place you
can get some bipartisan agreement on something, when you are
dealing with some of these issues. So we are attacking the
commercial component of it hopefully in this by giving more
authority to get jurisdiction over these foreign Web sites,
which has been a major problem for the FBI to even get access
or jurisdiction over these entities.
I have learned a lot more about this than I ever wanted to
know. I didn't know what a ``cloud'' was until--I thought
people were walking around with their heads in the clouds, and
now we are storing everything in the cloud. It has been an
interesting learning experience for me, just as the last term
of Congress was a learning experience for all of us about all
of these sophisticated financial products.
I am learning about all the sophisticated ways that people
steal and produce bogus products, pirated products. ``Knock-
offs'' is the term I guess we use for them on the street. But
there are knock-off drugs, pharmaceuticals. Our military, we
haven't even figured out a way to stop our military from buying
knock-off, pirated parts for military equipment.
So the problem is massive, and the bottom line is I thank
you all for spending some time exposing it in the financial
services and the whole cybersecurity area. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Watt.
Mr. Renacci for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I want to thank
the witnesses for being here today and discussing this topic.
Coming from the private sector and the small business world
just recently, as you get up every day, and you worry about
making payrolls, and you worry about just keeping your business
going, a lot of this doesn't really hit home until you are
sitting here listening to it.
I was wondering, from all three of your perspectives, do
you believe that private industry and the government agencies
are really doing enough to educate the general public and the
small businesses and community banks of the safety and security
conduct issues that they have to be concerned about with online
transactions these days? I would like to hear your thoughts.
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Congressman.
I do think that there is a tremendous amount of effort
going into communicating to the business community. At DHS, we
have a number of programs to do that. One which is about to
start is National Cybersecurity Awareness Month, the month of
October. We will spend a significant amount of time with
seniors and others working around the country, and indeed
internationally, to talk about cybersecurity broadly to the
public.
We have the ``Stop, Think, Connect'' campaign, which is
really designed to speak to individuals about paying more
attention to what they are doing when they are clicking through
on these links that can cause them to be exposed to some of
this malicious software and then become part of a botnet and
part of the problem.
There are a variety of things that do need to be done to
reach out to small businesses, and both DHS and the Department
of Commerce and others have taken some steps to do some of that
reaching out to make it clear there are resources like on the
US-CERT Web site where you can get information about how to
secure your systems and get information about threats and
vulnerabilities made available to the public broadly, and there
are many places where that information can be obtained.
I do think that this is an issue that we cannot just focus
on security professionals. They understand the issue. They are
with us. This is an issue that has to be shared with data
owners, the folks who are making business decisions about where
to invest. The lock on the door, as someone pointed out, the
theft is happening through the Internet more than it is
happening through breaking into the back storage room, and
people need to invest accordingly and risk manage accordingly,
and we have to reach those folks and make them understand that
shift has occurred, and they need to adjust as well.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Smith, particularly from a small business
standpoint, do you have any suggestions for small business
owners? They don't have the dollars in many cases that the
larger institutions have for protection. What are some of the
things that a small business owner can do to protect themselves
from these security breaches?
Mr. Smith. You are exactly right, Congressman. You heard
from my testimony that some of the smaller businesses and
financial institutions have become more of the victim over this
past year or so. There are a number of things that they can do,
and obviously probably one of the best things they can do is
just consult the FTC's Web site.
But I do want to point out, and I mentioned in my remarks,
the Verizon 2011 data breach study that Verizon and the Secret
Service, and also from the European theater that we mentioned,
the Dutch High Crimes Unit participated in this report this
year, and it gives a lot of valuable information about
breaches, about hacks, and then also further would probably be
a very good tool that small businesses and financial
institutions could use in terms of prevention and that sort of
thing. It certainly talks about how the hacks occurred and sort
of what kind of crimes were perpetrated against them.
Mr. Renacci. Mr. Schaffer, are you having unique challenges
hiring people in regards to cybersecurity?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. We indeed do have some challenges
in that regard. The marketplace for deep cybersecurity
professionals is extraordinarily competitive. Pay in that space
is higher than it is for many other professionals who have an
IT or information technology background.
As a consequence, with the Department of Homeland Security
trying to hire into a space where even others in government
have more hiring flexibility--DOD, for example, has significant
authority that DHS does not currently have to bring in those
deep technical experts--we would love to have that same kind of
capability, and that is part of the legislative proposal that
is currently circulating.
Mr. Renacci. Thank you.
I see I am running out of time. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
I was very intrigued by the fact that the CIA, the
Department of Defense and our Fed Chairman's computers were
hacked. Let me ask you something, because in order to know
where we are going, we can learn from experiences that we have
gone through. What did we learn from that experience? Who did
this? What were they after? What kinds of information did they
obtain?
Mr. Schaffer, each of you, if you could. It would be
important for us, because I think it is important to know who
did this, why they did it, what kind of information did they
get, what were they after, and what have we done to correct it?
Mr. Schaffer. Congressman, as I think you have heard across
the panel today, the number of entities that have been breached
and are constantly under attack far exceeds the few that have
been mentioned. Literally every department and agency has had
attacks against it at various points in time, and those attacks
are from a wide array of threat actors that go from individuals
to hacktivists or people trying to take political action on the
Net, to organized criminal organizations, to nation state
actors. It really does run the gambit.
The good news from our perspective in terms of defending
these networks is that most of the studies, including the
Verizon study that has been referenced that was done with the
Secret Service, showed that much of the vulnerability that is
being taken advantage of by all of these actors is known and
can be fixed by good hygiene and aggressive cybersecurity
efforts. We know how to do this. We just need to make sure that
our public and private-sector entities are, in fact, executing
against those security requirements.
Mr. Scott. Do either of you want to comment on that?
Mr. Snow. Congressman, I would say a couple of things also.
One is--and we talk and relate it back to small business--most
of the time the people's awareness is only triggered by a loss
or an intrusion, and it is the first time that they are
actually reaching out for some of the partners or law
enforcement or even their peers in the community.
I think we learned after 9/11 that one of the things we
need to do is really look at risk, what are your threat times,
your vulnerability times, your consequence, and how can we fix
those things. How do we table-top those issues? And if you are
the IT person or the CEO for the corporation or whatever it
happens to be, I know we have to make decisions based on
dollars, but we should run even the first run-through of if
today you got hacked, what was vulnerable on your networks? Are
we really looking to manage and secure systems, or are we
looking to manage and secure information? Is your IT person, is
the general counsel of that organization, are they good with
your IT person's decisions? Is the CEO okay with those
decisions? Does anybody understand, as the chairwoman
referenced before, that there are proprietary contracts in
there that may preclude sharing that information robustly? And
how do we go forward taking a look at those issues?
Mr. Scott. So we would say, then, that what we have before
us is a situation where it is the machinery, it is the system,
it is what we have out there, this new technology that we have
in and of itself, and that the threats are not necessarily
primarily at this point terrorists as much as they are
competitors, as much as they are criminal organizations, as
much as they are maybe other nations. Is that a fair
assessment? From some of our information, we found out that it
is not necessarily terrorists who are at the top of the list
here in all of this, but it is these other entities.
What I am trying to get at is we have to figure all of this
out if we in Congress are going to try to fashion some
legislative remedies. We have to get our hands around what it
is if we are going to do something significant.
And that leads me to, and I don't have much time, given all
of this, what do you recommend when we look at this? It is like
a bowl of Jell-O. You get your hand around some of it, and
another squeezes out. How do we legislate? What do you
recommend that we do legislatively here in Congress to address
this extraordinarily difficult and complex issue?
Mr. Snow. Sir, I will take the question in two parts. One
is, where does the threat reside? And honestly, the highest
threat is the counterterrorism threat of a terrorist hacker
moving into our infrastructure that protects our way of life
and our basic necessities and our needs throughout the Nation.
The largest threat right now is the nation state threat
that comes in and takes a look at all of our critical research
and development, our intellectual property, the things that are
coming in lock, stock and barrel, and copying and moving off.
In that threat is included the criminal threat, and I think
this Financial Services Committee is focusing in on it
correctly. The criminal threat to the economic security of the
United States is very critical.
What do we do about it? I think that is an answer for all
of us. But one of the things we really need to do is sit down
and talk about what are those options we are going to take. How
do we engage as a Nation? First, what are the citizens within
the Nation willing to accept on how they want to be protected;
and second, what are we as a Nation going to do as we respond
to the threats we see? Are we appropriately engaged in the
domestic intelligence, military, economic, law enforcement
model?
I would pass it over to my peers here.
Chairwoman Capito. I think the gentleman's time has expired
on his questioning.
Mr. Duffy.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I appreciate
the witnesses coming in for their testimony.
As an individual, is the main threat that comes the
individual's way through phishing emails, or are people's
computers being hacked on the individual side?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, it is actually both. We still see a
lot of phishing that occurs and people respond to, and, again,
a good public awareness campaign is probably as efficient as
anything. By the same token, we do see account takeovers and
large quantities of personal identification that is actually
taken in these kinds of instances that we talk about.
Mr. Duffy. And on the attacks that are happening, whether
they are hacking into computers or they are sending out
phishing emails, is it fair to say that a large percentage of
the attacks are coming from outside the United States?
Mr. Smith. Yes, sir, they are. And I believe before you got
here, I covered the fact that we have tried to force multiply
our efforts, if you will, through our liaison efforts in our
foreign offices to make sure that when we encounter criminals
in other countries, we have the right liaison effort there, and
we can get the right cooperation from the local law enforcement
in those countries to try to arrest the people responsible for
those things as well.
Mr. Duffy. And that is where I was going to go with the
next question, because if you look at folks who plan and carry
out terrorist attacks on our country, we pursue them pretty
aggressively, or, as someone mentioned, walking into a bank
with a gun and robbing a bank, we also pursue those folks
pretty aggressively as well. On one side we are either killing
them or capturing them, and bank robbers, we are putting them
behind bars for a lengthy period of time.
How successful are we in branching out around the world to
get these folks who are actually orchestrating these attacks on
our country, because if they pursue several attacks, and we
don't apprehend them, they just sit there and attack and attack
and attack until they are successful. Are we able to get those
folks who are orchestrating the attacks on the country?
Mr. Smith. We are, and we are very aggressive when it comes
to trying to pursue these individuals. Again, a lot of it
depends on the country that they may reside in as to the level
of cooperation that we may get. But through, again, our
international efforts, we liaison to the nth degree, if you
will, with those host countries. And we have tried to do that
through another means, and that really affects the public
outreach piece, and that is through our Electronic Crimes Task
Force. We have 29 domestic task forces that have quarterly
meetings that involve both State and local law enforcement, the
private sector, particularly the financial sector, as well as
academia, to keep us on the cutting edge of what is out there.
But we have also recently organized and started two
electronic crimes task forces overseas, one in Rome, Italy, and
the other one in London, England. So we are trying to take the
model that has worked for us dating all the way back to 1996 in
New York City and make that spread not only across the country,
but now around the world, and then through those efforts and
through that liaison we are able to, we believe, force multiply
our efforts and get by on, if you will, from those countries
where we actually have to go and investigate these crimes.
Mr. Duffy. Are we seeing that more of these folks are then
congregating in these countries that are less cooperative with
their law enforcement agencies?
Mr. Smith. I really can't give you a statistic for that
because they are all over. Again, we talk a lot about Eastern
Europe and that area, but there are certainly criminals who do
this sort of thing in other parts, in Asia. So I don't think
really there is a hard figure for that.
Mr. Duffy. My time is just about up.
I think one of you mentioned this. It is fair to say that
we do have the technology to protect ourselves. Is it just a
matter of making sure our financial institutions and our
individuals are implementing the procedures and the technology
to make sure they have that firewall from these folks?
Mr. Schaffer. To be sure, what we have seen statistically
is that a significant percentage, a very high percentage of the
attacks can be dealt with through good implementation of
current technology. That is not to suggest that we can deal
with everything in that regard. And there are some
sophisticated attacks that current technology is not going to
address, and we will need to develop additional capabilities in
order to do that.
Unfortunately, today, offense wins in cyber. Defense has to
be perfect everywhere; offense only has to be right somewhere.
As a consequence, we have a challenge on our hands, and we do
need to get to the next level from a technological perspective
to be able to get to the point where we change that paradigm.
Mr. Duffy. And do we have the resources available to pursue
those technologies, to make sure that we are being proactive
instead of reactive to these attacks?
Mr. Schaffer. I think we are definitely being proactive.
For example, one of the things that DHS did earlier this year
was to publish a paper about what we think needs to happen from
an ecosystem perspective to get to the next level, where we
have more automation, better interoperability between security
solutions, better authentication of people, devices and
software. And there are indeed initiatives like the Trusted
Internet Connections Initiative, the name of which just has
slipped my mind, that are designed to try to get us to a better
place on that authentication issue.
So there are several pushes under way to get those new
technologies in place, but it is something that we have to
continue to be vigilant about.
Mr. Duffy. I want to thank you all for your hard work.
I yield back. No more time.
Chairwoman Capito. No more time. I would add `speed,''
because we have already heard that speed is an issue.
Mr. Baca for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
One of the questions that I have, the United States has a
separate law imposing data privacy requirements for financial
information and for medical information. Do you think it is
preferable to have the data protection requirement imposed
based on who holds the data, or should it be based on the type
of data, regardless of who holds the information? That is for
any one of the panelists.
Mr. Snow. Sir, obviously I wouldn't make the legislative
decisions for the Department of Justice or weigh in on it, but
I would say that I think it is regardless of who holds the
information. As technology and innovation changes so rapidly, I
think there would be a desire to offload cost by offloading the
information to somebody who may not have that same regulatory
requirement. But, once again, that is just a personal opinion
of my own.
Mr. Baca. Anybody else want to weigh in on that? Everybody
wants to take a pass on it, right?
Okay. Let me ask the next question. To DHS: Can you
elaborate on the information-sharing pilot and what lessons
have you learned from it, and how do you expect it to inform
future actions that you take in this area, which is question
number one; and does the financial sector have a unique set of
challenges as opposed to other sectors with respect to the
cybersecurity; and can you describe some of the unique
challenges that you see with respect to the financial sector?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question.
I think we have learned some lessons from the pilot
activity with the Financial Services Information Sharing &
Analysis Center. That pilot has shown us a couple of things:
first, that each sector has its own technological choices. It
has implemented in financial services a set of solutions that
are different, for example, from what the defense industrial
base has employed, and we need to be able to craft our
capabilities at US-CERT as we push out information to be
ingested and used and made actionable by the sector. It is
going to have to be slightly different for the financial
services sector than it was for the DIB, for example.
Second, we have learned that interaction between analysts,
the analyst-to-analyst discussions which we have done quite a
bit of throughout the pilot, are enormously valuable; that
having folks sit down and actually discuss where things are
going, and what mitigations are available, and how best to
implement those mitigations moves the ball tremendously and
allows for greater efficiency and effectiveness on both the
government side and the private-sector side.
Third, we have learned that having representatives on the
watch floor, as I have mentioned a couple of times, really does
enhance the ability to stay up to speed on what both sides are
doing and make sure that we are able to, if something is
ratcheting up, have good situational awareness from steady
state to crisis if indeed something is getting more
challenging.
With respect to unique challenges for the financial
services sector, I think you have heard these gentlemen speak
to it. The fact is the financial services sector is where the
money is, and so that sector is targeted in a way that other
sectors may not be because there is availability of ready cash.
What we are seeing is that intellectual property is being
targeted across the entire economy and across all sectors,
government and industry, but in terms of direct access to cash,
this sector is particularly valued by those who would do us
harm. So that targeting puts this sector at the leading edge of
some of those issues.
They also are technologically advanced, and they have a lot
of Web access capability in this sector, so they are making use
of the technology to deliver services to consumers and to the
public, and those are some of the places where, again, the
malicious actors have an opportunity to interact with the
technology and maybe take advantage of it.
So those are some of the unique challenges, I think.
Working with this sector to try to figure out how to do risk
assessments and working with them to develop good mitigation
strategies is one of the things we are doing at DHS to try to
buy down that risk.
Mr. Baca. Let me follow up with an additional question
between the Federal Government and the private sector. How does
the Federal Government compare to the private sector with
regard to receiving, storing, and maintaining encrypted
information? And if the private sector has to send or report
encrypted data to the Federal Government, can the Federal
Government ensure that it remains so protected?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. I believe that the Federal
Government has the capability to protect data that is submitted
by the private sector. Again, the devil is in the details, and
the need to correctly implement solutions and make sure they
are maintained in the appropriate way is critically important
for any agency that is intaking data.
At DHS, we have some programs that are specifically
designed to allow private-sector entities, particularly
critical infrastructure players, to submit data with special
protections so that they are comfortable with telling us about
their security situation without the worry that the information
is going to be inappropriately released or made available in
ways that could hurt their security over the long run, and we
take measures to ensure that we are indeed protecting and
maintaining that data in an appropriate way.
The same issue with respect to personally identifiable
information that we may come into possession of during our
cybersecurity work with other departments and agencies. We have
procedures and processes designed to ensure that the data is
maintained appropriately and not exposed to unnecessary risk.
Mr. Baca. I realize that my time has expired, but what I
heard you make a statement is that we need government
involvement, because everybody says, all right, let's let the
private sector separate itself from government and we don't
want any more government involvement, but here I am saying that
we do need that for that protection versus not to it. One side
is saying, all right, let's not allow government to be involved
in all regulations; but yet we are saying that we do need it
for that protection to allow that safeguard, because the
private sector won't be able to provide that kind of protection
unless we both have a joint partnership in ensuring we have
that kind of security; is that correct?
Mr. Schaffer. I certainly think government--
Mr. Baca. We do need government.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Canseco, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Canseco. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
San Antonio, Texas, is the home of USAA, the largest
financial services company in the country. Many of my
constituents either work there or do business with USAA, and
members of our military and their families have become huge
targets for cybercriminals. At USAA, most business is
transacted online and with our active and retired military.
Mr. Smith, are there any efforts being made to specifically
protect members of our military and their families from having
their personal information financial accounts hacked?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, none that we are not trying to do
for the average citizen as well, and a lot of that is again--is
just through a public awareness campaign and the things that we
try to do, quite frankly, in our electronic crimes task forces.
So I wouldn't be able to say that there is specifically for the
military personnel.
Mr. Canseco. Many of them are deployed, either in Iraq,
Afghanistan, or in far reaches of the world, and they have
their laptops with them, or they have access to computers, and
they keep current with what is happening with their financial
accounts and when they get deposits and what they have to pay,
and they are extremely vulnerable.
Do you think that it is important to make sure that
something is done to protect at least our military in a
specific way?
Mr. Smith. Yes, sir, I think it would be good. And, again,
just a lot of personal requirement, I guess, on some levels to
try to make sure that they are aware of these sorts of things,
and that they are, in fact, vulnerable, and that they double-
check themselves, as crime prevention goes in terms of
passwords, the security of their accounts, and that sort of
thing. I think there is something on an individual basis that
can be done as well. But I would agree with you.
Mr. Canseco. Do you feel, Mr. Snow, that the financial
services sector is appropriately vetting the background of
personnel?
Mr. Snow. Yes, sir. It is one of the issues that I will
bring up. And let me just make a comment about USAA. I know,
like many financial institutions, they are very proactive, and
they are trying to do everything they can because of their
constituency, number one, but because their membership includes
others besides those in the military.
We took an individual who came from the Joint Task Force
Global Network Operations who went down there to work in that
facility and brought him on board for the clearances through
the FBI so that we could share that information in realtime. I
will go down there for the Cybersecurity Awareness Week in the
opening comments just to thank them for what they do for their
membership, but also to thank them for being as proactive as
they can out there.
But on that line, and we will talk about the vetting first,
statutorily there are only certain people who have access to
law enforcement records for checking backgrounds. Some of the
places like the SWIFT organization that controls the instant
messaging going from financial institutions to others don't
have that access statutorily. So that is something we need to
take a look at.
Also, which I think is interesting to me, after 9/11 we
came out with a bill which said we would have off-duty carry
for former first responders, law enforcement officers, State,
local, and Federal officers, because it would add to our
complement throughout the United States a certain response
capability. Pilots took weapons after proper training up into
aircraft.
What I don't see, and it is interesting to me after having
left the military about 25 years ago--when I was in there, I
only saw one or two people who had clearances, TS clearances,
maybe somebody who was in charge of a certain program, or maybe
someone who was a designated intelligence officer. When I went
over as the on-scene commander in Afghanistan, I couldn't find
somebody that didn't have a TS clearance. So every single
fusion center I went into, every single place that I walked
into, they carried full credentials.
But now as I reach out, and we are talking about
information-sharing, and I try to reach out to people like
USAA, we have one member there. What about these other
organizations that don't have a government contract, that don't
have a military contract, or don't fall into one of the
historic arenas where they should have those contracts?
So I have been having discussions on thoughts of, should we
carry those clearances on? Maybe somebody leaves the military,
and they are going off into a normal business, but 2 or 3 years
from now they walk into an area when we see, as Mr. Schaffer
says and Mr. Smith says, every agency, every organization,
every department, every size business, small, medium and large,
and school district, so we could share that information more
readily.
Mr. Canseco. Mr. Schaffer, in your opinion, what
cybersecurity roles are exclusively government functions, and
which ones are the responsibility of the private sector? And if
I am out of time, if you could be brief, please?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. As mentioned in my opening, I think
that this is a shared responsibility. In most of these areas,
we have to work together. Industry owns the vast majority of
the infrastructure. Government has access to certain
information, as Mr. Snow just mentioned, some of the classified
information that can help make things better. We have to work
together as a team. I think that there are multiple efforts
under way to make that happen. There are some things that
government will do at the classified level, but there is much
that we can do as partners.
Mr. Canseco. My time is up, but I want to thank you three
gentlemen for your information very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Carney from Delaware for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to thank you and the ranking member for holding this
hearing today, and the panelists for coming, and for the great
work you do for our country. I am most interested in the
threats to our banks and financial services institutions, so I
would like to just ask a few questions, really following up on
some of the answers that you have already given and your
written testimony.
Could you characterize for me--you have talked about
individuals, hacktivists, I think you said, nation state
perpetrators and organized crime. Who is most involved in the
attacks on our financial services, our banking and cyber
infrastructure, and how are we doing stopping them and
arresting them and bringing them to justice? Maybe we can start
with the FBI or whoever feels most comfortable with that.
Mr. Snow. Yes, sir. I would say right now that the largest
threat to the financial services institutes and institutions is
from the criminal organized crime group and realm, at least
where we have the most information pointing to a specific
adversary.
Mr. Carney. Are those domestic or offshore organizations?
Mr. Snow. Many offshore, sir, that we see.
Mr. Carney. Most offshore, or how would you break that down
as a percentage?
Mr. Snow. I would say it is probably a 90-10 split, maybe
an 80-20 split.
Mr. Carney. But overwhelmingly mostly offshore then?
Mr. Snow. Yes, sir. And it is important to make a
distinction, and the distinction would be those that are doing
organized criminal groups for profit, and then the hacktivists.
So we see a lot of hacktivists who are still worldwide. We have
been identifying many here within the United States, but they
are not the real threat to the financial institutions and
organizations. They are a harassing threat. They cost a lot of
money, they do a lot of damage to the systems, but they are not
the ones that I guess are damaging the economic stability.
Mr. Carney. So how are we doing stopping them and arresting
them, whoever is the best one to answer that question, and
what, if anything, do we need to bolster our efforts there?
Mr. Snow. I will make the first comment, sir, and then turn
it over to Mr. Smith.
As he stated previously, I think we are doing a good job,
especially in the international relations with other countries,
working the imbeds, the electronic crime task forces, all the
efforts that the United States has as we move from the domestic
side out internationally. I think we are doing a good job and a
much better job than we have in the past 2 years.
The thing that concerns me is that it is still a reactive
mode, so I am trying to find a forensic evaluation of a
financial institution. There have been many cases where we have
actually gone out to doors and knocked on them and said, here
is what we saw in our investigation, and you are already a
target through reconnaissance. Here is what you need to fix
yourselves. But I think we need as a government a much more
robust effort in that fashion.
Mr. Carney. So do you actually arrest these people, find
them, or do you just stop them?
Mr. Snow. We try to arrest them for the deterrence effect.
The problem is some countries--and it is a force
multiplication--some countries want to prosecute their own
individuals, their citizens who reside there. Depending on what
treaty or MLAT agreement we have, many may be subject to
extradition or not, and others may want to address the issue of
their citizens within their domain themselves.
Mr. Smith. I would agree with Mr. Snow. It just really
depends on the country and the level of cooperation. We have
had cases in the Secret Service that were very significant,
that were large enough that we actually, through some of our
undercover operations, were able to lure that individual out of
their home country and bring them to the United States in order
to be arrested. So it just depends. Each one is sort of an
individual case and an individual plan, if you will, to go
after them.
Mr. Carney. So there is not a pattern there. Are there
countries that you would want to point out publicly that are
problematic, or is that something you would rather not say
publicly?
Mr. Smith. I wouldn't want to do it individually, but I
would say, as we mentioned earlier, a lot of our liaison
efforts are in that Eastern European area and also the Baltic
region, and that is specifically why we opened our office in
Tallinn, Estonia.
Mr. Carney. Is there anything that you would like to add?
Mr. Schaffer. Congressman, one of the things that I would
say is that from a National Protection and Programs Directorate
part of DHS, recognizing Secret Service is another part, our
focus is on network defense. The attribution pieces we leave to
the law enforcement folks for the most part. But what we do try
to do is make sure that we are taking the knowledge from one
incident within the financial services sector and making it
available to the rest of the sector. And in some cases, we have
even had the opportunity to bring in an entity that was
experiencing an issue that we had seen some months before at
another entity and correct those two entities in a way that
wouldn't have been possible but for government being able to
know about both of the incidents and being able to connect the
dots.
Mr. Carney. I see my time is up. I want to thank you again,
and please feel free to contact us if there is something we can
do to help in those efforts. Thanks for those efforts.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here today.
A lot of questions I was going to ask you have already been
asked this morning, so I will try and be brief here.
I am just kind of curious. With regard to financial
institutions, are most of the thefts done with inside help, or
are they mostly done from the outside?
Mr. Smith. It is really a combination. I would say most are
from the outside. But, again, the insider threat study that was
conducted several years ago, which we would be happy to share
with you, showed that there is a certain amount of that. And
certainly, an insider has access to a lot more information than
the outsider. But I think probably in sheer numbers, there are
more outside.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What do you see as the most exposed? Are
the big banks the ones that are mostly attacked, or medium-
sized, small banks, because perhaps they are not as
sophisticated with their security network? What do you see?
Mr. Smith. That is one of the things that the Verizon study
points out, that a few years ago it was the larger financial
sector banks and corporations, but because now they have had
time to react to a lot of these sorts of things, we are seeing
that more smaller institutions and smaller businesses have
become their target. And so we are seeing more of that in this
most recent study.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Whenever you see that smaller institutions
are being attacked, why are they so connected? It would make
sense to me that they could--because they are not as large, and
they are probably not as integrated, the need for integration
probably isn't as great, couldn't they have a separate system
that would be inaccessible so that their basic information
could be retained and not accessible versus allowing full
access to everything? I am pretty naive when it comes to this
sort of stuff, so bear with me here.
Mr. Smith. No, I agree. And I think that they will now have
time to react. I think we are all human. Until you become a
victim, you don't pay a lot of attention to it, so I guess it
was something that was not quite at the forefront of their
thinking. Again, it was the larger institutions that were
suffering these losses and these hacks, but now in the last
year we have seen these smaller institutions become more
vulnerable. So I think there are certainly precautions that
they can take and should take and probably will do exactly what
you are saying in the coming years.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I doubt that you guys want to answer this
question, so I will just make a comment. If you want to comment
on it, you are welcome to. But from the national security
standpoint, whenever somebody is trying to hack in, wouldn't it
make sense that when they hack in, it would automatically
trigger a virus going back the other way so you destroy the
guys on the other end?
Maybe you already do that and you don't want to tell me
about it. That is fine. It would make sense to me to make sure
you make life as miserable on the other end as they make it for
us on our end.
Thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairwoman Capito. Mr. Green from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I especially thank
you and the ranking member for allowing me to participate in
this hearing. It is exceedingly important that we have this
opportunity to explore these issues, and I thank you very much.
To the members of this panel and the next, I thank you for
appearing here today.
The intelligence that I have received and perhaps has been
shared bears repeating if it has: $388 billion lost last year
to cyber crime, $114 billion in the United States alone; 1
million new cyber victims per day, that is very daunting; and
54 percent of these cyber crimes can be easily prevented,
according to what has been shared with me.
Notwithstanding these stats, I do believe that we will
prevail, and I say this to you because I am confident that when
we moved from coins to paper, someone and some people said, my
God, that paper will never work, it is too easy to duplicate.
Then when we moved from paper to checks, someone said, our
checks are too easy to write, it will never work. As we moved
into the plastic era, there were always people who thought that
plastic would never compete with paper. But the truth is we
have been successful, and I think we will be successful with
these efforts and these endeavors, notwithstanding statistics
that are daunting.
I am confident that privacy is something that you have
considered, and it is a real issue, and my hope is that the
champions of privacy, those who wake up every morning and they
eat and they sleep privacy, my hope is that they have been
included within those who are part of this avant-garde effort.
My belief is that you have done it, but I will just ask anyone
who would like to respond to tell me about the efforts to bring
in the organizations that make it their daily responsibility to
protect the privacy rights of Americans. Are they involved?
Mr. Schaffer. Congressman, indeed we have made an effort to
include the privacy community in many of the efforts that we
have under way at the Department of Homeland Security. Many of
the systems that we deploy, like the intrusion detection
systems and intrusion prevention technologies that are being
deployed for the government networks, we have done privacy
impact assessments that have been made publicly available. We
have briefed those in the privacy community. We have brought
the privacy community in to look at a lot of what we are doing
programmatically.
We also have privacy officials within the Department who
are tasked with making sure that, in fact, as we go forward on
cybersecurity issues, we are looking at the privacy
implications of those issues and making sure that they are
addressed as we go forward in many of these areas. So we have
spent a lot of energy trying to ensure that privacy is
considered at each step of the process.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Let me move quickly to tools. I trust that we are giving
you the necessary tools that you need timely. Are there tools
that you need, laws that you need from Congress, or is there
something that we should be doing or paying special attention
to so as to make your efforts successful?
Mr. Smith. If I could, Congressman, I would respond to that
and I would just say that, yes, we are receiving, I think, the
support that we need. But one thing I would like to highlight
is that the Administration has proposed data breach legislation
that goes a long way toward improving some of these things that
you are talking about, and certainly would aid law enforcement
if this sort of legislative package were passed.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
And finally, extradition. I know that one of the big
problems that you have is that the person who commits the
dastardly deed is in some distant place beyond our borders, and
if prosecuted may not be extradited to this country. I know
that is a real concern for you. Could you just elaborate on it
for just a moment, please, as my time is expiring?
Mr. Smith. Just to follow up again, it really depends on
the individual country, and that is why we try our very best
with our liaison efforts, the agents. We have 74 agents
overseas assigned to different countries, and they work every
day toward trying to improve those kinds of relationships.
Again, we could give you a specific briefing outside of this
forum if you would like on kind of our successes or negatives
there.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much. Because my time is about to
expire and I am an interloper, let me just thank all of you and
thank the Chair again because my time is up. Thank you very
much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce from New Mexico for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
If I could get each one of you to kind of give me an idea,
just a percent, what percent of the cases that come across your
desk do you actually prosecute, and then what percent do you
actually convict? Just a rough guess.
Mr. Schaffer. I can go first, because my answer is easiest.
We don't have law enforcement authority within my part of DHS,
so we are not in that business. I was a Federal prosecutor at
one point on these issues back at the Justice Department, but
these gentlemen have the ball on this one, sir.
Mr. Smith. It is sort of a splintered answer, if you will,
because we obviously have jurisdiction in a number of areas. I
can tell you that we arrested over 1,200 people for cyber-
related crimes last year, and that resulted in a loss of about
$500 million, and we think we prevented about $7 billion in
loss just in Secret Service cases. But I could certainly get
you our exact number in terms of both arrest and conviction.
Mr. Pearce. We are, say, saving $7 billion out of $388
billion. That is modest.
Mr. Smith. Yes, it is.
Mr. Snow. Yes, sir. I would echo the same. I can always
come back with the actual numbers for you later on. My
portfolio runs everything from intrusions down to Internet
fraud. Many, many cases are prosecuted at a high level, NSM
images, child exploitation, some of the intellectual property
rights. And some of the national security stuff, for obvious
reasons, does not reach that same threshold of prosecution. And
then on the criminal side, I think we have had success, but I
would have to get you the actual numbers.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Schaffer, what do you all do with them when
you get them, when you find them? What do you do with them,
since you don't prosecute them?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. We have representatives from both
the FBI and the Secret Service on our watch floor, so law
enforcement is coordinated with us, and we work with them on
the issues that we discover that are reported in to our
processes. It is a coordinated effort
Mr. Pearce. You refer them over?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pearce. So if we have a pretty small, modest
prosecution rate and an even smaller conviction rate, what is
our awareness rate? What percent are we aware that is going on,
and what do we don't even have a clue is coming in the attacks?
Is that large, small?
Mr. Schaffer. Sir, I think that one I can address, which is
we know what we know about, and the reporting--there is no
requirement currently for private-sector entities to report
when these incidents occur, at least from a DHS perspective. We
work in partnership. We get a lot of reporting from the private
sector when incidents occur, and we work with our law
enforcement partners, and we get awareness through that, and we
get awareness--
Mr. Pearce. Excuse me, my question is that we don't know
what is even occurring. You wait for a report to come in after
somebody discovers that it has happened, and I am asking, how
many attacks are coming in, how many attempts are coming in
that we don't even know about? Do we actually have a chance to
prosecute a very small percentage of that? If so, then the
magnitude of the problem is much bigger. I don't want to get
much deeper into it. I think I understand.
Has the Treasury, Mr. Smith, ever lost money? Have they
been hacked like an individual? Has anybody been in there
borrowing money?
Mr. Smith. Not to my knowledge, Congressman.
Mr. Pearce. Okay, just checking.
How many times have you individuals sat down at the table
together, the three of you, before this meeting today?
Mr. Snow. I would put it up at about 150 to 200 times.
Mr. Pearce. So the agencies are cooperating, and we are not
all chasing the same guys?
Mr. Snow. No, sir. Sometimes we have meetings even when we
don't want to have meetings.
Mr. Pearce. That is nice.
How many attempts have been made on the electrical grid? Do
you all track that?
Mr. Schaffer. Again, sir, we know that there have been
attempts made. We know about instances when various parts of
the electric grid have been subject to attack. I can't tell you
how many attacks have occurred that we don't know about, but I
do know that has been happening.
Mr. Pearce. Have we seen blackouts because of those
attacks?
Mr. Schaffer. I can't speak to specific blackouts in the
United States that are caused by a cyberattack at this point.
Mr. Pearce. My belief might be that our greatest threat
would be the interruption of electrical services. It would
affect everything in the country immediately. Is that the
perception you all talk about? Would you all perceive that to
be an accurate or inaccurate statement? And then, what are we
doing to protect that grid?
Mr. Snow. Sir, I would say that is an accurate statement. I
would say that is a big concern, industrial control systems,
data systems, process control systems. I will put a kudo in to
the Department of Homeland Security which has a very robust
response capability. They have trained most of our cyberaction
team individuals for response on that issue itself. And I can
tell you in no uncertain terms that when a blackout happens, my
BlackBerry goes off, and one of my first calls is back over to
DHS, and whether it is overseas, through one of the legal
attaches or one of the domestic offices, those people are woken
up to get your contacts and find out exactly what that is.
Mr. Pearce. I appreciate each one of you, and I appreciate
especially that you have been cooperating together and working
across those jurisdictional lines. That is a frustrating thing
from this side, when agencies don't even talk to each other and
you have similar threats or the same threats.
But thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for your indulgence.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I want to thank all of the Members, and I want to thank the
members of this panel. The first panel is dismissed.
I do want to make a quick comment. We have talked about
what threats there are to individuals. I mentioned in my
opening statement that I thought I was one of these folks. I
think I certainly have been. But certainly, whether my
MasterCard has been compromised pales in comparison of what
could happen to our country if a financial cyber crime of a
large scale is perpetrated. And I don't think we really think
about it in terms like that.
I want to thank you. I know you think about it like that,
and I am glad you are thinking about it in those terms, because
it could really seize up our country. It could go into things
like electrical interruption and everything else. Because I
don't think we really, at least speaking for myself, have a
total concept of all of the financial business that is
conducted over the electronic payment systems and through our
computers.
So thank you very much for doing this. I know it is very
complicated, and I know you are chasing a lot of 20-year-olds
at the same time sometimes in these cyber crimes, and that is
difficult. So I appreciate your forthrightness and your
testimony. And I would like to call up our second panel of
witnesses. So thank you all very much.
At this time, I would like to welcome our second panel of
witnesses. I appreciate you gentlemen coming today to educate
us on this very important issue.
I will introduce each of you individually for the purpose
of giving a 5-minute statement. I think you heard me mention
earlier that we have your written statements for the record,
and we will try to keep our opening statements to the 5-minute
deadline.
Our first witness is Mr. William B. Nelson, who is
president and chief executive officer of the Financial Services
Information Sharing & Analysis Center. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM B. NELSON, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, THE FINANCIAL SERVICES INFORMATION SHARING & ANALYSIS
CENTER (FS-ISAC)

Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and Ranking Member
Maloney. Thank you for inviting us here today.
The FS-ISAC was formed in 1999 in response to the 1998
Presidential Decision Directive 63 that called for the public
and private sector to work together to address cyberthreats to
the Nation's critical infrastructures. After 9/11, in response
to the Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 in the
Homeland Security Act, FS-ISAC expanded its role to encompass
physical threats to our sector also.
FS-ISAC is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit organization that is
funded entirely by its member firms and sponsors. In 2004,
there were only 68 members of the FS-ISAC, mostly larger
financial institutions. Since that time, the membership has
expanded to over 4,200 organizations, including commercial
banks and credit unions of all sizes, brokerage firms,
insurance companies, payment processors, and over 30 trade
associations representing the majority of the U.S. financial
services sector.
The FS-ISAC works closely with various government agencies.
I think you heard in the prior panel who we work with. A
complete list of the FS-ISAC sharing services are included in
my written testimony. I am going to highlight a couple of those
key services.
I think one of the key ones is the delivery of timely,
relevant, and actionable cyber and physical email alerts from
various sources--actually, hundreds of sources. We have an
anonymous and attributable online submission capability to
facilitate member sharing of threats and attacks. We operate an
email list-serve supporting attributable information exchange
by various special interest groups. Surveys allow members to
request information regarding security best practices at other
organizations. And then, we have a biweekly threat information
call. We have emergency threat or incident notifications and
conference calls. And we have special projects to address
specific risk issues, such as the Account Takeover Task Force,
which was mentioned in the earlier panel.
We have implemented a number of programs in partnership
with DHS and other government agencies. We have, actually,
representation on the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center, the NCCIC, watch floor. These are FS-ISAC
representatives cleared at a Top Secret/Sensitive
Compartmentalized Information level, or TS/SCI.
It should be noted that the FS-ISAC has worked closely with
DHS, the U.S. Treasury, the FBI, the Secret Service, and other
government partners to obtain over 250 Secret-level clearances
and a number of TS/SCI clearances for a number of key
personnel.
An example of a successful instance of government and
financial services sector information-sharing occurred on
October 24, 2009, when the FBI, the FS-ISAC, and an
organization called NACHA, the rulemaking body for the ACH,
released a joint bulletin concerning account takeover attacks
targeting businesses and corporate customers. Some of those--
actually, details of those recommendations are not included in
my testimony, but they included: initiation of ACH and wire
transfers under dual control; reconciling all banking
transactions on a daily basis; implementing customer awareness
programs; actually implementing fraud detection and mitigation
best practices, including anomaly detection; and out-of-band
authentication of transactions.
It is my understanding that the OCC is not here today, but
I would like to talk about the recent FFIEC supplemental
guidance on Internet banking authentication. It incorporates
many of the defense-in-depth recommendations that were included
in our bulletin with the FBI and a number of important new
regulatory provisions. It calls for, actually, annual risk
assessments by financial institutions. It now distinguishes
between retail and commercial accounts, actually raising the
bar of minimum controls for all accounts and recognizing that
commercial accounts pose a higher level of risk. It also
insists that financial institutions have layered security for
consumer accounts.
I think the thing to point out is, this goes into effect in
January 2012. And they use the word ``guidance,'' but it is
actually a requirement. All financial institutions were
required to adhere to this.
I also in my written testimony talk about the Account
Takeover Task Force. We had over 120 individuals from 35
financial firms, 10 industry associations and processors, plus
representatives from 7 government agencies participate in that
task force. And they developed a number of important
deliverables, including--major deliverables, including how to
respond, prevent, and detect different types of cyber attacks.
Lastly, I just wanted to mention we have conducted a cyber
attack payment exercise in 2010. We are planning another one
this year in November.
And, with that, I just want to wrap up and conclude that I
think before 2009, the corporate and consumer public knew very
little about the risk of cyber crime. I think that joint
bulletin was the beginning of a massive educational effort that
has been somewhat effective in raising awareness of financial
institutions and their customers of cyber crime attacks. Since
then, we have worked with the FBI, the U.S. Secret Service, and
DHS to issue new bulletins. This cyber attack exercise, the
FFIEC supplemental guidance, and the deliverables of the
Account Takeover Task Force have all played important roles in
increasing that awareness. I think today more financial
institutions and their customers are now aware of how to
detect, prevent, and respond to malicious and criminal
activities resulting from online attacks.
Thank you again for this opportunity to present this
testimony, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nelson can be found on page
64 0f the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our second witness is Mr. Bryan Sartin, director,
investigative response, for Verizon.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF A. BRYAN SARTIN, DIRECTOR, INVESTIGATIVE RESPONSE,
VERIZON

Mr. Sartin. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify here. My name is Bryan Sartin, and I am director of
investigative response at Verizon.
Verizon is a global provider of communication services. Our
data network spans 6 continents and 150 countries. As detailed
in my written statement, we engage in a wide range of
activities to enhance cybersecurity both for ourselves and for
our customers.
Investigative Response is a specialized group of IT
investigators who handle more than 200 cases each year,
including many highly visible data breaches. Our findings are
documented in a Verizon ``Data Breach Investigations Report.''
It encompasses more than 1,700 data breaches over 7 years of
research. It is a study about security failures and the lessons
we can learn from them.
This report provides valuable guidance for corporate and
government entities on effective ways to secure their networks,
including financial services firms. The report utilizes an
information-sharing framework that we developed called Verizon
Enterprise Risk Incident Sharing, or the VERIS framework, which
we have published as an open-source initiative.
There are five points that I would like to share with the
subcommittee today.
Point one: Although the consequences of cyber attacks may
vary depending on the target, there is little variance in cyber
risks and threats by sector. Hospitality, retail, and financial
services are the top three sectors in terms of data-breach
victims. Cyber criminals are after data they can easily convert
into cash. More than 90 percent of electronic crimes are, in
fact, financially motivated. Retailers and financial services
entities have the largest quantities of targeted data types,
namely credit card, debit card, and PIN information that we see
targeted in nearly 80 percent of our cases.
While those two sectors will continue to be key targets of
electronic crimes, they do not face a unique cybersecurity
threat. Cyber threats are neither sector-specific nor unique;
they are mostly opportunistic and blind to industry.
Point two: Electronic crimes generally do not involve
complexity or innovation. Nine of the top 10 hacking methods
are, in fact, very simple. For example, criminal exploitation
of default or easily guessable credentials accounted for nearly
two-thirds of our cases. Many devices come with default user
names, such as ``Admin'' or ``Password1,'' and, if left
unchanged, these default credentials offer cyber thieves often
easy entry points into potential victim systems.
Point three: The most fundamental security controls make
the most effective countermeasures. Over 70 percent of
criminals' points of intrusion are through victims' own remote-
access facilities. It is not that the technologies are flawed.
Instead, it is the manner in which they are deployed and the
way they are configured. Most criminal entry can be prevented
if a second factor for authentication is required. For example,
if a system requires a username and password and the additional
requirements of a hardware or software token, it would prevent
most remote-access intrusions that we see.
Now, making it difficult for criminals to exfiltrate stolen
information is another simple but highly effective way to
prevent data breaches.
Point four: There is often a significant time lag between
when a breach occurs, when data theft actually occurs, and when
the victim finds out. The timeframe from initial point of entry
to the first instance of data theft is more often measured in
days, weeks, or months as opposed to minutes or hours. On
average, it takes victims more than 6 months to discover that
they have been hacked into. Even after 6 months, almost 9 out
of 10 victims did not make that discovery on their own; they
found out from third parties. Significant improvement in data-
breach detection is badly needed.
Point Five: Closer cooperation between victims and law
enforcement could reduce the overall numbers of electronic
crimes. Greater information-sharing has improved our ability to
identify criminals conclusively, and that is critical to
successful prosecution and, in turn, has had a huge impact in
reducing cyber crimes.
The greatest obstacle to cooperative information-sharing is
the reluctance of victims to engage law enforcement for fear of
fines, penalties, and litigation. And reasonable protections
from litigation and regulatory fines would encourage victims'
cooperation with law enforcement that would improve the odds of
successful prosecution and reduce the overall numbers of
overall electronic crimes.
In conclusion, cyber attacks represent very real threats to
our economic prosperity and our Nation's security. While many
public- and private-sector remediation activities have been
highly effective, our investigations indicate that greater
vigilance is required.
The data-breach report lays out several recommendations
which, if implemented, would improve the cybersecurity posture
of financial services firms specifically and of all entities
more generally. Overall, every entity must identify a set of
essential controls and ensure their implementation consistently
and without exception. More advanced controls can be
implemented as necessary. Achieve ``essential'' first and worry
about ``excellent'' later.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you again for this opportunity. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sartin can be found on page
101 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our third witness is Mr. Brian Tillett, chief security
strategist, public sector group, Symantec.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN TILLETT, CHIEF SECURITY STRATEGIST, PUBLIC
SECTOR GROUP, SYMANTEC

Mr. Tillett. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today as the subcommittee considers cybersecurity
and threats to the financial sector.
My name, again, is Brian Tillett, and I am the chief
security strategist for the Public Sector Group at Symantec.
Symantec is the world's information security leader, with a
footprint of more than 200,000 sensors in more than 200
countries and territories which track malicious activity
globally 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. We refer to this as
the Symantec Global Intelligence Network.
At Symantec, we are committed to assuring the security,
availability, and integrity of our consumer, enterprise, and
government customers' sensitive information. Concurrently,
protection of critical infrastructure in all sectors is a top
priority for us.
In my testimony today, I will provide the committee with an
abridged analysis of the threat landscape, an assessment of
threats in the financial sector, and risk-mitigation measures
for addressing those threats.
The threats landscape is constantly evolving. In the most
recent ``Symantec Internet Security Threat Report,'' which we
publish annually, we observed significant shifts in 2010. The
volume and sophistication of threat activity increased more
than 19 percent over 2009, with Symantec identifying more than
286 million variations of malicious software, or malware. To
put it in another perspective, that is a staggering 9 per
second. These included threats to social networking sites and
their users, mobile devices, and targeted phishing attacks.
Symantec intelligence quarterly reports indicate that these
trends are continuing at an accelerated pace through 2011.
We have observed an ominous change that has swept across
the Internet. The threat landscape, once dominated by worms and
viruses developed by irresponsible hackers, is now being ruled
by a new breed of cyber criminals. Just last week, we released
the ``2011 Symantec Norton Cyber Crime Report,'' where we
calculated the cost of global cyber crime at $114 billion
annually. We also calculated that lost time due to recovery and
impact on personal lives was an additional $274 billion
worldwide. With an annual combined cost of $388 billion, cyber
crime costs are significantly more than the global black market
of marijuana, cocaine, and heroin combined.
We also have been monitoring an array of threats specific
to the financial sector for many years, including ATM heists,
banking trojans, and botnets. These threats will only continue
to mature and increase as society becomes more dependent on
technology for financial and banking needs.
Let's address a snapshot of the recent trends. We have
talked a considerable amount about botnets already, so I am
going to skip through some of the background on this, but I
wanted to add some more context: that botnet owners are often
known to rent the use of their botnet to other users. And they
will do this in an effort so they can perpetrate malicious
activity, also reinforcing the fact that you do not have to be
an uber-hacker in order to perpetrate malicious activity. We
saw evidence of this in the denial-of-service attacks on the
payment card industry after WikiLeaks events last year.
One such botnet targeting the financial services industry
is called Qakbot. It is a sophisticated malware that has been
spreading through shared networks, thumb drives and infected
Web pages since 2009. Among other things, where it is trying to
steal financial information, one of the things it likes to do
is it will hide the log-out button when you are actually signed
into your favorite financial institution, perhaps Bank of
America, and it will actually intercept that log-out
transaction, and phone home to its command-and-control
infrastructure server, and say you can now log in using the
credentials that someone else is using. That is another
characteristic of the Qakbot botnet.
Trojan horses are another type of malware that is designed
to look like a valid or beneficial application, or perhaps an
app that you would put on your mobile device, and sometimes
even act the way that they are expected. At the same time, they
introduce a hidden malware into the enterprise designed to seek
sensitive financial and other high-value info and exfiltrate
that from the enterprise in a covert fashion.
As more users download and install third-party applications
for mobile devices, the opportunity for installing malicious
applications is also increasing. There will likely be more
threats created for these devices as people increasingly use
them for sensitive transactions such as online shopping and
banking.
As a sign that the mobile space is starting to garner more
attention from cybercriminals, there was a 42 percent increase
in the number of reported new mobile operating system threats
and vulnerabilities from 2009 to 2010. We also see that
increasing, as our study in 2011 shows.
There is no one-step program for mitigating risks to the
financial sector, and while it is leaps and bounds ahead when
it comes to security, there are still steps that need to be
taken to lessen the impact and prevent future attacks. In our
written testimony, we have provided recommendations on how to
better protect critical systems from cyberattack. Embracing new
technologies and other technological improvements are
necessary, but they must be paired with increased education and
awareness.
In addition, there has been progress over the years to
advance information-sharing among critical infrastructure
sector partners and the government. Private-sector alliances
such as the National Cyber Forensics and Training Alliance and
the Financial Services Information Sharing & Analysis Center
have done a commendable job of creating mechanisms to share
intelligence among industry and between industry and
government.
Successful mitigation of the threats to the financial
sector depends on this continued communication; however,
information must be shared in a timely and actionable manner.
There are still significant impediments to government sharing
information with industry, including classification
designation, legal restrictions, and competitive advantage
concerns.
I applaud the committee's commitment to this critical topic
and its leadership on information security issues. As the
threats we face today escalate, we must continue our
informationcentric cybersecurity strategy, improve information-
sharing mechanisms, and increase awareness in education.
Symantec looks forward to continuing to work with Congress and
our partners to address these important issues.
Thank you again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tillett can be found on page
149 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you, Mr. Tillett.
Our fourth witness is Mr. Greg Garcia, partnership
executive for cybersecurity and identity management, Bank of
America.
Welcome, Mr. Garcia.

STATEMENT OF GREG GARCIA, PARTNERSHIP EXECUTIVE FOR
CYBERSECURITY AND IDENTITY MANAGEMENT, BANK OF AMERICA

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. I am Greg Garcia,
partnership executive for cybersecurity and identity management
at Bank of America. I also serve as co-chair of the
cybersecurity committee of the Financial Services Sector
Coordinating Council.
Thanks again for inviting me to discuss cybersecurity with
the committee. I will provide a quick overview of the
cybersecurity threat environment; how Bank of America manages
security to protect our company, our customers and our
shareholders; and how we partner with industry and government
to mitigate the cyber risk.
As you know, the global financial system operates on a vast
network of information and communications technology. Trillions
of dollars in transactions flow across the network globally on
a daily basis. It is our responsibility to ensure the swift
delivery of those services wherever we do business, to secure
the data and networks that enable them, and to prevent
unauthorized access that could lead to fraud, identity theft,
data loss, or system downtime.
At Bank of America, we are laser-focused on cybersecurity.
In discussing how we manage this challenge, it is useful to
break it down into two interrelated components: one, our
customer facing policies and activities; and two, our
enterprise-level security. Of primary importance to us is
securing our customer financial information. We take this very
seriously, and we invest heavily to protect our customers, and
we deliver a range of services to secure their transactions and
to keep our consumers whole, such as fraud monitoring and zero
dollar liability guarantee.
In addition, we offer more than 50 kinds of alerts to our
customers to choose from, including alerts that will notify you
if there is irregular activity on your account. In fact,
Javelin Research designated Bank of America number one, best in
class, in security and privacy for online for our consumers for
the fifth year in a row, and we are quite proud of that. We
have done a lot to achieve that.
We also continue to educate our customers with many tips
about what they can do online to protect themselves online and
in the mobile environment, and we offer additional tools such
as antivirus protection for them to use.
We continually warn our customers about phishing--you have
heard a lot about that already--which remains one of the most
widely used and effective attack methods by cybercriminals.
Those are simply targeted emails that look legitimate, but they
trick receivers into clicking on malicious links or entering
personal information, and these are difficult to spot and to
prevent. But again, with our awareness regime program,
customers who are victims of fraud are not liable for
fraudulent transactions, and they are protected with the zero
liability guarantee.
Our customer-facing security strength relies on many of the
standards of practice that protect and enable our broader
enterprise. Our security strategy is designed to protect
critical nonpublic data, intellectual property, and operational
availability and continuity. It is in all of these areas that
we work very closely with our regulators to ensure that we
apply, maintain, and constantly measure all the necessary
security controls across the enterprise.
Much of our work in security is aimed at addressing the
increasingly sophisticated threats from well-organized and
funded groups that you have heard about earlier today, and to
stay ahead, we are continually investing in new tools and new
capabilities and the highest standards of practice commensurate
with the financial sector status as critical national
infrastructure.
We are on alert 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Fundamentally, our cybersecurity program is based on a
combination of people, process, and technology. Let me just
summarize what that means in high points.
Across the company, all employees receive annual training
on the importance of information protection, the policies and
methods that the bank uses, and the responsibilities of every
employee. We have an information security team of experts who
have past careers in law enforcement, the military, security,
and high technology innovation. We operate under detailed,
rigorous information security policies with a program designed
to protect the security and confidentiality of customer and
client information, and we are concerned about the life cycle
of that information from acquisition to use and from storage to
disposal. And as we are a global company, and the threat is
global in nature, we are building this protective capability
wherever we do business.
A few quick words about partnerships: A critical element of
a mature cybersecurity program is our investment in
partnerships. At Bank of America, we are sharing information
and best practices across the financial and other critical
sectors and with the government to gain the broadest view of
the threat landscape. We do this to get collectively smarter
and better at protecting assets and critical information.
For example, you have heard about them in previous
statements. We are partnering with the Financial Services
Sector Coordinating Council, or FSSCC, the FS-ISAC, the
Treasury Department's Office of Financial Services Critical
Infrastructure, Homeland Security, and various law enforcement
partners globally. These are essential elements in our ability
to protect our company, our customers, and our shareholders.
They are an opportunity for us to improve our own internal
security capabilities and to extend our expertise to other
partners. As Under Secretary Schaffer said, no one entity has
all the information. It takes teamwork to bring all the pieces
together.
So I am proud to say that Bank of America focuses a
tremendous amount of resources and energy to stay ahead of the
cybersecurity challenge, and we are continually making the
necessary investments in developing new tools, processes, and
expertise to meet the challenge.
I will conclude my remarks, Madam Chairwoman, and I would
be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garcia can be found on page
54 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Dr. Greg Shannon, chief scientist,
Carnegie Mellon University's Software Engineering Institute
CERT Program.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY E. SHANNON, CHIEF SCIENTIST, CARNEGIE
MELLON UNIVERSITY'S SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE CERT PROGRAM

Mr. Shannon. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Maloney, and subcommittee members. I am honored to testify on
the evolving cybersecurity threat to the financial community.
CERT was created in 1988 in response to the Morris worm
incident, and we have grown into a national asset in
cybersecurity with 200 staff, most of whom are cleared,
supporting the operational and R&D needs of our mostly
government customers.
When DHS created US-CERT, it called upon CERT to contribute
cybersecurity expertise. Through US-CERT, we work jointly with
DHS mitigating cybersecurity threats. Please note that US-CERT
and DHS work together closely, but are distinct partners who
have different roles in providing cybersecurity to the Nation.
To achieve CERT's cybersecurity mission, we engage both
public and private communities to create mutable technologies,
apply them to real problems, and amplify their impact by
promoting broad national and international adoption.
In response to your opening comments, we work with
government customers to find practicable solutions to problems
like protecting sensitive information that has been aggregated,
such as that considered by the Dodd-Frank legislation.
Similarly, over 200 computer security incident response teams
around the world at the national and sector level can trace a
pedigree back to the DOD-sponsored CERT program at Carnegie
Mellon.
Our solutions stem from long-standing collaboration and
trusted relationships. Those associations give us the
opportunity to access real data for our research and
development, which in turn enable usproduce operationally
viable cybersecurity solutions for the country.
We know that understanding a cybersecurity threat is more
than just anecdotes and scare tactics. We know the threat is
real and it is evolving, because for--as one example, CERT
catalogs over 250,000 instances of malware artifacts each
month. As you might imagine, at this volume it is difficult to
determine in real time the operational relevance of each
artifact. Unsurprisingly the limits in our technical abilities
coincide with the steady corporatization of cybersecurity
attacks, as we have heard today.
In reference to Mr. Smith's earlier testimony, I just want
to acknowledge our work at insider threat and refer you to our
testimony there.
The financial sector needs networks that are secure and
resilient in order to mitigate escalating cyberthreats. As
software vulnerabilities continue to grow at an alarming rate,
it is imperative that we build security into the software
development process to root out the problem at the beginning
instead of responding to the consequences.
CERT, taking a comprehensive approach to limiting
vulnerabilities and other software defects, created new
international coding standards, developed in coordination with
security researchers and software developers, which, when
applied, result in more secure systems. There is no magic
bullet. Systems will fail, and we need to ensure that business
goals are met and critical business functions are sustained
despite the presence of cyberattacks. Systems must be
resilient. Improving survivability in the presence of
cyberattacks also improves the ability of businesses to survive
accidents and systems failures that are not malicious.
Through our collaboration with the financial community,
CERT has a definition for operational resilience management
known as CERT-RMM, and we are quite proud to have worked with
the broader community in creating that.
When a cyberattack does occur, we need the forensic ability
to locate the source of the attack and limit the damage,
sometimes in minutes or seconds, as discussed earlier. As you
are aware, computer forensics labs are constrained by the lack
of resources and unable to handle the overwhelming increases in
volumes of data that need to be examined for evidence; for
example, hundreds of terabytes of data captured at data centers
by law enforcement.
Partnering with Federal agencies and law enforcement, CERT
is creating solutions to enable organizations to accelerate the
tempo of investigations, as well as boost computational
analysis of the data. CERT is currently working on a new
incident analysis framework which speeds up the velocity of
investigations and allows for faster and more adaptive defense
and mitigation opportunities otherwise not available in near
real time.
These examples of CERT's work highlight the need for
leadership and support from the government in policy
discussions about research and about how research can support
sound policy decisions in cybersecurity. Research is only as
good as the data it is created from, and currently, researchers
have limited access to data. To better combat the cyberthreat,
we must maintain better situational awareness, otherwise
policymakers and experts are left to speculate about what is
the right data to share. Achieving this enhanced situational
awareness will require continued research on network data and
the cooperation of the financial community.
The credit card fraud detection capabilities that were
referred to in opening remarks is a good example of public-
private research and development that started 20 years ago in
the financial community, and I think can serve as an example of
addressing issues in cybersecurity.
I realize information-sharing on this scale tends to
exacerbate an already contentious relationship between security
and privacy. This is an unhealthy condition, and our
adversaries are exploiting it. In an ever more interconnected
world, anonymity is being redefined, and, without security,
there is no privacy.
We at CERT look forward to working with the Federal
community and staff and other stakeholders to improve the
security and survivability of our national assets.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Shannon can be found on page
118 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final witness is Mr. Marc Rotenberg, executive
director, Electronic Payment Information Center.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARC ROTENBERG, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE ELECTRONIC
PRIVACY INFORMATION CENTER (EPIC)

Mr. Rotenberg. Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member Maloney,
thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
EPIC was established to focus on emerging privacy and civil
liberties issues. In fact, the first issue that we took on was
the availability of the strong technique for data security
encryption, because we understood that this was critical for
the development of the Internet and its use as a platform for
commerce.
I also wanted to thank the subcommittee for your interest
in this issue and acknowledge the important work of the
witnesses on the first panel on the law enforcement side
protecting the interests of American consumers.
I would say from the consumer perspective, this is one of
the most critical issues people face today. As the earlier
witnesses have stated, the loss in dollar amounts are very
high. According to the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, over the
last several years, more than 500 million records containing
sensitive personal information have been lost in data breaches.
We know in addition to the recent hacks of financial
institutions, there are also non-financial institutions that
contain a great deal of sensitive financial information. For
example, the Sony PlayStation Network, which was compromised,
contained credit card record information, and contained
unencrypted password files that were accessed. These are very
sensitive and significant issues.
And then, of course, most recently involving the so-called
Comodo hacker, the digital certificates which provide the basis
for a lot of the trust and confidence in the online environment
were compromised as well. These are the techniques that make it
possible for a person to go to a Web site that says Google or
Yahoo or Skype and be assured that it is, in fact, the Web site
of the company that is being represented.
So the urgency here is clearly quite significant, and if
this is not enough to worry about, I would suggest to the
subcommittee as well that you may also need to look at the
cybersecurity implications of moving more commercial data, more
of the government's data, and more consumer data into the cloud
computing environment. One of the practical consequences of the
migration of this sensitive personal information is that it
will be more difficult for consumers and government agencies
and businesses to be aware when this kind of activity occurs
because it will no longer be the data that is in their
possession.
Now, in my prepared statement I offered a few suggestions
of legislative principles. I understand the hearing is not
primarily focused on legislation, but I would like you to
consider that when consumers turn over their personal
information to financial institutions, there is actually very
little that they can do at that point to safeguard their
information, and that is the reason that we have recommended to
other committees and would recommend to this committee as well
that you consider strong legislative safeguards to protect the
information of consumers that is now in the possession of
financial institutions.
So, for example, we favor an opt-in standard so that people
are aware when their personal information is disclosed to
others. We favor strong breach notification so that people know
when these kinds of incidents have occurred. We think it is
important also that States remain free to develop their own
legislation to protect consumers.
There is oftentimes an effort in this area to establish a
so-called national standard, but one of the practical problems
because the threats are so quickly evolving is that a single
national standard, unless it operates as a baseline, may
actually not be adequate to deal with some of the new threats.
California, for example, had to recently amend its breach
notification law so that people would be more fully informed
about some of the risks if their personal information was
disclosed, and what additional steps they might take to protect
their information. I think it is also interesting that in the
California law, there was an obligation on institutions in the
financial services sector that suffer a breach to notify the
State attorney general so that the State attorney general would
have a clearer picture across the State of a pattern of
breaches that had occurred, and what additional efforts the
States may need to take.
I think that is actually a very helpful approach going
forward, as you think about cybersecurity, how do you get a
good assessment of where the risks are, what the harms are, and
what additional steps might be taken.
So, again, I am grateful for the opportunity to testify
today. I would say for American consumers, the protection of
their financial information has to be one of the top concerns.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rotenberg can be found on
page 88 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. I couldn't agree more, and that is a
good place to stop.
I want to thank all of you for your testimony. I am going
to begin the questions.
Mr. Garcia, first of all, I would like to thank you and
Bank of America for coming forward in this particular panel,
realizing that acknowledging security breaches are difficult
for competing entities. And Mr. Rotenberg talked about
retailers, same issue. If you are perceived to be a company
that has a weak cybersecurity wall or breaches of personal
information, you are obviously going to lose customers or lose
people who come into your store or wherever. You have received
an award, your bank has, and you are obviously on top of this.
When a breach occurs, no matter what the magnitude, what
are you actually required to do in terms of notifying your
customer, or notifying the FBI, or notifying Mr. Nelson's
organization? I am assuming you are one of his members. What
are you required at this point to do?
Mr. Garcia. We have a number of requirements on a per-
State basis, of course. Where we operate, there are State
breach notification laws. Also, under the FFIEC, as was
mentioned by Bill Nelson, there are requirements whenever we
have an event, we notify our regulators.
Chairwoman Capito. Your regulators.
Mr. Garcia. Correct. So we have a very well-defined,
tightly scripted set of requirements and routines for when we
have a breach and how we work with law enforcement, what we do
with that information internally and--
Chairwoman Capito. What about with your customer? Does the
customer have to opt into being notified, or you are required
to notify them no matter what?
Mr. Garcia. Not no matter what. We work with law
enforcement. When an investigation is under way, we want to be
sure that we don't flood customers with false information. So
we want to be sure that they have confidence that their
information is being well handled. But the important thing is
making sure we provide the customer accurate and actionable
information, if something actually has occurred.
Chairwoman Capito. I am not going to ask about mobile
devices, but I am very curious about them. I think that is
probably a signal of my age, wondering, gosh, we are going to
be able to actually carry that around and do all those kinds of
things? But I think you all have voiced a concern about where
that is going to lead, and I think from the last panel, he
mentioned that we need to be on the front end of that in terms
of trying to prevent fraud, rather than reacting to it once it
occurs, because we know it is going to occur. Somebody said 52
percent more threats to the mobile--I think that might have
been you, Mr. Tillett.
In the Dodd-Frank Act--and I don't know if you are familiar
with this--an Office of Financial Research was created.
According to the Treasury, the mission is to ``improve the
quality of financial data available to policymakers, and
facilitate more robust and sophisticated analysis of the
financial system.'' If this new office is going to be tasked
with gathering significant financial information from across
the Nation, are we creating a very fertile ground and huge
target for hackers, in your opinion? Dr. Shannon?
Mr. Shannon. Thank you.
There are many targets already out there. As we have heard
in the testimony, there are many sources for hackers to attack.
Clearly, an aggregated collection of data offers potentially
even more of a target, but what should be considered is what is
the right information to put into that. You don't need to have
a fishing expedition in terms of collecting anything and
everything, but clearly, a certain level of fidelity about
cases, if you are trying to get an overall situation awareness,
is important. On the other hand, if you are trying to use it
for oversight of specific organizations or individuals, that is
a different animal.
Chairwoman Capito. So what I am hearing you saying is there
are all kinds of other opportunities out there, so this one
particular one doesn't create a new and better opportunity. Am
I hearing you correctly?
Mr. Shannon. Correct. There are lots of good opportunities,
and in various sectors they are creating other opportunities,
if you will, but using the right security protections won't be
the issue. It will be probably more of some of the privacy
issue.
Mr. Rotenberg. I actually do share your concern. I am not
familiar with the specific provisions of the legislation. I
think general reporting requirements are important and useful,
but the collection of sensitive data can create new risks, and
we have recommended, for example, techniques to anonymize or
de-identify or minimize data collection so as to reduce those
risks. So I think there is a way to do it, but I think it has
to be done with some sensitivity about the data that is being
collected.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay. Now, let me ask you, Mr. Nelson's
organization, I have just established that Bank of America is
one of your members. Is Verizon one of your members?
Mr. Nelson. No. We are just financial services
organizations, but they have been a sponsor of ours in the
past, and Symantec.
Chairwoman Capito. I am drumming up your membership here.
And then do you share your data with--and I think you said this
in your testimony--with the FBI, the folks we saw in panel one?
Is there really a coordination between the private sector and
the government sector and law enforcement that--and I am not
disputing their testimony, I certainly thought it was
excellent, but would you corroborate that testimony?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. I think it really kicked off in 2009. I
remember being summoned by the FBI--and I don't know when--if
you have ever been summoned by the FBI and not given a reason
why, I was a little worried. But I showed up, and I was in a
room with about 20 agents. I think Gordon Snow was there, his
other deputies were there, and they described this situation,
and it was this commercial account takeover situation. And they
said, we knew about commercial account takeover, but we didn't
realize it had become an epidemic. They had 85 cases they were
investigating. They were adding 10 a week, and they said, we
need to get something out to the industry. We don't want to
compromise our investigations, but we need you, the FS-ISAC, to
help us with this.
And I brought NACHA in, which is the rulemaking body for
the ACH network, because mostly these involved ACH
transactions. The losses were pretty high. Businesses were
affected, school districts, municipalities. We ended up--what
we used to tell people when they got attacked, we told banks to
tell their customers, is don't click on that link. That wasn't
good enough. So we spent 3 weeks--our threat intelligence
committee volunteers--working with the FBI, working with
NACHA's legal staff, and came up with a whole series of pretty
in-depth layer defense recommendations. Those become the basis
really for FFIEC supplemental guidance in June. So I think that
cooperation was pretty obvious.
In July and August, I gave three different presentations to
bank regulating groups that were having conferences at the
FDIC, where I spoke to over 500 bank regulators about what we
are doing, but also about what they have to do in terms of
their own guidance. So I think the cooperation has been there.
In terms of actual information-sharing and operational
information-sharing--
Chairwoman Capito. I am kind of at the end of my time here.
Mr. Nelson. Never mind.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay.
Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank all of you for your hard work and
your testimony today.
After 9/11, we created across this country, or the law
enforcement did, antiterrorism task forces on the local level
to react and share information. The prior panel said that there
were 24 task forces created in our country now on a regional
level to share information. So I would like to ask first Mr.
Garcia, or anyone on the panel, if any of you are participating
in these tasks forces that they mentioned, and how do they
work? Are they working?
So Mr. Garcia first, and anyone else who may be
participating. I assume you are from New York. New York has to
have one of these task forces, and I would like to hear your
comments on it.
Mr. Garcia. That is a very good question. Thank you for
asking it.
What was referred to at that time, I believe, was the
Secret Service, which sponsors the Electronic Crimes Task
Force. We have Bank of America associates who participate in
those forums where they gather with government and industry
representatives to discuss threats, vulnerabilities, and best
practices.
The FBI, similarly, has a program called InfraGard with
chapters all over the country, including in New York, where the
same type of activity happens. So this is all for the good
where we have law enforcement, government agencies, and the
private sector sharing what they know.
Greg Schaffer also alluded to the National Communications
and Cyber Integration Center, the NCCIC, which is a 24-by-7
watch and warning center located in Arlington, hosted by DHS.
The FS-ISAC has a seat on the NCCIC, and it is a watch floor
with government agencies and private sector, including
information technology and communications, the people who are
sharing information real-time about what is happening on their
networks, how are we responding to it, where is it coming from,
what is the method, and what do we do about it, and we do it
jointly.
So I think the partnership framework is getting more and
more mature every year, and it can only get better from here.
And Bank of America is very actively engaged in as many
partnerships as we can to get better for ourselves and to help
the broader ecosystem.
Mrs. Maloney. You mentioned the Secret Service had their
task force, the FBI had their task force. Would it be a better
model if you followed what the intelligence system is doing in
our country and have the task forces integrating everyone in
the same room from the local up to the top, in your opinion?
Mr. Garcia. I believe that is really the mission and
objective of the NCCIC, the National Cyber and Communications
Integration Center, at DHS, and it is just getting started, and
it is getting developed with more members, more standards of
practice, and I think it is maturing very well.
Mrs. Maloney. I did want to comment on Mr. Rotenberg's
comments that we do need to protect the privacy, and that we
need to take steps in that direction.
I would like to ask the panel, even though it is not a
legislative one today, a group of legislative proposals were
put forward by the Administration in this area. I would like to
ask you, have you read it? Are you aware of it? Are there any
proposals that you think are particularly worthy?
Mr. Shannon. I will just make one simple comment here. The
safe harbor provisions for sharing data so that organizations
and individuals can do the right thing, as they are responding,
time is usually of the essence in many of these incidences,
especially national security ones, and safe harbor-type
provisions, I think, enable people to do that right thing, and
we certainly support that.
Mr. Tillett. I would like to add to that the actionable
intelligence that needs to be shared. We have a number of
different public-private relationships which are sharing this
information. So actionable intelligence and real-time
intelligence is of high importance on this, but I think often
what we see is we don't need to reinvent the wheel. We just
need to make it work better, we need to speak a common
language. And I think that those initiatives are in process
amongst many of these private-public relationships, but we
absolutely need to embrace and endorse that so we are not
speaking past each other and we are not speaking above each
other. We all understand a common language about the current
threat.
Mrs. Maloney. In terms of technology, do you think any
foreign country has superior technology in this whole form of
hacking and protection, or are we leading the way in this area?
What is your opinion, anyone?
Mr. Shannon. As mentioned in the data breach report, a lot
of the at-scale for these cybercriminals, it is using fairly
simple techniques. But I believe in other venues, the specific
capabilities can be addressed, but they haven't taken us down
significantly yet. So I see that as a good sign. The stock
market operates, the press operates--
Mrs. Maloney. And they have to now talk about a cyberattack
that would stop our communications--yes, Mr. Sartin?
Mr. Sartin. I was just going to add to that about the
international perspective. We do see variances in knowledge
about security, implementation. We see variances in the
technologies that are adopted from one country to the next,
generally whether it is the people who process the technology,
the combination of that. I don't necessarily see that one
country is necessarily better prepared than any other. It comes
down to individual data breach victims.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. My time has expired. It has been
very insightful. Thank you for your hard work, all of you, and
your presentation today. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I have one additional question for Mr. Nelson regarding
notification of breaches and other cyber crimes. I understand
there is an update to FinCEN's suspicious activity report form.
Do you think this will help law enforcement better understand
the cyberthreat?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. I think today it is not really identified.
FinCEN's commercial account takeover is--you don't have a box
you can check on the form today to indicate what that is. I
think we could actually have a better idea--in my report, I
have some information about a survey we did, and 77
institutions responded, but that is not the whole industry. So
if SARs reports could indicate those types of attack, the
different types of attacks, what the losses actually were, we
would have a better understanding what the losses were and the
losses that were prevented. In many cases, the losses--funds
don't go out the door, or if they do, the receiving institution
returns the money.
Chairwoman Capito. I, too, want to thank all of the
witnesses, and I have to say one last thing myself. From an
individual standpoint, I think we have to be patient as
Americans to realize that there are a lot of people out there
trying to protect our financial information, our personal
information, and when we receive, like we all have, those phone
calls where we will try to use your card or whatever, and you
are locked out, we have a tendency to lose our patience and
become very frustrated, and many times these efforts are going
forward to try to protect us as individuals and us as families.
And I don't know that my statement is going to do any good
towards that. Maybe I am talking to myself here a little bit,
but I think we all need to remind ourselves that it is not
quite as simple as it looks. It is not as easy as it looks to
reach into your pocket, and you forget about all the
infrastructure that is going on behind you.
This concludes our hearing. The Chair notes that some
members may have additional questions for this panel which they
may wish to submit in writing. Without objection, the hearing
record will remain open for 30 days for members to submit
written questions to these witnesses and to place their
responses in the record.
I appreciate you all very much for coming in, and we are
very interested in the topic. And with that, the hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

September 14, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2601.106


