- LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE JOB CREATION, CAPITAL FORMATION, AND MARKET CERTAINTY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE
JOB CREATION, CAPITAL FORMATION,
AND MARKET CERTAINTY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS AND

GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 16, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-19

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-678                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises

SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey, Chairman

DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona, Vice      MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
PETER T. KING, New York              GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JEB HENSARLING, Texas                CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              AL GREEN, Texas
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 16, 2011...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 16, 2011...............................................    41

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 16, 2011

Bertsch, Kenneth A., President and CEO, Society of Corporate
Secretaries and Governance Professionals.......................     6
Deutsch, Tom, Executive Director, American Securitization Forum
(ASF)..........................................................     8
Hendrickson, Pamela B., Chief Operating Officer, The Riverside
Company........................................................     9
Silvers, Damon A., Policy Director and Special Counsel, AFL-CIO..    15
Weild, David, Senior Advisor, Grant Thornton LLP.................    11
Zubrod, Luke, Director, Chatham Financial........................    13

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Hurt, Hon. Robert............................................    42
Bertsch, Kenneth A...........................................    44
Deutsch, Tom.................................................    50
Hendrickson, Pamela B........................................    83
Silvers, Damon A.............................................    93
Weild, David.................................................   107
Zubrod, Luke.................................................   122

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Garrett, Hon. Scott:
Written statement of the Center On Executive Compensation....   125
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association
(CUNA).....................................................   127
Written statement of NASDAQ OMX..............................   130
Written statement of NYSE Euronext...........................   132
Hurt, Hon. Robert:
Written responses to questions submitted to Pamela
Hendrickson................................................   133

LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO PROMOTE
JOB CREATION, CAPITAL FORMATION,
AND MARKET CERTAINTY

----------

Wednesday, March 16, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and
Government Sponsored Enterprises,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Scott Garrett
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Garrett, Schweikert,
Royce, Manzullo, Neugebauer, McCotter, Posey, Hayworth, Hurt,
Grimm, Stivers; Sherman, Lynch, Miller of North Carolina,
Donnelly, Himes, Peters, and Green.
Chairman Garrett. This hearing of the Capital Markets
Subcommittee will come to order. Today's hearing is entitled,
``Legislative Proposals to Promote Job Creation, Capital
Formation, and Market Certainty.'' Each side will be limited to
10 minutes for opening statements.
And I will now yield myself 1 minute.
Basically, all I want to say during my time is I am pleased
to chair today's hearing inasmuch as today is the first
legislative hearing in which we are going to try to discuss
real solutions that address several of the negative
consequences that resulted from Dodd-Frank. And these are the
areas as mentioned: job creation; capital formation; and market
certainty.
I am also pleased that we have with us today the
subcommittee's five freshmen. Basically, these freshmen have
stepped up to the role of sponsoring the five pieces of
legislation that we will be discussing from the panel shortly,
which address the areas of promoting job creation and
eliminating unnecessary government overreach. These are issues
that they all engaged in during the campaign of last fall. And
now that they are here in Washington, I would say that these
freshmen are proving that they can get the job done and are
doing something about these issues.
Throughout the debate over Dodd-Frank in the last Congress,
I often spoke about the many negative consequences, both
intended and unintended, that it has caused. Now, some of those
negative consequences are being exacerbated by what? By the
rulemaking process that we are going through right now.
So my hope is that the bills in front of us today will spur
a productive discussion that will continue here in this
subcommittee and throughout this Congress. They will focus on
ways to--as I have already said--get capital, private capital
off the sidelines, back into the marketplace and create those
jobs that we so desperately need.
And with that, I will yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from
California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Some say that all we worry about here is the next election.
If you are only worried about the next election, you can
achieve your purpose by passing statement bills, bills that
might pass the House or committee, but have no chance in the
other body. Hopefully, we are focusing on bills that will
actually pass both bodies, be signed by the President and,
hopefully, will focus on things that affect the capital
markets, not just our own reelection chances.
Dodd-Frank needs technical correction and improvement.
Those who voted for it acknowledged that it would need a
technical corrections bill. And we are going to need to pass
several. But if we pass nothing except on a purely partisan
basis--as I believe almost every vote at the full committee in
markup has been absolutely party line, and that is thousands of
votes we have cast already this year, each of us casting a
couple dozen.
And so, I hope that these bills will move forward and
become bipartisan, both in content and in sponsorship. I am
particularly concerned with the credit rating agencies. Senator
Franken and I worked on an amendment that then got mangled in
conference so that it is a little vague. And it gives a little
too long to the SEC to act. What we need is to guarantee that
we clarify that and that we expedite it and we make it clear to
the SEC that within 2 years, we will not be in a circumstance
where you get to pick your credit rating agencies when you are
issuing a debt instrument.
If the pitcher picks the umpire, it is a strike. We know
that. And hopefully, we won't be dealing with tactics that try
to dissuade us from that by saying things like, ``Well, just
tell people not to rely on the credit rating agencies'
rating,'' which begs the question, what social purpose do they
serve, but also, how can you possibly not rely on it?
Even if you are investing in a mutual fund, you have to
choose between several different mutual funds. Which one of
those funds, both with a 5 percent rate of return, is investing
in the safest instrument? I guess if you have $10,000 to invest
and you want to spend a couple million dollars evaluating the
portfolios on your own, you could reach a conclusion.
Otherwise, you have to rely on the credit rating agency.
We do have one bill that deals with credit rating agencies,
but it does not deal with the issue that we have to deal with,
which is issuers selecting their own rater. And I hope that
legislation that will drive this change forward may--on an
expedited basis, will pass this committee on a bipartisan
basis, whether that is through an amendment to the Stivers bill
or as separate legislation.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. And I thank the gentleman. I think we are
on the same page, hoping to see these bills get through the
process and to the White House and signed.
And with that, I will yield 1 minute and 20 seconds to the
gentleman from Arizona.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One minute, 20
seconds. Okay. I am going to actually speak to H.R. 1070, which
is the Small Company Capital Formation Act of 2011. And part of
this, we have had a couple of the folks who are here to testify
today have actually come and visited me in my office talking
about what has gone on with Reg A.
If you take a look at the little charts--and we have a
handful of charts we have mocked up, you see that nice, long,
flat line on the right-hand side? That is where we have been
now since 1992, 1993 where we have not raised the dollar amount
that you can take a small company and go and put it out on the
market.
If we truly care about creation of jobs, if we care about
capital formation and getting that velocity of innovative ideas
in the marketplace where you and I can buy and sell them in
some type of stock or equity, I think this bill is simple. It
directs the SEC to raise that limit up. We would like to raise
it up to $50 million for initial offerings within those Reg A
rules.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Peters is recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding a hearing on legislative proposals to promote job
creation. I think there is bipartisan agreement that job
creation should be our top priority. And some of the bills that
we will be dealing with today are issues that were worked on in
the last Congress in a bipartisan fashion.
For example, I worked with Chairman Garrett as well as Mr.
Meeks on including a provision in Dodd-Frank that includes a
$150 million exemption from the SEC registration requirement
for private funds and also directs the SEC to come up with a
registration scheme for larger firms that takes into account
the amount of risk they pose for investors or for the larger
economy. I think the amendment provides the SEC with the
flexibility that they need to come up with a less burdensome
registration scheme and I look forward to continuing to work
with Chairman Garrett on this issue.
I also worked closely with many of my colleagues on both
sides of the aisle and in both Houses of Congress on the
derivatives title of Dodd-Frank. Bringing greater regulation
and transparency to these markets is of critical importance.
But I remain committed to making sure that end-users who are
using derivatives to hedge actual risk are not required to post
margins. It is important that as we revisit the end-user
exemption, we keep in mind the important role that captive
finance companies play in supporting the work that end-users do
to create jobs and to grow our economy and also pension funds
that provide retirement security to millions of workers and
retirees.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
The gentleman from California for 1 minute and 20 seconds?
Mr. Royce. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the future
of U.S. competitiveness is dependent upon us looking at three
glaring impediments to capital formation: first, unnecessary
and duplicative regulation; second, excessive litigation; and
third, a convoluted Tax Code. We have the second highest
corporate tax code in the world.
In terms of raising capital through IPOs, I have watched us
go from a situation where half of the world's new public
companies in the 1990s were here to one today where we have 13
percent. And, as Mr. Weild notes in his testimony, there has
been a precipitous decline in the number of publicly listed
companies in the United States on our exchanges.
We had 8,823 in 1997, and 5,091 at the end of last month.
That is a 42 percent decline. And this is the definition of
capital flight. When capital, both human and financial, can
relocate anywhere around the globe with the type of ease that
they have today, we have to reassess the business environment
that we have created here.
The three problems I indicated are all problems that
Congress has contributed to mightily. And I am grateful to the
Chair for taking a critical step in this endeavor and I look
forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
To the gentlelady from New York for a minute and 20
seconds?
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses for joining us. Congressman
Royce's comment regarding the business environment could not be
more apt. And vis-a-vis that, this week we have introduced the
Burdensome Data Collection Relief Act, H.R. 1062. And that
would repeal Section 953 of Dodd-Frank. There have been
statements of support from both sides of our political aisle
supporting this concept of repeal. And I appreciate that.
Existing law does, as you all know, require extensive
disclosure regarding executive compensation. And all material
information that a company that issues stock--is a public
company--is required to be disclosed, material information that
would affect a decision to invest or divest or vote for
directors. The legislation that we have proposed in H.R. 1062
only applies to immaterial disclosures, which is, in fact,
virtually all of that particular section.
One lesson of our financial crisis that started, as we
know, in 2008, is the importance of risks and incentives
associated with executive compensation. H.R. 1062 focuses
disclosures regarding executive compensation on these risks and
incentives by eliminating irrelevant and confusing, extraneous
information.
The disclosure requirement, Section 953(b), as it now
exists would be costly and time-consuming for employers, would
serve no useful purpose for company shareholders, and most
crucially, would divert resources from job creation. And that
is our critical role here. So for these reasons, we need to
repeal Section 953(b).
I thank you again for your testimony today.
And I thank the chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Virginia for a minute and 20 seconds?
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for being here this afternoon.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding today's
hearing on these important legislative proposals that will
facilitate job creation by increasing the flow of private
capital to small businesses. As noted by Republican and
Democrat Members in last week's hearing with the SEC, there is
serious concern about the effects of the new government mandate
for advisers to private equity included in Dodd-Frank. These
unnecessary registration requirements, which do not make the
financial system more stable or less risky, will impose an
undue burden on small and mid-sized private equity firms and
will decrease capital available to spur job growth.
This is why I have introduced H.R. 1082, the Small Business
Capital Access and Job Preservation Act, with bipartisan
support. If enacted, private equity advisers will be given the
same exemption under Dodd-Frank that venture capital advisers
receive. This will allow small businesses to access capital,
expand, and get people back to work. With unemployment still
unacceptably high in my district, Virginia's 5th District, and
across the country, now is not the time to impose onerous and
unnecessary regulatory requirements that force firms to divert
essential capital from preserving and creating jobs.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses and thank
them for their appearance before our subcommittee today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
Now, the gentleman we have been waiting to hear from is
recognized for a minute and 20 seconds.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You will always be
waiting to hear from me because I am the most junior member of
the committee. I would like to thank the chairman for calling
this important hearing.
And the five bills we are going to talk about today are
going to be addressing some of the most burdensome parts of the
Dodd-Frank bill that are having a negative impact on jobs in
our country. Specifically, the proposal that I have brought
forward deals with the asset-backed securities market. It is
the Asset-Backed Market Stabilization Act of 2011.
Last year, in Dodd-Frank, the credit rating agencies were
basically held liable for potential shareholder lawsuits. And
as a result of that, the Securities and Exchange Commission had
to issue two no-action letters to get the asset-backed
securities market moving again. And unfortunately, that is not
a way to make things work.
We can't have laws on the book and have regulatory agencies
saying we are not going to enforce this law. So I think there
is a better way to move forward.
I know Mr. Sherman talked earlier about the conflict of
interest. I think we need to deal with both of those things
long-term. And we are looking at making some changes that may
deal with a little more of that in this bill. But this bill
will basically do away with Section 939(g) of the Dodd-Frank
bill and go back to the old Section 436.
It will help folks like Ford, and like Honda, that employs
about 4,400 people in my district and built 400,000 cars last
year. This is a way to finance the creation of things and make
sure that we continue to have jobs in this country.
I look forward to hearing the witnesses. And I appreciate
the opportunity to bring this bill forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
And at this point, I welcome again the entire panel for
being with us here today. Without objection, your complete
statements will be made a part of the record. And as those of
you who have been on these panels before know that you will
each be recognized for 5 minutes. And, of course, before you
are the red, green, and yellow lights to advise you to keep you
within that timeframe, if we can do so.
So with that, I begin with 5 minutes to Mr. Bertsch,
please.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH A. BERTSCH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SOCIETY OF
CORPORATE SECRETARIES AND GOVERNANCE PROFESSIONALS

Mr. Bertsch. Thanks. My name is Ken Bertsch, and I am the
new executive head of the Society of Corporate Secretaries and
Governance Professionals, which is an association of governance
officers. We have 3,100 members.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the repeal of
Section 953(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires company
disclosure on the pay ratio, as Congresswoman Hayworth just
mentioned, between the CEO and the medium-paid employees of the
company. We acknowledge the public policy concern on widening
pay gaps in the United States. However, we believe the required
disclosure will not be material or meaningful to investors and
that Section 953(b) as now written will be difficult and
expensive to implement.
We note also, by the way, that the SEC faces challenges in
implementing many Dodd-Frank reforms and is otherwise resource-
constrained. The SEC must prioritize and focus on the most
important issues facing investors in the securities market.
Accordingly, we believe the provision should be repealed. If
Congress wishes to move ahead on the concept of the pay ratio,
a more workable legislation should be enacted.
We have two basic problems here. One, the pay ratio would
not provide meaningful information to investors, in our view.
Under existing SEC requirements, investors get extensive
disclosure on executive compensation.
SEC disclosure documents are meant to contain information
that a reasonable investor needs to make an investment
decision. SEC disclosure documents are not meant to contain
every item of information that any investor could possibly want
to know. Proliferation of disclosure requirements not censored
on a disciplined standard will make SEC disclosure documents
unusable for the average investor.
The pay ratio will not provide meaningful, comparable data
because it is not based on similarly situated employees. There
is a great deal of noise around what constitutes a company
employee with many firms contracting out work locally or
globally and others not doing so. Some companies have overseas
locations with lower pay levels where much of the work is done.
They have outsourced.
These companies may have better pay ratios than those that
have chosen to maintain their operations, call centers, for
example, in the United States. Companies with franchisees
rather than company staff stores will also likely have a better
pay ratio. The pay ratio will not be a meaningful measure to
compare the CEO's compensation or to compare the pay practices
within a single industry.
We believe investors have indicated limited interest in
obtaining such pay ratio information from companies. We are
aware of votes last year on 10 shareholder proposals requesting
reports on pay disparity. On average, the proposals were
opposed by 93.9 percent of the shares voted. They received
lower levels of support than many other shareholder proposals
concerning executive compensation.
Finally, if investors are concerned that they need
additional disclosure on pay equity, they can exert pressure
through say-on-pay votes, votes on directors, and shareholder
proposals.
The second major area of concern--the requirement as
written is burdensome well beyond its benefit. Given the
definition used in this provision, we fear that large,
worldwide U.S. companies will not be able to calculate the
median of the annual total compensation of all employees, as
the law specifies, with the degree of precision and certainty
required for information filed under U.S. securities laws.
Payroll systems are not set up to gather the kind of
information required under this provision. This is especially
the case for companies organized into multiple business
operating units. Those business units keep records and have
internal controls over what each employee is paid, but they
report aggregate figures to the parent company for inclusion in
consolidated financial reports for public filings.
A company would have to convert the pay of each employee
globally into the elaborate pay formula applicable to the named
executive officers in the summary compensation table. To our
knowledge, no public company now calculates each employee's
total compensation this way. For a company with tens of
thousands of employees, this would be a very large and costly
task, at best.
My written testimony lists some of the questions that
corporate staff must answer in trying to comply. I would point
to one in particular that--and there are really a lot of
different questions that would have to be answered. One that is
a little bit different than other understanding is that local
privacy laws in some markets actually prevent the export of
personal compensation information across borders without
employee consent.
In summary, we believe the provision is simply unworkable
and would produce information that is not meaningful to
investors. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bertsch can be found on page
44 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Deutsch for 5 minutes?

STATEMENT OF TOM DEUTSCH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN
SECURITIZATION FORUM (ASF)

Mr. Deutsch. Thank you very much, Chairman Garrett, for
inviting me to testify here on behalf of the American
Securitization Forum. My name is Tom Deutsch. I am the
executive director of the organization that represents over 330
member institutions who originate the collateral for most
mortgage and asset-backed securitizations in America. That
includes auto loans, student loan companies, mortgage
originators, small banks, large banks, as well as lenders to
small and medium-sized businesses.
Let me first just address a couple key points of the
importance of the securitization markets to the overall global
economy, in particular, the U.S. economy. Currently, there are
over $11 trillion outstanding of securitized assets in America,
of all these different asset classes: credit cards; student
loans; asset-backed commercial paper, etc. In particular, 91
percent of all outstanding loans--at least currently, loans
that are being originated to support auto loans to consumers,
91 percent of those are financed through the securitization
process.
Finally, even talking about Government-Sponsored
Enterprises. Although 95 percent of mortgages in America today
are backed by the U.S. Government, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and
Ginnie Mae all securitize those loans into the secondary market
and sell them to the institutional investors such as pension
funds, mutual funds, insurance companies, and others who seek
returns on those investments.
But as we saw in 2009, once the securitization market
stopped working, the credit market stopped working. It is a
very quick--and, unfortunately for American consumers,
unfortunate that they wouldn't be able to access auto loans,
credit cards, and student loans at many of the same levels,
certainly not looking to go back to a 2006 credit availability,
but we certainly don't want to go back to a 2009 credit
availability, either.
As we saw strong consumer ABS demand uptick into 2010, we
had significant issuance of auto and other asset-backed
securitizations. We also saw credit availability expand for
more lower-income borrowers and also at cheaper rates
throughout the United States.
My purpose in testifying here today is to talk about two
issues. In my written statement, I go into a great amount of
detail about some key issues related to securitization that
concerns the orderly liquidation authority provisions of the
Dodd-Frank Act. There is a tremendous amount of detail, and I
will leave that to your future reading.
But in my oral remarks today, I do want to focus on the
ASF's strong support for Congressman Stivers' legislation to
effectively repeal the repeal of 436(g). Although he has not
introduced it yet, we have seen the draft that is available
online.
In this testimony, I would like to provide a little bit of
background of how 436(g) works and in particular, why it is
important for the securitization markets that we have a long-
term fix. As Congressman Stivers indicated, on July 22nd, the
repeal of 436(g) went into effect. That was the day after
President Obama signed Dodd-Frank into law. That same day, the
securitization markets completely shut down.
No issuer of auto loans, student loans, etc., was able to
put a securitization in the market because of a peculiar SEC
regulation, items 1103 and 1120, that specifically require that
ratings be included in statutory prospectuses. The
securitization markets are the only markets to be impacted by
this.
Because of this, credit rating agencies were not willing to
provide consent to include those ratings into the statutory
prospectuses because at that point, they had become subject to
strict Section 11 liability. That is in their ratings, when
they are providing some forward-looking statements about the
potential credit quality out of the underlying assets and what
that performance may be over time, they are very concerned that
with 20/20 hindsight 5 years down the road, you could look back
and say, that assessment wasn't exactly right. We are going to
bring litigation against you because you didn't have the right
assumptions.
This is very different than existing parties that are
subject to Section 11 liability under the Securities Act
because they look at existing facts and things that they can
actually verify as opposed to make forward-looking statements.
That is why it is critical to distinguish between credit rating
agencies being subject to this Section 11 strict liability and
other potential actors that are currently subject to this
liability.
But at this point, the markets have resumed under the SEC's
no-action letter, which we certainly are very grateful for the
SEC staff to be able to keep the securitization markets going.
But a no-action letter is certainly not a long-term or
permanent fix. So what we are proposing and what we are
strongly supportive of is legislation that would ultimately
repeal the repeal of Rule 436(g) so that the securitization
markets can go back to normal and have the permanency
associated with being able to understand the rules and not have
this subject to change in the SEC's position.
I thank you very much for the time. And I look forward to
answering any questions that committee members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deutsch can be found on page
50 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Hendrickson for 5 minutes?

STATEMENT OF PAMELA B. HENDRICKSON, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER,
THE RIVERSIDE COMPANY

Ms. Hendrickson. Chairman Garrett, members of the
subcommittee--
Chairman Garrett. Can you just pull your microphone up a
little bit?
Ms. Hendrickson. Sorry.
Chairman Garrett. And then you might want to even pull it
up closer to you a little bit.
Ms. Hendrickson. Can you hear me now?
Chairman Garrett. There you go.
Ms. Hendrickson. Chairman Garrett, members of the
subcommittee, my name is Pam Hendrickson, and I am the chief
operating officer of The Riverside Company.
Riverside is a private equity firm that manages $3.5
billion of investor funds. We use that money to buy and build
small companies that, with our capital and guidance, will grow
and create hundreds of jobs. Today, the 50 companies we own in
the United States together employ more than 10,000 people.
There are more than 2,000 small and mid-market private
equity firms like us in the United States. I am here today to
support legislation introduced by Representative Hurt of
Virginia that would eliminate the Dodd-Frank requirement that
private equity firms register with and report to the Securities
and Exchange Commission under the Investment Advisers Act of
1940.
Registration will not accomplish Dodd-Frank's stated
purpose of helping identify and reduce systemic risk in the
U.S. financial system. Let me begin by sharing a story.
Commonwealth Laminating and Coating is a small company based in
Martinsville, Virginia. It manufactures solar window films that
help shield cars, houses, and commercial properties from the
sun's heat.
Its products are sold all over the world, but they are all
manufactured in Martinsville. In 2006, CEO Steve Phillips
realized that he needed much more capital to continue to grow
his company. Riverside was approached as a potential capital
source and acquired a majority interest in CLC.
At the height of the recession, Riverside and CLC together
invested an additional $16 million in capital to significantly
boost the company's production capacity. Together, we grew jobs
by 73 percent.
By the time Riverside sold CLC last summer, the company had
grown its earnings by 277 percent. The teachers, firefighters,
and government employees whose pension funds invested in
Riverside received a significant return.
The bottom line is that with Riverside's help, this small
company in Martinsville nearly quadrupled its earnings and
significantly increased its employee base during our ownership
period. This is what Riverside and firms like us do every day.
But suppose the CLC investment hadn't turned out so well.
Could a failure there have created the type of cascading losses
that caused the financial crisis? The answer is a resounding
no.
Private equity investors commit capital over a 10-year
period. They generally have no right to pull their money out of
a fund. So there simply couldn't be a run on the bank.
Any financial loss would have been confined to this single
investment. Private equity transactions are not interconnected
with other financial market players. And they are not related
to each other.
The failure of any one company cannot cause a ripple
effect. Our world is not the Wild West. Our industry is closely
watched and heavily scrutinized by a very sophisticated group
of investors, generally large pension funds, foundations, and
endowments who employ highly-trained consultants and
experienced lawyers.
Private equity has been around for 50 years and has
survived at least 3 cyclical downturns. In all those years,
neither the SEC nor this committee have had to devote time to
worrying about negative macroeconomic impacts or investor fraud
in private equity. We invest in businesses and people, not
publicly traded securities.
What happens to Riverside if the proposed registration and
reporting requirements take effect? Let us look at just one
issue, valuation. Valuing private companies where there is no
publicly traded stock is an art, not a science. It is
challenging, and it is expensive. While we develop quarterly
valuations for our investors, they understand that the true
value of an investment is known only when the acquired company
is sold and profits are returned to them.
Under the proposed new rule, all private equity firms would
be required to calculate the value and performance of each of
their funds, and, therefore, each of their companies, on a
monthly basis. You can do the math. Our 50 companies times 12
months means we would have to undertake 600 separate valuations
each year to comply with the regulation.
Under the new rules, small firms might need to calculate
240,000 company values each year. That is for members of the
Association for Corporate Growth, who represent about 20,000
small companies. According to comments filed with the SEC,
estimated annual costs per firm of this exercise range from
$500,000 to $1 million.
To conclude, private equity exists in large part because
the public equity markets do not do a good job of serving the
capital needs of small companies, the companies that generate
the most job growth. Instead of imposing additional costs and
regulatory burdens, we should be supporting a system that has
steadily provided critical capital to small and growing
businesses, thereby strengthening companies, communities, and
creating more jobs.
Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hendrickson can be found on
page 83 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Weild?

STATEMENT OF DAVID WEILD, SENIOR ADVISOR, GRANT THORNTON LLP

Mr. Weild. Thank you. Chairman Garrett and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify this
afternoon on job creation, capital formation, and market
certainty, issues that are absolutely critical to our Nation's
economic future. My name is David Weild, and I am a senior
adviser for the Capital Markets Group of Grant Thornton, one of
the six global audit tax and advisory organizations.
The United States stock market, once the envy of the world,
has suffered a devastating decline in numbers of small initial
public offerings. Our research and analysis of relevant data
strongly demonstrates that small businesses and entrepreneurs
cannot access the capital they need to grow jobs. The United
States is losing more public companies from our listed stock
exchanges than we are replacing with new IPOs.
When measured by number of listed companies, America's
stock exchanges are declining while those of other developed
nations are increasing. It is imperative that Congress,
regulators, and stakeholders in the debate evaluate and take
action to increase the number of U.S. publicly listed
companies. An increase to the Regulation A ceiling will provide
a less costly and more effective alternative for smaller
entrepreneurial companies that want to access the public
capital markets and may also enable smaller growth-oriented
companies to access the public market at an earlier stage in
their growth cycle.
We applaud the Small Company Capital Formation Act as the
beginning of a campaign to bring back the small IPO, the U.S.
economy and our stock markets. Regulation A was originally
enacted during the Great Depression to help the economy by
improving small-business access to equity capital. Huge
startups and growth companies have the option to borrow money
from a bank, and consequently, access equity risk capital is
essential to drive entrepreneurship.
This bill does three things that are enormously beneficial
for small companies' capital formation and in turn, the U.S.
economy. First, it will drive down costs for issuers by
permitting the use of a simpler offering circular for the SEC's
review. Second, it opens up the Regulation A exemption to a
size--this is important--that will allow companies to list on
the New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ and to avail themselves
of the so-called ``blue sky'' exemption, thus avoiding
extremely costly State-by-State filings.
And third, it will allow issuers to gauge the viability of
an offering by meeting with investors before incurring the
significant costs of an offering. This last so-called ``testing
the waters'' provision may not seem like much, but there has
been a steady increase in IPOs that are postponed, withdrawn,
priced below the low end of the range of the IPO filing range,
or that have broken the IPO issue price within 30 days of the
completion of an offering. These so-called ``busted deals'' can
be ruinous to small companies.
I fully endorse the passage of this bill to increase the
cap on Regulation A from $5 million to $50 million with the
following requirements: one, that issuers file audited
statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
distribute such statements to prospective investors; two, that
issuers be required to submit their offering statements to the
SEC electronically; three, that periodic disclosures be
determined by the SEC--we recommend that they mimic those
required of registered companies--and four, that the SEC
stipulate so-called ``bad boy'' provisions to disqualify from
participation in this market those individuals or entities with
a disciplinary or criminal history.
I applaud the subcommittee for seeking solutions to the
capital formation challenges that small-growth companies face.
Passage of the Regulation A draft bill is a necessary first
step in the campaign to bring back the small IPO, generate
jobs, and revitalize the U.S. economy.
Please note, however, that this Regulation A draft bill
alone is not going to be sufficient to get the IPO market back
on track and to get America back on the path to prosperity. I
encourage Congress to seek many solutions, including a
congressional charter for a new stock market, one that focuses
on providing the essential economic model that sustains the
infrastructure needed to support small public companies and
drive that long-term growth and prosperity that we all seek for
all Americans. A market such as this would also drive tax
revenues without costing the taxpayers a dime.
Thank you for this opportunity to present on such an
incredibly important topic. I am pleased to answer any
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weild can be found on page
107 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I appreciate your testimony. We will have
questions in a moment.
Mr. Zubrod for 5 minutes?

STATEMENT OF LUKE ZUBROD, DIRECTOR, CHATHAM FINANCIAL

Mr. Zubrod. Good afternoon, Chairman Garrett, and members
of the subcommittee. I thank you for the opportunity to testify
today regarding legislative proposals to promote job creation,
capital formation, and market certainty. My name is Luke
Zubrod, and I am a director at Chatham Financial.
Today, Chatham speaks on behalf of the Coalition for
Derivatives End Users. The Coalition represents thousands of
companies across the United States that utilize over-the-
counter derivatives to manage day-to-day business risk. Chatham
is an independent adviser to businesses that use derivatives to
reduce risk. A global firm based in Pennsylvania, Chatham
serves over 1,000 end-user clients, ranging from Fortune 100
companies to small businesses, including clients in 46 States
and every State represented by members of this subcommittee.
The Coalition supports the efforts of this subcommittee to
pass legislation aimed at reducing systemic risk and increasing
transparency in the OTC derivatives market. The Coalition also
appreciates the bipartisan nature of the present undertaking.
The overwhelming and bipartisan support for end-users was made
clear in the amendments adopted to the financial reform
legislation that passed the House in December 2009.
Several amendments, including the Murphy-McMahon amendment
which passed with 304 votes, were intended to ensure that the
salient economic requirements of the Act were appropriately
focused on those entities whose use of derivatives could
jeopardize financial stability. In essence, they were intended
to protect end-users from onerous bank-like regulation that
would divert precious working capital from job-creating
activities, including research and development and business
expansion.
Let me turn to where things now stand in terms of
implementing the derivatives title of the Dodd-Frank Act and
point out where end-users have the greatest concern. The
Coalition appreciates recent comments by Federal Reserve
Chairman Ben Bernanke, CFTC Chairman Gary Gensler, and SEC
Chairman Mary Schapiro indicating that margin requirements
should not be imposed retroactively. Appropriately, the
chairmen recognized that the retroactive imposition of a margin
requirement would upset the reasonable expectations of market
participants when they entered into preexisting contracts and
could severely restrict economic growth.
The Coalition is concerned, however, by recent testimony
provided by regulators concerning the imposition of margin
requirements on end-user transactions used prudently for the
purpose of risk management. Congress recognized that the
imposition of margins on end-users would divert working capital
from job-creating activities and hamper economic growth while
offering no appreciable mitigation of systemic risk.
Indeed, following the conclusion of the conference
committee, the chairmen of the four committees with primary
jurisdiction over Title 7 took steps to make clear that
regulators did not have the authority to impose margins on end-
user hedges. However, in spite of congressional intent and the
clear language of the statute, some regulators appear to have
interpreted Title 7 as giving them authority to impose margin
on end-user hedges and even worse, requiring swap dealers to
impose margin requirements on all end-user hedges. We
respectfully request that this committee provide end-users with
certainty by clarifying that their hedges will not be subject
to margin requirements.
The Coalition appreciates the hard work of the CFTC, the
SEC, and prudential regulators in proposing more than half of
the 150 or more expected rules to meet the 1-year rulemaking
timeline mandated by Congress. The regulators have run an open
and transparent process and have met with representatives of
the Coalition approximately a dozen times. However, we are
concerned that the statutory deadline for rulemaking does not
allow regulators sufficient time to incorporate
recommendations, craft thoughtful rules, and conduct adequate
cost/benefit analyses.
The regulators have sufficient authority to adopt a phased-
in approach to implementation of rules. We are eager to ensure
the final rules strengthen the market and minimize unintended
and unnecessary consequences.
We therefore, respectfully ask this committee to consider
extending the date by which final derivatives regulations must
be promulgated, which is now set at July 15, 2011.
Additionally, I elaborate in my written testimony on two more
issues, which I will briefly summarize.
First, though we strongly support the legislation's
transparency objective, we are concerned that proposed real-
time reporting rules could inadvertently jeopardize end-users'
ability to secure efficient market pricing in certain
situations. Second, the Coalition is concerned that capital
adequacy guidelines finalized by the Basel Committee on banking
supervision late last year could unnecessarily and
substantially increase end-user costs incurred as they use
derivatives to manage their business risk.
As regulators go about the important work of finalizing the
rules intended to address problems revealed by the financial
crisis, it is critical that well-functioning aspects of these
markets not be harmed. We appreciate your attention to these
concerns and look forward to continuing to support the
subcommittee's efforts to ensure that derivatives regulations
do not unnecessarily burden American businesses, jeopardize
economic growth, or harm job creation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zubrod can be found on page
122 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. And I thank you.
Mr. Silvers for 5 minutes?

STATEMENT OF DAMON A. SILVERS, POLICY DIRECTOR AND SPECIAL
COUNSEL, AFL-CIO

Mr. Silvers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am Damon Silvers. I
am the policy director and special counsel for the AFL-CIO. I
am testifying today on behalf of the Americans for Financial
Reform and the Consumer Federation of America as well as for
the AFL-CIO.
The 250 member organizations of Americans for Financial
Reform represent well over 50 million Americans and their
families. I should note I am also the Deputy Chair of the
Congressional Oversight Panel for TARP, however, I am not here
on behalf of either the panel or its staff.
The title of today's hearing is, ``Legislative Proposals to
Promote Job Creation, Capital Formation, and Market
Certainty.'' These are the very goals that the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act sought to achieve
after the most traumatic financial crisis since the Great
Depression cost our Nation 8 million jobs, left 13 million
families facing home foreclosure, and destroyed $10 trillion in
household wealth.
Well-regulated financial markets facilitate capital
formation and help private companies obtain the financing they
need to grow and create jobs. Poorly-regulated markets, such as
we have seen over and over again in the last 15 years, lead to
bubbles and panics and excess volatility, which destroy
confidence and jobs. If we want well-regulated markets,
Congress must first give regulators the opportunity to
implement the Dodd-Frank Act and the financing necessary to do
so effectively.
The American people are genuinely worried--I think that is
an understatement--about unemployment and are frustrated that
Congress is focused on side issues that will not help people
get back to work. A tracking poll conducted by the Kaiser
Foundation in February found that 71 percent of adults in this
country feel that Congress is paying too little attention to
the economy and jobs. Tragically, cynical exercises in
financial deregulation, such as the bills under consideration
today, are only going to intensify public frustration with this
Congress.
If there was a truth-in-labeling act for Congress, the
Business Risk Mitigation and Price Stabilization Act would be
called the ``Help Create Another AIG Act.'' The proposal would
amend the definition of a major swap participant to prevent
regulators from designating from special oversight
undercapitalized and highly-leveraged financial institutions
that maintain major derivatives positions that threaten U.S.
financial stability.
I have here the Congressional Oversight Panel's 300-page
unanimous bipartisan report on AIG that will hopefully help
refresh the subcommittee's memory as to where this type of
deregulation leads. The Burdensome Data Collection Relief Act,
which would repeal the Dodd-Frank requirement that issuers
disclose the ratio between CEO pay and median worker pay,
should be called the ``Promote CEO Pay Secrecy Act.''
I have here the Congressional Oversight Panel's unanimous
bipartisan report on executive compensation and the TARP,
which, among other things, contains the testimony of the
special master for executive pay that executives of our
country's major financial firms ``feathered their own nests to
the tune of billions of dollars while their companies were
receiving public money and laying off tens of thousands of
Americans.''
The Small Business Capital Access and Job Preservation Act,
which would amend the Investment Advisers Act to provide a
registration exemption for private equity fund advisers, should
be called the ``No Accountability for Leveraged Buy-Out Funds
Act.'' I have here the special regulatory reform report of the
Congressional Oversight Panel, which lays out the systemic
risks associated with leveraged private pools of capital. And
if one has an interest, one could take a look at tens of
thousands of jobs lost through leveraged buy-outs over the last
2 decades in the United States.
The Small Company Capital Formation Act, which would allow
offerings of up to $50 million to rely on the Regulation A
exemption and seek capital from the investing public without
audited financial statements should be called the ``Promote
Penny Stock Fraud Act.'' And finally, the Asset-Backed Market
Stabilization Act, which would exempt the rating agencies from
the same standards that apply to other experts giving an
opinion in connection with offerings of asset-backed
securities--remember asset-backed securities. They are, after
all, the market that caused the collapse of our economy--would
be called the ``Illegal Immunity for the People who Brought You
the Financial Panic Act.''
In reality, these legislative proposals are not attempts to
help put Americans back to work or to restore confidence in our
financial markets. They are a systematic effort to chip away at
the first meaningful steps toward reregulating our financial
markets and restoring some level of stability after 30 years of
deregulation led to the worst financial crisis, the worst
unemployment, and the greatest economic suffering in our
country since the Great Depression.
For these reasons, the Americans for Financial Reform, the
AFL-CIO, and the Consumer Federation of America strongly oppose
each of these efforts on behalf of Wall Street interests to
weaken the Dodd-Frank Act and to further put our country in
danger of repeating the experience of 2008. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Silvers can be found on page
93 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman for his testimony.
But if we rename all the bills, we won't continue to get the
bipartisan support that we have been getting for all of them.
[laughter]
So with that, I thank the panel for all their testimony.
And we now go for questioning to the gentleman from
Virginia for the first 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate you
taking me out of order.
Mr. Silvers, I was particularly interested in your
testimony. I assume that you would agree--it sounds like you
have been around here long enough. It sounds like to me you
would agree that there are significant costs to increased
regulations to businesses--in this case, private equity funds--
which have to comply with these new regulations. Do you agree
with that?
Mr. Silvers. I would compare that to telling you that every
time you sneeze, there is a cost. The regulations that the
Dodd-Frank Act subjects private equity funds to, which is
registration under the Investment Company Act, I think is
widely understood to be among the least onerous of the
regulations that we apply to financial markets.
Mr. Hurt. But you would agree there is a cost?
Mr. Silvers. I think there is a--as I said, I think there
is a cost to every act one takes in life.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. Thank you. And in the SEC budget, have you
been following the SEC budget request and the tremendous strain
that all these additional regulations are going to put on the
SEC? Are you familiar with that?
Mr. Silvers. I have been following the systematic effort to
strip the SEC of the resources necessary to protect American
investors by you and your colleagues. Yes, I have.
Mr. Hurt. Okay. And so, you understand that by imposing
these new costs on these businesses, it necessarily means there
is less capital to put into companies that create jobs in
Martinsville, Virginia, where I represent the people who have
25 percent unemployment? You understand that?
Mr. Silvers. Are you asking me to agree with the way you
see the world? Or are you asking me a question? I am not sure
which.
Mr. Hurt. I am asking you a question. And that is--
Mr. Silvers. Can you restate it?
Mr. Hurt. --do you agree that by increasing the costs to
these businesses, that it necessarily means they have less
capital to put on the street to employ people in this country
and specifically, in Martinsville, Virginia--
Mr. Silvers. Absolutely not.
Mr. Hurt. --which is part of my district.
Mr. Silvers. Absolutely not. And let me explain to you why.
Mr. Hurt. How, then, do you--what would you say to the 61
people who now have jobs in Martinsville, Virginia, as a
consequence of the investments made by, in this case,
Riverside? What would you say to those people?
Mr. Silvers. I am saying you are cynically exploiting them
to deregulate Wall Street and further put our entire country in
danger of repeating 2008. That is what I would say.
Mr. Hurt. You call it exploitation. I call it a paycheck.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
The gentleman from Massachusetts for 5 minutes?
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Let us continue along that line of
questioning, Mr. Silvers.
First of all, I want to thank the chairman. And I want to
thank all the witnesses for their willingness to help the
committee with its work.
I want to associate myself--and I do this rarely--but I
want to associate myself with the remarks of Mr. Silvers. As a
general matter, I think this group of bills, these five bills--
some are worse than others. But I generally think that the
effort to redefine a major swap participant and to induce
leverage--hello--I am astounded.
I am astounded that we have not even recovered from this
disaster, this financial crisis, and we are planting the seeds
for the next one by inducing leverage, by removing liabilities
from rating agencies who grade asset-backed securities as AAA
and they turn out several weeks later to be junk bonds, to stop
the disclosure of CEOs' pay in relation to their employees in
denigration of the efforts of Dodd-Frank to align the interests
of the CEO and the investors and shareholders, to block the
registration of financial advisers for private equity firms.
This is back to the future.
I am as astounded by the substance of this proposal as I am
by the speed at which we have forgotten what got us into this
mess to begin with. It is really breathtaking that we are back
into a--regulation.
And in response to the gentleman who asked the question
about costs, Mr. Silvers, can you estimate what it cost
American homeowners and--well, go globally. These asset-backed
securities were sold--they went viral, including through AIG
and others. What is the total cost of the failure, the abject
failure of us to induce responsibility and accountability and
to preserve the integrity of our financial system? What was the
cost of that?
Mr. Silvers. Congressman Lynch, a lot of people have been
trying to figure that out. The number is very large. I will
give you some numbers to give you a frame of reference.
Mr. Lynch. Please.
Mr. Silvers. As I think everyone knows, this Congress gave
authority for TARP that was $700 billion.
Mr. Lynch. Which I voted against. But go ahead.
Mr. Silvers. Approximately $500 billion was laid out.
Current estimates are that the net cost will be somewhere in
the $50 billion range for TARP alone. Trillions of dollars were
laid out by the Federal Reserve to address the economic crisis
and prevent it from worsening. The costs involved in that are
very hard to measure.
In terms of vanished wealth, in terms of the fall of the
stock market, the fall of the housing market--and the housing
market is still falling--my testimony reflects, I think, the
general estimates of around $10 trillion.
In terms of lost GDP, it is hard to figure exactly because
you have to make assumptions about what would have happened had
we not gone through this horrific policy failure. But again,
the estimate--I think one could reasonably estimate something
on the order of 5 percent of GDP a year for several years
running. That is approximately--let us see, GDP is $15
trillion. That is $1.5 trillion in lost GDP. It is very hard to
estimate. What is the financial cost one associates with
throwing 13 million families out of their homes? I don't know
how to price that.
I don't know how to price what it means that multiple
millions of Americans have graduated from high school and
college and gone into nothing. I don't know how to price that.
And, by the way, we are just talking about the United States
now. We are not talking about worldwide--Ireland, Iceland,
Spain, one could go on. I don't think there is any doubt, but
the right number here is well in excess of $10 trillion.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. I see my time has expired. I thank the
gentleman.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman and recognize
myself for 5 minutes. First, although the gentleman says he is
baffled that we are moving legislation or considering
legislation that would induce or increase leveraging, I don't
know of any of the legislation that the panel has just
discussed here today that says anything with regard to
leverage.
Second, the gentleman speaks to the fact that we are trying
to undo some of the causes--legislation dealing with the
underlying causes of what brought us to the--
Mr. Lynch. By redefining--will the gentleman yield?
Chairman Garrett. If you will just let me finish this
thought.
Mr. Lynch. Sure.
Chairman Garrett. --the causes of it. And I don't know that
any panel that we have had over the last year-and-a-half said
that part of the cause of the problems was the lack of data
compilation with regard to salaries, nor was it anything to do
with the interconnectedness of private equity funds. So those
were not the causes. Those are just the elements that are now
the additional burden that we are placing onto industry and the
capital markets that are preventing the very same jobs that I
think everyone on this panel would like to see brought to
fruition.
Did the gentleman have just a--
Mr. Lynch. Right, just in looking at the way we are
redefining major swap participants, we are--allowing entities
that do not have the underlying capital as Dodd-Frank would
require.
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. And so, those folks would be included and be
able--that would be an inducement to that type of activity for
firms that don't have the underlying capital.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Lynch. You will have more of that. That is why I am
saying it increases leverage.
Chairman Garrett. Reclaiming my time. And I am reminded
that that provision has already been addressed by this House
and has passed this House by over 300 bipartisan votes
previously.
Mr. Lynch. Why did we redefine here, then?
Chairman Garrett. Well--
Mr. Lynch. It is also in law--and the House and Senate--
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman--
Mr. Lynch. --passed that. And the President signed it.
Chairman Garrett. I did not yield the remaining time.
Mr. Lynch. I am sorry.
Chairman Garrett. So with my remaining time, Mr. Zubrod, I
see in your testimony that you are requesting legislative
extension of Dodd-Frank with regard to derivatives. Can you
very quickly, with regard to rulemaking, talk to us about how
much time is necessary in order to get this thing right?
Mr. Zubrod. I think the Coalition for Derivatives End Users
hasn't formally put forward a proposed time request.
Chairman Garrett. No?
Mr. Zubrod. But I think it is eventually critical that as
we regulate this very large market for the first time,
regulators have sufficient time to write thoughtful rules.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. And you also mentioned other
changes to legislative fixes that the Coalition has looked
through. You talked about real-time reporting, the capital
considerations with regard to Basel, not creating margin
requirements by the end-users, I guess, would be one specific
one you need. Anything other than those?
Mr. Zubrod. We have written over 100 pages of comment
letters to the--
Chairman Garrett. For legislative fixes?
Mr. Zubrod. On regulatory matters. For now, the items that
we are focused on receiving some legislative clarification
include the clarification that margins shall not be applicable
to end-user transactions.
Chairman Garrett. Right. That is the main one.
Mr. Zubrod. And the implementation date.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Silvers, you came up with a couple of different names
for these bills. The Business Mitigation and Price
Stabilization Act should be called the ``Help Create Another
AIG Act.'' But if you look at the legislation that is drafted
out there, any reading of it--and when you consider under the
Murphy amendments that passed the House, as I said before, with
wide bipartisan support, how would anyone take that to read
that it would not capture an AIG situation again? It didn't
capture it the last time with the regulators. But why would it
not capture it with that definition as we have presented?
Mr. Silvers. There are, in Dodd-Frank, in addition to those
capital requirements that obviously fall under the--that banks
fall under through the normal banking system, there are two
categories of swaps--of actors in the derivatives market under
Dodd-Frank.
Chairman Garrett. I understand.
Mr. Silvers. One category is what you call--is a dealer,
swaps dealer. The other category is a major swaps participant.
The full definitions of both categories are being worked out
through regulation at the moment. But the difference between
the two fundamentally is the notion of a dealer is somebody who
is basically working to--would appear to be somebody working to
maintain a balanced book. A major swaps participant would be
someone likely to be taking risks. They would be taking one
side of a particular position.
What AIG was doing was taking one side of a particular
position. They were not a dealer. They sometimes referred to
themselves as a dealer. But that is not what they were. They
were taking the risk without the other side--
Chairman Garrett. So you are saying--I understand what they
were doing.
Mr. Silvers. --in a whole set of derivatives--
Chairman Garrett. So you would say that they would not be
captured by this definition?
Mr. Silvers. While it is always conceivable that the
regulators could write their definition of a dealer in such a
way as to capture parties that are taking a major position in
one direction, it doesn't seem the obvious way one would
envision a dealer.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Zubrod, do you have a comment on
that? And then I will close on that.
Mr. Silvers. But that is your risk right there.
Chairman Garrett. I understand your perspective.
Mr. Zubrod. AIG had a $2 trillion book of derivatives. I
think the bill that this House passed and the bill that the
Senate passed--each of them would very clearly encompass AIG in
its major swap participant definition.
Chairman Garrett. There is no way they are going to squeak
out of this, however the regulators--
Mr. Zubrod. A $2 trillion derivatives book is not a needle
in a haystack.
Mr. Silvers. But you are gutting that provision.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Himes, from Connecticut, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a question for Mr. Silvers. I share your concern that
there is a fairly cynical effort under way now to--in a not
terribly thoughtful fashion--roll back a lot of the progress
that was made. As a response to all of the catastrophe that you
described--and I appreciate the dramatic flair of your
testimony. But I am also very conscious of the fact that the
exercise of getting this right is a very nuanced, technical,
and esoteric thing. And there is one thing I wanted to ask you
about, which pertains to private equity. It is something I have
been thinking a lot about.
You object to the Small Business Capital Access and Job
Preservation Act, suggesting that perhaps private equity
entities generate what you call leverage pools of capital. And,
by the way, if we are talking about hedge funds, I am with you
on that one. But I am really curious whether it is your belief
that private equity operates at the fund level with a lot of
leverage.
I don't know a lot of private equity entities that operate
with leverage at the fund level. Of course, they do leverage-up
their investments. But if not, whether you really do believe
that even the largest private equity players do create systemic
risk.
Mr. Silvers. Congressman Himes, you correctly point out
that where private equity or leverage buy-out funds put
equity--put leverage into our economy is at the firm level, not
at the management company level or at the fund level. The
limiteds are not borrowing money. Right? The company that they
invest in is.
As--there were two issues that have led, I think, investor
advocates and people concerned about the regulation of the
financial system to be in favor of including private equity
funds in the requirement to register--that private pools of
capital have to register with the SEC. The first issue is the
one that I addressed in my oral testimony, which is the issue
of systemic risk.
Systemic risk comes as several things happen: one, as the
firms that private equity funds invest in get larger; two, as
the banking system lays on more and more leveraged loans; and
three, as particular private equity sponsors essentially have
more and more--have larger and larger sets of obligations
through their portfolio companies into the banking system. If
the economy weakens, bank lenders and credit rating agencies
become very interested in the capacity of the private equity
complex to be able to backstop the credits across the pool.
Mr. Himes. I agree that--
Mr. Silvers. [Off microphone.]
Mr. Himes. I am sorry, let me just interrupt.
Mr. Silvers. Yes.
Mr. Himes. I am following you here. But it seems to me that
the right answer for us, then, is to follow the extenders of
leverage, which are typically lenders into the firm level
investments. And I am 100 percent with you there. I just am
really wondering--and I have one follow-up question about the
industry, too--whether we are, in fact, looking at the private
equity entities as themselves generators of systemic risk.
Mr. Silvers. What I was pointing out is contrary to the
testimony of my fellow panelists. There is an interlinked
quality to that risk at the private equity fund level that is
not going to be very easily captured by bank regulators looking
at the exposure of this bank or that bank.
The second point that is not in my prior oral testimony,
but which is very important to investor advocates is that there
is a set of fundamental investor protections such as a single
common standard of fiduciary duty and access to Federal courts
in cases of breaches of fiduciary duty or worse conduct that is
created when a private equity fund registers with the SEC as an
investment adviser. And those investor protections are
extremely important to the teachers and firefighters and the
like--my fellow witnesses.
Mr. Himes. Thank you. I don't mean to interrupt. But I do
actually have one question. It is actually not relevant to the
legislation at hand. It is just something that, oddly, I don't
know the answer to. It doesn't often happen in these hearings.
But very quickly, if the chairman would indulge me, I have
heard anecdote after anecdote of leveraged buy-outs that
destroyed jobs and leveraged buy-outs that created jobs. My
question to both Ms. Hendrickson and Mr. Silvers--is there any
study, any third-party validation as to whether this industry,
net-net--and, by the way, it is not perhaps legislatively
relevant. I am just curious what the facts are. Is there any
third-party validation around whether this industry as a whole
creates or subtracts jobs from the economy?
Maybe Ms. Hendrickson, and then Mr. Silvers.
Ms. Hendrickson. As with most things, there are many
studies. And it depends on which one you choose to look at. The
most recent studies that I have seen and corroborated by our
own data, actually, are that through the recessionary period,
we grew jobs 6 percent. Now, we invest in middle-market-type
companies. But the industry average appears to be about 6
percent job growth through the recession.
Mr. Himes. Thank you.
Ms. Hendrickson. There are obviously anecdotal examples
where that did not happen.
Mr. Silvers. There is a gentleman named Joshua Lerner at
Harvard who has done very good work in this area. The evidence
that he has found is somewhat inconclusive. There are two
methodological problems. Many studies, particularly those
sponsored by the industry, conflate essentially the LBO
business model and the venture business model. No question the
venture business model creates jobs.
European studies that have disaggregated those two models
tend to find that the--and there is another issue, which has to
do with sort of apples to apples issues around companies. The
issues that disaggregate the business models typically find
that the LBO model destroys jobs, and the leverage model
creates them. The V.C. model creates them. The labor movement's
view of this is heavily influenced by some very large anecdotes
at companies like SafeWay and RJR Nabisco, which involve tens
of thousands of lost jobs, worker suicides and the like.
Mr. Himes. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. And if there are other things that you
just don't know. Okay.
To the--
Mr. Himes. Don't get used to it.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. Wow. Okay.
To the gentleman from Arizona for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought that was
an interesting question.
Mr. Silvers, forgive me for not jotting these down. Who are
the folks that you speak for?
Mr. Silvers. The AFL-CIO, the Consumer Federation of
America, and the Americans for Financial Reform, which is a
large Coalition of more than 250 organizations. The members of
the Americans for Financial Reform are in my written testimony.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. Mr. Silvers, is it typical for those
groups to take a position opposing a bill without reading it?
Mr. Silvers. Excuse me?
Mr. Schweikert. Is it typical for those organizations to
take a position on the bill without reading it?
Mr. Silvers. I can tell we are going to have a dispute as
to what the bill says. Why don't we come to it?
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Silvers, can you grab for me the nice,
little bill in regards to the $50 million capital formation?
Mr. Silvers. Just a moment. What did I do with the bills?
Sorry. I brought the bill text with me, if--
Mr. Schweikert. The Small Company Capital Formation Act.
Mr. Silvers. Okay.
Mr. Schweikert. H.R. 1070.
Mr. Silvers. Okay.
Mr. Schweikert. Do you have it?
Mr. Silvers. Not yet, but that is okay. Why don't you read
the provision that you think I misunderstood?
Mr. Schweikert. No, no, I was going to ask you--to take you
to page three, line six. You made a rather bold statement
that--how simple and evil this was because of the lack of
audited financials. And I know literacy may be a problem around
here, requiring the issuer to file audited financial statements
with the Commission and distribute such statements to
prospective investors. What are we missing here, Mr. Silvers?
Mr. Silvers. When we reviewed the bill, the bill gave that
as an option to the SEC. If you since changed it to make it
mandatory, then I would suggest that is an improvement, and I
congratulate you for it. But when we look at it, it was
voluntary. It wasn't voluntary. It was an option the SEC could
choose to impose.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Silvers, it was
always this way in our work-up. But I appreciate you being
willing to play.
Mr., is it ``Weild?''
Mr. Weild. ``Weild.''
Mr. Schweikert. ``Weild.'' Could you actually share with
me--because you and I have already had some conversation--both
the good and the bad you think would come from changing the
Rule A amounts, or the Reg A amounts?
Mr. Weild. First of all, the bill the way it is currently
crafted has some--I would call it an enhanced Regulation A, not
only in terms of size, but in terms of investor protections. So
I applaud the committee on that.
It allows us to access capital--corporations, small
corporations--more cost-effectively and avoid the train wrecks
that they typically have in the market by not being able to
test the waters. And so, that is a great positive--much more
cost-effectively because you don't have to add a lot of the
exhibits that are typically associated with the prospectus of
formal S-1 that add up to quite a bit of cost and that very few
people ever actually read in the marketplace.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Weild, share with me what you think the
biggest threat to the markets is if we do this.
Mr. Weild. If we do this? I truly believe there are not big
threats to the market. To put it into context, when WorldCom
went--filed for bankruptcy, it had $100 billion in assets. And
that represents 2,000 $50 million transactions, which in
today's terms would be increasing the size of the listed market
by 40 percent. So essentially, by strangling small companies
and entrepreneurship by not allowing them cost-effective access
to capital, we really dampen the economy job formation. And
exactly, I would say the constituency that Mr. Silvers
represents.
Mr. Schweikert. All right. Mr. Weild, as you may know, I
have a compulsion about making graphs and charts. It is a
problem in my statistical background.
Up on the screen--actually, go back one, please, you will
notice the lines. And one thing I found fascinating is it looks
like over the last decade or so, we have actually had a
shrinkage of U.S. listings. While you see our competitors,
somewhat of an explosion by some of them. What is your
understanding of what has happened to the number of traded
equities?
Mr. Weild. We have lost from the peak in 1997, which
interestingly was before the crescendo in the bubble--we have
lost 42 percent of listed companies from the United States
listed equities markets, which, by definition, is pulling jobs
out of the U.S. economy. And by contrast, other countries,
including China--the one at the top of the chart there is
China. But almost every other industrialized country in the
world is net adding listed companies to their markets.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Weild and Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman Garrett. And I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Ohio for 5 minutes?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing.
I appreciate all the witnesses.
I would like to ask Mr. Deutsch a question about Ford. If
you remember, last year Ford had to cancel an offering. You
talked about the whole bond market closing down. But clearly,
there was a front page article in the B section of the Wall
Street Journal about Ford having to cancel, I think it was a
$100 million asset-backed bond, because of the very provision
we are talking about, Section 929(g) in the Dodd-Frank Act. Can
you just explain to the committee quickly what happened there?
Mr. Deutsch. Yes, I think Ford and--again, I don't know all
the extreme particulars of the Ford transaction. There were
actually a number of transactions in the market, coming to the
market at that point. I believe Ford had a transaction. I think
it was closer to a billion dollars that they were looking to
sell off into the secondary market of loans backed by prime
quality auto collateral.
Mr. Stivers. And what is the effect of them not being able
to finance that $100 million?
Mr. Deutsch. Ultimately, they can't sell cars.
Mr. Stivers. Or employ people, right?
Mr. Deutsch. Which, obviously, you stop employing people to
make those cars.
Mr. Stivers. Right. So, the change in the law was effective
immediately. The SEC did step in and have a no-action letter
that kept the law from being enforced. And that is where we are
today. And that is why some things are allowed to sort of go
forward at this point.
But I guess the SEC is maybe talking--according to Mr.
Silvers and some other reports I have seen--about removing
rating agency references altogether. That is another direction
to go. Frankly, that would solve this problem, too. But the
result is two things. It has more cost in the marketplace
because if the liability is passed on through the increased
cost at the rating agencies, it will cost issuers more and,
therefore, affect jobs. But the second piece is less
information will be available in the marketplace--readily
available in the marketplace. Are those good or bad things?
Mr. Deutsch. Generally, it is a very bad thing. Although
the SEC could change their rules to no longer require that a
rating has to be included in a statutory prospectus, you would
still have ratings being conveyed to investors.
Mr. Stivers. Right.
Mr. Deutsch. But they are conveyed in these ancillary
documents. Why wouldn't you want to convey the information in
your primary offering document?
Mr. Stivers. They would be less readily available is a way
to say that.
Mr. Deutsch. Of course.
Mr. Stivers. The information may still be available, but it
results in less information in the marketplace.
Mr. Deutsch. Correct.
Mr. Stivers. And so, that is why I prefer this approach as
opposed to that approach. You could just remove the rating
requirement from the prospectus, which is the other way to go.
But it makes information less readily available.
I do have a question for Mr. Silvers really quickly because
I want to talk about more information and less information in
the marketplace. Can you quickly tell me how people know what
an investment grade bond is?
Mr. Silvers. If you are asking whether I think that having
ratings in the bond market is a good idea or not, I think that
is a complicated question. I think it is--
Mr. Stivers. I am not asking you that. I am asking you how
people would describe an investment grade bond. If you were
going to just tell somebody what an investment grade bond is,
what would you refer to? You know what the answer is.
Mr. Silvers. An investment grade bond is a term of art, and
it derives from the credit rating.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. And that is the point. Credit
ratings are an important part of the information in the
marketplace.
Mr. Silvers. I think you misconstrue my testimony.
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. I don't disagree with you.
Mr. Stivers. Okay. Essentially, what I am telling you is if
you remove the ratings from the prospectus, which is the
direction you want to go, you are going to have information
less readily available in the marketplace.
Mr. Silvers. Actually--
Mr. Stivers. It is just a fact.
Mr. Silvers. No, but you misunderstand the direction I want
to go.
Mr. Stivers. Okay. Okay. I will let you go a little bit
here. I don't have much time, though.
Mr. Silvers. I think you have touched on a very important
issue in terms of financial reform.
Mr. Stivers. And, by the way, it is not that I want to do
nothing about the rating agencies.
Mr. Silvers. No, I know. And I--
Mr. Stivers. There is work to be done.
Mr. Silvers. I think it may very well be that you and I
completely agree about this.
Mr. Stivers. Okay.
Mr. Silvers. Now, it is not a matter of--
Mr. Stivers. --I am reading or listening to your testimony,
by the way.
Mr. Silvers. Right. It is not a matter on which I can say
that it is--you put me in an awkward position, in a sense,
because there are differences of opinion in the people that I
represent on this question.
Mr. Stivers. I notice the United Auto Workers not on your
list, by the way.
Mr. Silvers. That is not--
Mr. Stivers. You are going to have a hard time getting them
on this one.
Mr. Silvers. That was not what I was referring to.
Mr. Stivers. Okay. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. All right. What I was referring to is--and I
will give you an example.
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. Credit ratings have been used to screen out
investment grade commercial paper for money markets.
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. Many people feel that is a critical function
to avoid a huge moral hazard problem in the money market area.
Mr. Stivers. Can I come back to this? Because I have one
more question for Mr. Deutsch because it is an important--
something happened in the marketplace last week, and I want to
ask him about it.
Redwood Capital made a disclosure, not a required
disclosure, about ratings shopping. Would disclosures on
ratings shopping help fix a lot of the problems that occurred
in the marketplace? I know I am out of time. I think they will
let you answer.
Can he answer, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Deutsch. I think certainly additional disclosures
around ratings shoppings--I think that many investors would
like to see additional disclosure around that. Many investors
would find that helpful to understand the different ratings--
the agencies that issuers have approached. And so, I think
there would be some--that would be well-received by the
investor community.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
The gentlelady from New York for 5 minutes?
Dr. Hayworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am fascinated by our witnesses' testimony from Mr.
Bertsch and Mr. Deutsch, Ms. Hendrickson--forgive me--Mr. Weild
and Mr. Zubrod, in particular, because you are describing a
litany of loss in a sense, due, no doubt, to unintended
consequences. And those losses are very real to the nearly 14
million unemployed Americans who are counting on us to help
them. And that is what we are trying to do today.
We have lost resources that should be devoted to job
creation. You have described that eloquently in your testimony.
That is what we are endeavoring to reverse in the pieces of
legislation we have introduced. We have seen that there is a
loss of trust in the common sense of our fellow citizens, in
this case, investors and entrepreneurs, who are the engines of
job creation in so many instances. And this represents a loss
for all Americans as working capital is kept out of the
marketplace due to regulation-induced stasis, or worse, working
capital is migrating out of the United States market entirely.
And I think it is important for everybody listening to remember
those things.
So in an effort to clarify the highly useful nature of what
we are endeavoring to do by repealing Section 953(b) of Dodd-
Frank, Mr. Bertsch, could you talk more about the disclosure of
information that is currently necessary and how that is useful
to investors?
Mr. Bertsch. Disclosure of information before Dodd-Frank?
Dr. Hayworth. Before Dodd-Frank, before 953(b).
Mr. Bertsch. Sure. There is extensive disclosure on senior
executive pay that has been in place for quite a while. It had
been modified a few years ago. And I think that the interest in
that information on the part of investors relates in part to
the fear of conflict of interests to the extent that the CEO,
in particular, has influence over that, over his own or her own
compensation. So I think that that is appropriate disclosure
and has been useful in understanding that whole dynamic.
I do think, frankly, that--and this is my view. With these
organizational representations, I haven't done enough of this
to know to what extent I should try to clear this. But from my
perspective--and I worked most of my career on the investor
side, some of the disclosure enhancements made a few years ago
by the SEC in a particular compensation disclosure analysis
requirement actually complicated things so much that proxy
statements are actually less useful than I think they used to
be.
It used to be faster and easier to get a pretty good fix on
CEO pay than it is now. So I think disclosure requirements can
backfire at some point. I think they are legitimate, but I
think you want to make them as smart as possible.
Dr. Hayworth. The phrase that always comes to my mind when
I think about so many of the regulations we talked about that
have been promulgated in Dodd-Frank, among other things, is
more heat than light is generated by these things.
Speaking of light, compensation disclosure requirements
that you have just described, Mr. Bertsch, that perhaps, in
fact, we have asked for too much information, so to speak, even
before Dodd-Frank--you alluded to a survey among investors, I
believe it was, that described their desire, if you will, for
more information about compensation.
Mr. Bertsch. Yes, in the testimony I just referred to, that
we have seen a series of shareholder proposals on--requesting
reports on pay disparity. And they don't get very high votes.
Dr. Hayworth. Right.
Mr. Bertsch. So that is an indication that shareholders
generally don't express a lot of interest as opposed to, for
example, the say-on-pay. There were many shareholder
resolutions requesting advisory votes on pay. Those got much
higher levels of support other than these have. So 6 percent
support is not--on an average, is not very high.
Dr. Hayworth. And if there were some sort of movement
toward say-on-pay, presumably current--or pre-Dodd-Frank data
would satisfy the informational requirements for shareholders
to make those sorts of decisions--or to participate in those
decisions.
Mr. Bertsch. I think that issue is not, to my knowledge, at
this point being addressed again.
Dr. Hayworth. Right.
Mr. Bertsch. But that is a more substantial issue than this
one.
Dr. Hayworth. Yes.
Mr. Bertsch. And my major point is that this is actually a
lot of work.
Dr. Hayworth. Right.
Mr. Bertsch. This is not a simple statistic to throw out
there. And it is not one that I believe is of particular value
to investors.
Dr. Hayworth. Right. And, indeed, as I understand it, to
compute a median--as I understand it, the problem exists on
several levels. To identify the population of workers to whom
this regulation would actually apply, if we wanted to start the
process of data collection. There are all sorts of
complications in identifying then what pieces of data would
actually be applicable, how they would fit into a computation
and then the fact that they would have to be computed for every
single employee so as to identify a median.
Mr. Bertsch. That is correct.
Dr. Hayworth. Am I correct?
Mr. Bertsch. A median is a lot different than an average to
calculate. Our members believe that you need to calculate it
for every single person in order to arrive at the correct
median.
Dr. Hayworth. Right. How else could you arrive at a median,
indeed?
Mr. Bertsch. There you go.
Dr. Hayworth. I appreciate your clarifying all of those
points for us, Mr. Bertsch. Thank you.
Mr. Bertsch. Yes. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. And I announce to the rest of the
committee that we do have a vote that is called, but we are
just going to plug along as long as we have our panel here. And
members here--just the order that--unless anyone else comes
from your side, will be--next will be Mr. Royce. And then--I
guess the other people have probably stepped out to vote
already. So when they come back, they will be in line.
So the gentleman from California for 5 minutes?
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Weild, I want to thank you for your testimony. And you
gave some pretty staggering statistics there that I think
should give us all pause. But in terms of capital formation for
small-growth companies, you recommend passing this Reg A
change. What else should we be focused on here?
Mr. Weild. I think there are three things that the House
Financial Services Committee can think about. One of the Reg A
passes, which is a big step forward in terms of knocking down
the costs of capital and the certainty of raising money. The
second is that the stock market itself, the way it is currently
constructed, has deprived issuers of any real choice in market
structure. And it is really optimized where the 10 percent of
the largest market value stock that represent 90 percent of the
volume. It is a one-size-fits-all stock market.
And I think that to create a market structure that--just
like bridges, roads, and tunnels are infrastructure to the U.S.
economy, so is the stock market. And if we don't have a way of
paying for the research, sale support, and the liquidity
provision that is so desperately needed by small-cap.
companies, then the low end of the market, the smaller
companies, die on the vine. They wither in the vine, just like
our communities would if we didn't have bridges, roads and
tunnels.
The third thing is you might consider in the private
market, there are some archaic restrictions, in the private
market. The prohibition against general solicitation and an
inability for accredited investors effectively to be able to
buy and sell stocks in the private market. Those are things
that could help capital formation.
Mr. Royce. So those things come to mind. I am wondering if
there are additional provisions in Dodd-Frank that sort of
compound this problem with capital formation. And one of the
frequent things we see in the financial press is the
conversation about capital flight, about the decision to move
business to Europe rather than to try to soldier through here.
Because in Europe, they don't have any intention of following
our lead on some of these particular provisions that have been
raised as a concern, right?
They have a different regulatory framework there. There is
certainty to it. And I think that a lot of businesses look at
that and say, ``All right, we will opt for that as the
alternative.''
It is a mouse click away, basically, these days to get to
do business under a regulation that seems far more certain. We
are in the throes of waiting for 300 rules to be written. We
haven't been able to reach agreement, for example, between the
SEC and the CFTC and get them on the same page--50 differences
we know of so far, 60 more rules to come down the pike by
September. And after that, 40 more that we are waiting for.
And in this environment, the derivatives business and a lot
of other businesses seem to be flirting with relocating. Some
of it is already happening. Do you see that as a challenge
here?
Mr. Weild. I see getting the regulation right-sized for the
company size to be absolutely critical. I think that is one of
the themes that I have heard a little bit here from this panel,
that what worked for a $200 billion market value company isn't
necessarily appropriate for a $100 million equity market value
company.
Mr. Royce. We have made no adjustment yet, really, on
Sarbanes-Oxley to address this problem, have we, really?
Mr. Weild. There are some exclusions from 404 for sub-$75
million equity float value company. So there have been some
adjustments.
Mr. Royce. Do you think that is helping?
Mr. Weild. I think that the bigger issue--if you look at
the charts that we submitted, Congressman, what was interesting
was our discovery that the sub-$50 million equity market value
companies started to disappear from the IPO market before
Sarbanes-Oxley ever came into effect in 2002, that the
implosion started in 1997.
Mr. Royce. I agree. And I gave these--in my opening
statement, I gave these figures. I agree that erosion began for
that portion of the market. But what has happened since is that
the acceleration has included the entire market. So it is not
now just the smaller firms. It is across-the-board. IOPs are
now 13 percent of the market. We were 50 percent of the market.
This is quite an adjustment.
So I think we can attach some of this to the way in which
we have--Sarbanes-Oxley, for example, has really been--we have
had a failure to address it in ways that solve at least that
problem. I grant you, Mr. Weild, some of your other points in
terms of what we have to do for the niche of the market that
you are most interested in. But on top of it, I am just saying
it is the market in its entirety that we risk losing to Europe
and elsewhere.
Mr. Weild. I would tell you that if you don't get the
growth side of the economy back in high gear, then it actually
drags down the performance of the entirety of the economy,
including the large cap. stock.
Mr. Royce. Yes.
Mr. Weild. To your point about moving capital offshore, I
gave a presentation at the New York Stock Exchange to a bunch
of pension fund trustees not that long ago. And I sat through a
number of the presentations prior to my own. It was very
interesting how many consultants to the pension fund industry
were advocating to American pension funds to move their money
offshore to higher-growth economies, the brick countries, which
are Brazil, Russia, India, and China. That is very disturbing.
Mr. Royce. Thanks for that information.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. Royce. Yes. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. I thought you had another question.
Mr. Royce. I have used all my time.
Chairman Garrett. With unanimous consent, you can ask your
other question.
Mr. Royce. Yes, I will then ask another question, if you
don't mind.
The NRSRO issue--that has been around for some time. And I
was going to ask Mr. Deutsch.
We had a few entities issuing what ended up being flawed
rulings. But they were treated as the gold standard with few
alternatives. It was very, very frustrating. And in 2006, we
tried to correct that in the Credit Rating Agency Reform Act,
which I think made some strides to promote competition. That
was the goal there, to establish a more transparent rating
process.
But unfortunately, the financial markets have turned upside
down since the passage of that Act. And clearly, part of it was
the credit rating agencies. But Dodd-Frank, I think, took a
different approach here and essentially opened the NRSROs up to
a very active trial bar. And when I laid out in my initial
statement here, I pointed out we had 97 percent of the lawsuits
worldwide are here in the United States. The day after the law
was enacted, the NRSROs refused to allow their ratings to be
used, bringing a temporary freeze to the credit markets before
the SEC promised not to enforce the provision.
Where is the happy medium with the NRSROs? We need to
encourage due diligence among counterparties in the market, but
essentially removing the rating agencies from the picture
altogether seems to be overkill. So I was going to ask you, Mr.
Deutsch, about that.
Mr. Deutsch. I have, I guess, multiple responses. I think
first, credit ratings serve an important part of the financial
markets. I am not sure either side of the aisle will disagree
with that.
The second point is that creating policy reform around the
rating agencies has been extraordinarily perplexing.
Mr. Royce. Right.
Mr. Deutsch. It is very challenging to try to figure out,
in a market with some natural economies of scale, how to
improve that market and make appreciable change. But I think--
Mr. Royce. On that thought, let me give you some time to
contemplate the answer, give it back to us in writing. We have
20 seconds left of the vote. And I think Mr. Garrett is a
little faster than me. If we head out right now, we can make
that vote.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Are you ready?
I will get that answer in writing, all right?
Mr. Deutsch. Right.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
I appreciate the testimony of the panel. If there are other
questions--and it looks like there may be another question--
there may be someone doing what Ed is doing, rushing to the
vote, and the others may be rushing back. So with that, unless
there is an objection, I will ask one last question and
hopefully, find out our one last member, who is probably in a
hallway someplace here.
So I yield myself such time as I consume, I guess, to--
[laughter]
Just a question for Mr. Silvers.
With regard to H.R. 1062, which is--you euphemistically
called it the ``Promote CEO Pay Secrecy Act.'' Okay. Which is
obviously--what the sponsor is trying to do is try to make not
such a burdensome requirements in a legislative format. But
what I will throw to you is we sort of went through to look to
see what is already out there if you do repeal this. Right?
What the SEC is doing.
Now, correct me if I am wrong on any of these because this
is just our quickly running through it. But even if we pass
this, you would still have what the SEC has done. One is
companies would be required to disclose a total pay number for
the CEO and other senior executives. Is that correct?
Mr. Silvers. That is a longstanding SEC rule, yes, sir.
Chairman Garrett. So that information has always been out
there, and that would continue to be out there, right?
Mr. Silvers. Yes.
Chairman Garrett. Then secondly, companies whose--also the
flow is--more specific information around retirement benefits
as well.
Mr. Silvers. The Commission's disclosures around retirement
benefits have increased over time. It is certainly true that
there is today required disclosure around retirement benefits.
There is some dispute about the details of it, I would say, but
it is certainly there.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. So that is there. So you have the
pay and the retirement. And thirdly, companies also have to
disclose additional information about termination payments,
which, I guess, is, what, like golden parachutes and that sort
of thing, right?
Mr. Silvers. Yes. Yes. Mr. Chairman, if you--
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. If you would allow me--
Chairman Garrett. Sure.
Mr. Silvers. Two points--one is there is no--the Commission
has made great progress over the last decade in getting more
comprehensive data about CEO pay available to investors and the
public. I don't think that is a matter of dispute. I think that
the--what is so important about the provision of the Dodd-Frank
Act that we are discussing here is that it creates a critical
context for evaluating what CEO pay means in the context of a
public company.
Right? And the question of whether CEO pay--and this has
two consequences. One is whether CEO pay is essentially eroding
the corporate culture by effectively placing the CEO and
perhaps other senior executives in a completely different place
than the other members of their team. And the second issue is,
like many issues with CEO pay, whether or not it gives
investors and the public a context for determining whether or
not the level of CEO pay that you are receiving is essentially
commensurate with, in general, the type of value that is being
created by this firm.
Chairman Garrett. But doesn't that go to another
requirement they have that the board or the compensation
committee, I guess, would actually also have to lay out why is
it they are giving the CEO all these benefits, most notably,
the executive pay? And so, if it is extremely high, they would
have to say this is why we think he is worth ``X.''
Mr. Silvers. Right.
Chairman Garrett. Which, in my opinion, in many cases, also
I agree, are astronomical sums that you and I probably can't
comprehend. Maybe you can because you--who knows what your
salary is. But--
[laughter]
Mr. Silvers. Let me put it this way. The multiple between
my salary and any of the ones that we are talking about is
itself a very large and hard to encompass number. I think
your--
Chairman Garrett. There may be multiples between your
salary and my salary.
Mr. Silvers. I think we have that in common, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. Yes, okay.
Mr. Silvers. The narrative you are discussing is, I think--
my colleague on the panel talked about the frustrating issues
involved in credit rating agencies and trying to find the right
balance, a comment I very much agree with. The SEC has tried to
get public corporations to tell investors and the public, give
them some meaningful detailed explanation as to why they are
paying 300, 400, or 500 times the amount the typical employees
are paid, to their CEOs. If you have read those narratives, I
think they are uniformly meaningless.
Mr. Chairman, if you could indulge me for 10 seconds? Your
colleague, Mr. Schweikert suggests that I hadn't read his bill.
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. His bill clearly, as it is now--because it was
in a different paragraph--makes auditing of companies under Reg
A optional. It is very clear. It was just hidden. And I want to
make clear that I stand by my original testimony in that
matter. It is in the heading paragraph of that section. And he
read a misleading excerpt when he read that section of that
bill.
Chairman Garrett. He was just--I can't say whether he--
Mr. Silvers. No, I am not--it is not your fault, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I am certainly not saying that he was
misleading. I saw he had a section of the bill actually
circled, so he was reading a piece from his own legislation on
page three of the legislation.
Mr. Silvers. It says, ``The Commission may determine
necessary in the public interest to require an audit.'' The
word ``may,'' as we all know around here, means voluntary.
Chairman Garrett. With that, I see that--well, no. Is it
voluntary for the Commission, but not--
Mr. Silvers. It is precisely--
Chairman Garrett. --but not for the company?
Mr. Silvers. It is precisely as I said it was in response
to his question. The way the bill reads, ``If the Commission
chooses to do,'' which the Commission may or may not do, right,
the Commission can choose to require an audit. But the bill
does not require it. It would be perfectly legal, under this
bill, for the Commission to sit tight and for companies to go
to market and raise up to $50 million in investment from the
general public and not provide an audited financial statement.
Chairman Garrett. The entire premise behind Dodd-Frank is
that the regulators, whom we are entrusting with all these
grand, new authorities and some regulators, additional funding
sources as well, that they are not going to be doing the wrong
thing.
Mr. Silvers. Why don't we just require it? I think that was
the testimony of my fellow witness. My testimony is about the
bill as written.
Chairman Garrett. All right.
The gentleman from Ohio?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
giving me a little more time.
I wanted to ask Mr. Silvers about some of the other
sections relating to the credit rating agencies in the Dodd-
Frank bill, because, frankly--I don't know if you have it in
front of you, and I can bring you my copy, if you need it, but
my bill does impact Section 939(g). But I would like to talk to
you about Sections 932 and 933, especially. Section 932
subjects rating agencies to additional restrictions on--or
disclosures, keeps people from doing revolving door from an
issuer to the agencies and then more importantly, Section 933.
Section 933 of Dodd-Frank does subject the rating agencies
to legal liability for misleading statements and just untrue
statements, which your testimony about Section 939(g) implied
that it overturned Section 933 of Dodd-Frank as well. I just
would like Mr. Silvers to clarify for the audience and the
world that might be watching on C-SPAN3. It won't be a very big
world.
[laughter]
Whether he thinks my bill turns over any of the other
sections with regard to the rating agencies, including and
especially Section 933 of Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Silvers. As I think the prior exchange showed, it can
be dangerous to express an opinion on these matters without
having lots of time to look at the text. My testimony did not
say that your bill is a grant of total immunity to the credit
rating agencies. I think it is nonetheless a grant of immunity.
If you might indulge me a moment or so longer--
Mr. Stivers. We have a little time now.
Mr. Silvers. Yes. I think that several people in this
hearing have expressed the view that this matter with the
rating agencies is complicated. And I very much agree with
that. I think our exchange a few moments ago suggests that we
probably have some common ground on some of these questions.
Mr. Stivers. Yes.
Mr. Silvers. I think the view of the Coalitions and the
organizations that I represent here today very much goes back
to what Mr. Miller said very--at the--Mr. Miller?
Mr. Stivers. It was Mr. Sherman, I believe.
Mr. Silvers. Mr. Sherman, I am sorry, Mr. Sherman's comment
at the beginning of the hearing. We need to have a robust
regulatory framework for the rating agencies because of the
embedded and unresolvable conflicts.
Mr. Stivers. Conflicts of interest, yes.
Mr. Silvers. And if we did that, then I think we could
talk, I think, with a greater degree of flexibility about a
variety of issues of the type that you are concerned with. I
think it is absolutely correct that we should not be in a mode
of no rating agencies at all because there is a substantial
sort of information economics being associated with having
rating agencies, if they are properly regulated.
We very much got into a--much as we did with independent
auditors prior to Enron and WorldCom, we got into a world where
we didn't have the necessary framework to capture those
economics. We had sort of false economics around the rating
agencies. It seems to me, that might be a sort of space where
there might be some bipartisan opportunities.
Mr. Stivers. I think there are. And I appreciate it. I
guess, my point is to say I am not saying that Dodd-Frank did
completely bad things about rating agencies. I support Section
932. I support Section 933. I support Section 938.
Section 932 creates disclosures so that rating agencies,
for the first time, have to list the assumptions underlying
their ratings so investors can understand what those ratings
mean. Section 938 creates universality of ratings so that they
all have a very similar meaning. And Section 933 gives them
real liability if they make meaningful misstatements or
purposeful misstatements or mislead people on purpose.
And, I guess, the point that I am trying to bring out is
Section 939(g) is only one teeny piece of the--what Dodd-Frank
did on the credit rating agencies. And unfortunately, it didn't
work. It is not working today. That piece of law is not being
enforced. And there is a better way to go by getting rid of it
and then moving to what I talked about at the very end of my
questions, on an additional disclosure on rating shopping.
And, I guess, Mr. Silvers, I am curious what your thought
is about what Redwood did on ratings shopping and whether you
think that kind of--and my understanding, from reading the
Financial Times, not--the SEC didn't tell me this. But the
Financial Times says the SEC may be working on something with
regard to that. What I would consider doing in this bill is
including a requirement in the bill that ratings shopping has
to be disclosed, which is currently not part of Dodd-Frank. And
I think it would make this bill a little stronger.
I have talked to Mr. Peters from Michigan about it,
frankly. And so, I guess, Mr. Silvers, in the minute we have
left, what do you think of that?
Mr. Silvers. Right. Ratings shopping--I am very pleased to
hear that you are working as you say you are on the ratings
shopping issue. It is a serious part of the problem.
I think our view would be that there is much unfinished
work to be done with the rating agencies. And it seems as
though you and your colleagues on both sides of the aisle have
some--have a fruitful path here.
Mr. Stivers. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Silvers. Thank you.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
The gentleman from California is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I believe it is Mr. Weild who is here to focus
on credit rating agencies. No? Which of your--
Mr. Deutsch. I would raise my hand, but I am not sure what
question you are going to ask.
[laughter]
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Right now, other than patriotism, which
is often in short supply, why wouldn't a credit rating agency
selected by the issuer--and this bill proposes that they
wouldn't be liable if they even knowingly gave too high a
rating. What constraint would there be on the credit rating
agencies?
Mr. Deutsch. I think what this bill does is creates a whole
panoply of potential liability for a rating agency.
Mr. Sherman. When you say this bill, you mean the Stivers
bill?
Mr. Deutsch. Section 939(g) by repealing--
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. Deutsch. --Section 436(g) now.
Mr. Sherman. Right.
Mr. Deutsch. You would subject the rating agencies to a
whole panoply of possible liabilities under Section 11, which
is strict liability under the securities law, which is the
highest form of liability under those securities laws. So it is
not just that you can point out one thing here or one thing
there. It creates this whole broad set of liabilities that the
rating agencies, whether we like it or not, would say, we are
not willing to accept that level of liability. Hence, we won't
rate these asset-backed bonds. Hence, those bonds, at least
under current SEC law, can't move forward.
Mr. Sherman. So are you suggesting we go back to the old
approach, no liability and every economic incentive to give AAA
and Alt-A?
Mr. Deutsch. I think Congressman Stivers' questioning of
the witness, Mr. Silvers indicates that there is significant
liability for rating agencies. But it is not Section 11's
strict liability under the securities law, which currently only
applies--
Mr. Sherman. Wait a minute. Those rating agencies have
testified in this very room that they are so proud that they
got a court to rule that, under the First Amendment, you can't
sue them and that, therefore, they feel invulnerable and wish
to--and it is that invulnerability that emboldened them to get
the additional market share that they could get by giving AAA
to Alt-A. So why do you think that their legal analysis of the
law prior to Dodd-Frank is wrong?
Mr. Deutsch. Again, what I think Congressman Stivers is
indicating is this is not prior to Dodd-Frank. Dodd-Frank has
created private rights of action here.
Mr. Sherman. Right. And the position of the credit rating
agencies before Dodd-Frank was that they were immune from such
private rating. Do you agree with that position?
Mr. Deutsch. Correct. I am not here to testify as to
Sections 933 or 944, the advisability of that. That is now law.
That is moving forward. There are these private rights of
action. What I am here to testify is that the repeal of Section
436(g) shut down the securitization markets completely,
absolutely without deniability.
Mr. Sherman. So you think--
Mr. Deutsch. That is a fact in record that if we would have
moved forward with--by creating this liability to the rating
agencies, they would, in fact, not rate these transactions, and
credit would not flow in America.
Mr. Sherman. Okay, what about--
Mr. Stivers. Would the gentleman from California yield for
1 second?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, I will.
Mr. Stivers. Have you looked at Section 933 of Dodd-Frank?
It does provide an amount of liability outside of Section
939(g). So I don't want anybody to think that Section 939(g) is
the only liability the credit rating agencies had to deal with
in Dodd-Frank. There is also Section 933. And I have a summary
for you, if you need it.
Mr. Sherman. I am just beginning to look at your bill and
by implication, which provisions of Dodd-Frank it repeals and
what is left afterwards.
But, Mr. Deutsch, are you arguing that the credit rating
agencies should be subjected to an ordinary liability
negligence standard?
Mr. Deutsch. I am arguing that credit rating agencies
should not be subjected to the Section 11 strict liability
standards that issuers are subjected to because the statements
that they are making are looking at the future.
Mr. Sherman. But my question was about ordinary negligence
liability.
Mr. Deutsch. I am answering your question as to what I am
testifying is that we are not taking a position on what they
should be subjected to.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. Deutsch. It is that they should not be subjected.
Mr. Sherman. So let me ask Mr. Silvers. Do you think we
should go to a world where there is no strict liability, it is
not clear there is negligence liability, the credit rating
agency is selected by the issuer, who is anxious to get the
highest rating and willing to write a $1 million check? Does
that sound like a good system to you?
Mr. Silvers. No, I do not think that is a good system. My
testimony is clear. We are not in favor of extending further
legal protections to the credit rating agencies. And
furthermore, as, I think, my exchange with Mr. Stivers,
hopefully, drew out, there is a deep need to make structural
changes in the business model of the rating agencies. And I
believe, Congressman, that is your intention. And hopefully,
that is something that maybe some bipartisanship should be
built around.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, I could see quicker implementation of
what I believe is Section 939(f), that is to say, a system
where the issuer is not selecting their umpire along with Mr.
Stivers' bill. And I look forward to working with him to try
to, on the one hand, make sure that they don't face excessive
liability, and on the other hand, make sure that they are not
selected, just as umpires at a baseball game. The pitcher
doesn't pick the umpire. And he can't sue the umpire.
Mr. Silvers. Congressman, if I might just add. I think the
distinction between forward-looking and backward-looking
statements that the rating agencies would like to hold up here
in relation to Section 11 is spurious.
Mr. Sherman. I look forward to looking at that distinction.
And I yield back the balance of my nonexistent time.
Chairman Garrett. There you go.
The gentleman from New York for 5 minutes?
Mr. Grimm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think that we all agree the purpose for all of us--and
there certainly are good intentions all around. It is the
unintended consequences that we have to worry about because we
all want the economy to grow. We want to create jobs.
There was a meltdown. There are a lot of reasons for that
meltdown. A lot of the rules and regulations simply weren't
enforced. There was a lack of proper oversight and enforcement
of rules that existed. And I think the pendulum has swung so
far the other direction that we are--we can be overregulating
and hurting industry.
Very quick question, Ms. Hendrickson. Do you have an
approximate cost to your firm, specifically your firm that you
will have to--you would expect to pay for compliance to be
fully compliant with the Dodd-Frank Act?
Ms. Hendrickson. At the moment, I expect the cost to be
between $350,000 and $500,000 for the first year. That is
buying new software to do trading, to monitor trading activity.
And, of course, we don't do anything in the public market. It
is to hold legended worthless securities by a third-party
custody agent. And then, of course, to hire a third compliance
officer to certify valuations of our companies, which were
already looked at by two nationally-known accounting firms.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you.
Mr. Zubrod, my Business Risk Mitigation and Price
Stabilization Act, the newly-termed ``AIG Act'', which is
pretty good. I have to admit. I did get a chuckle out of that.
That is good. That is very good. End users--will end-users, in
your opinion, just in your opinion, migrate the markets that
operate under a less punitive regulatory environment if they
are not exempt from clearing requirements?
Mr. Zubrod. I think end-users would certainly evaluate
opportunities to ensure that they can operate efficiently and
manage their risks sufficiently. But I think the message that
we would like to give is that we are simply looking for
clarification on something that Congress and this committee
intended all along, which is that there would not be a margin
requirement on end-users. That is something that was part of
the--in addition to containing systemic risk and increasing
transparency in this market, Congress came together and said
that we also need to ensure that end-users are not subject to
the salient economic requirements of this Act.
Mr. Grimm. If I could, just to put this in perspective,
because I think when you talk about the numbers, it scares some
people--$600 trillion is the overall market, derivatives
market, notional number? Is that somewhere in the realm of
reason?
Mr. Zubrod. That is right. The $600 trillion notional
amount is not a measure of risk in the market. It is simply a
quantification of the--what we call the notional amount. A more
appropriate measure of risk is the market value of the
transactions. And once you net offsetting positions, once you
contemplate transactions that have been cleared through central
clearing--currently about a third of the entire derivatives
market is already subject to central clearing. And that will
increase substantially as a result of this Act. If you
contemplate other such mitigation factors, that $600 trillion
amount compresses to something less than $2 trillion in market
value, which is a much more appropriate measure of risk.
Mr. Grimm. Will the growth of clearing reduce systemic risk
or increase systemic risk, in your opinion?
Mr. Zubrod. The Coalition supported both the Act's
objective of increasing transparency by subjecting every single
derivatives trade to a trade reporting requirement so that
regulators could have information on where market risks lie. We
also did support increased collateralization, whether through
clearing or otherwise, amongst systemically significant users
of derivatives. And so, I think that, indeed, the Act will
contribute toward mitigation of systemic risk and reduce
materially, if not eliminate, the derivatives market's
contribution to the ``too-big-to-fail'' problem.
Mr. Grimm. Thank you.
Thirty seconds, Mr. Chairman? One last question?
Mr. Silvers, I see that you are a big proponent of Dodd-
Frank. And it appears from your testimony that Dodd-Frank
really zeroes in on the heart of the problems that caused the
meltdown. Simply yes or no, is that accurate?
Mr. Silvers. Mostly.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Is there anywhere in here that it mentions
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac?
Mr. Silvers. That is why I answered mostly.
Mr. Grimm. Okay. Thank you. I thought that point needed to
be made.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And I appreciate the panel. And at this point, I would seek
unanimous consent to enter into the record--bear with me here--
the following documents: from NASDAQ, a letter with regard to
their support for the Small Company Capital Formation Act of
2011; from the New York Stock Exchange strongly supporting the
Small Company Capital Formation Act of 2011, among others; from
the Center on Executive Compensation, the support of H.R. 1062
seeking to repeal Section 953(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act; and
finally, I believe it is a statement from the Credit Union
National Association as well. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
And finally, this concludes today's hearing. The record
will remain open, however, as is always the case, for an
additional 30 days for all those folks who still think of
additional great questions to provide to the panel, the things
that maybe they don't--just don't know about, as some of the
other members have suggested earlier in the day.
And so, with that, again, I thank the panel. And this
hearing is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 16, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5678.098


