- THE EUROZONE CRISIS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE UNITED STATES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE EUROZONE CRISIS AND IMPLICATIONS

FOR THE UNITED STATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-76

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-617                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade

GARY G. MILLER, California, Chairman

ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois, Vice       CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
RON PAUL, Texas                      GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 25, 2011.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 25, 2011.............................................    35

WITNESSES
Tuesday, October 25, 2011

Collyns, Hon. Charles, Assistant Secretary for International
Finance, U.S. Department of the Treasury.......................     6
Elliott, Douglas J., Fellow, Economic Studies, Brookings
Institution....................................................    23
Lachman, Desmond, Resident Fellow, American Enterprise Institute.    21
Rashish, Peter, Vice President, Europe and Eurasia, U.S. Chamber
of Commerce....................................................    19

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Collyns, Hon. Charles........................................    36
Elliott, Douglas J...........................................    40
Lachman, Desmond.............................................    50
Rashish, Peter...............................................    56

THE EUROZONE CRISIS AND IMPLICATIONS

FOR THE UNITED STATES

----------

Tuesday, October 25, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on International
Monetary Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gary Miller
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Miller of California,
Dold, Manzullo, McCotter, Huizenga; McCarthy of New York and
Carson.
Also present: Representatives Lynch and Green.
Chairman Miller of California. The hearing will come to
order.
The hearing today is entitled, ``The Eurozone Crisis and
Implications for the United States.'' I ask unanimous consent
that Mr. Lynch of Massachusetts and Mr. Green of Texas, both of
whom are members of the Financial Services Committee, be
permitted to sit in with members of the subcommittee today for
the purposes of delivering a statement, hearing testimony, and
questioning the witnesses.
We have limited the opening statements to 10 minutes for
each side, based on agreement with the ranking member.
I recognize myself for as much time as I might consume.
Today's hearing is focused on the Eurozone's debt crisis
and its potential impact on the U.S. economy. Despite the
financial assistance provided by the European Union (EU), and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Greece, Ireland, and
Portugal plunged into deep recessions during the past year. The
economies of Spain and Italy are fragile, while the German and
French economies are also starting to show signs of strain.
In the past year, there has been a series of credit rating
downgrades for many EU members, often following the rounds of
stress tests on systemically important European banks. These
rating agencies have warned about the risk associated with the
global interconnectedness of European banks and the potential
risk of investing heavily in government bonds. The EU must take
bold and aggressive action to ensure this crisis is addressed
and contagion in the international capital markets is
prevented.
We meet as Eurozone leaders prepare to convene in Brussels
tomorrow to hopefully arrive at some agreement about how to
address the worsening debt crisis. There is no question that
this is a difficult and fragile situation.
Over the weekend, work was done to come to an agreement. We
expected finalization of a plan to resolve the crisis on
Sunday, but the target had to be changed to Wednesday. It is
our hope that things will be finalized tomorrow so that Europe
will be set on a path to recovery as quickly as possible.
Our hearing today will consider the impact of the crisis in
Europe on the United States. While the solution to the Eurozone
crisis must be a European one, the United States is not
insulated from the problems in Europe. The Eurozone debt crisis
has significant implications for the U.S. economy. The U.S.
economy is highly dependent on trade with the EU and will
suffer if our largest trading partner cannot fix its economy.
Our economic relationship with Europe is significant. It
exceeds $4 trillion. More than 20 percent of U.S. goods are
exported to Europe, totaling more than $400 billion. Thirty-
five percent of U.S. service exports are to Europe. Seventy
percent of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the United States
is from Europe. This is a result of jobs for U.S. workers, and
it is a very important one.
If the crisis leads to even slower growth in the Eurozone
and a general weakening of the euro against the dollar over the
long term, this could have a severe impact on trade by
depressing demand for U.S. exports.
In addition, the market is interconnected, and lack of
market confidence can become contagion. We have already seen
the impact of the crisis on U.S. stock prices. We are also
concerned about the exposure of our U.S. financial institutions
into the crisis.
There is no question there will be a U.S. consequence to
further decline in the Eurozone. It is in our interest that
there be a swift and effective resolution to the crisis in
Europe. Stability in the Eurozone is very important to U.S.
economic interests, and we should play a constructive role
where appropriate.
As we look at this issue, we need to be concerned about the
U.S. exposure to foreign sovereign debt in Europe. However, we
must ensure that the U.S. Government is not using taxpayer
money to bail out foreign governments or bank institutions, as
taxpayers should not be on the hook for failure of foreign
governance.
Today's hearing is focused on the European policy options
under consideration for containing the crisis, the impact of
problems in Europe on the U.S. economy, particularly related to
future trade flows and job growth in the United States. Our
first witness from the Treasury Department will be able to shed
light on the role the United States has played in the European
policy deliberations and steps European officials are
contemplating to stabilize markets and reduce uncertainties in
Europe.
Given the Administration's involvement in the talk in
Brussels, our subcommittee's oversight role is important. We
want to know who the United States is meeting with and what is
coming out of these meetings. We want to know what kind of
commitments the Administration is making during these meetings.
In addition, we are concerned about the impact of any
commitment on U.S. taxpayers. Overall, I hope this hearing
sheds some light for our members on what the appropriate U.S.
role should be during the crisis and how to protect U.S.
taxpayers from exposure.
Our second panel of witnesses will help members understand
how instability in Europe can affect the U.S. economy and
transatlantic trade because of the dependence of the U.S.
economy on the EU economy. We want to understand the
implications of the U.S. economy, particularly with respect to
the exposure of U.S. banks and nonbank entities such as hedge
funds. We want to understand the impact of our U.S. companies,
particularly regarding their exports. We are concerned about
the impact on jobs in this country and the risks this crisis
poses to our own economic prosperity.
Given the significant economic and financial relationship
between the United States and Europe, the United States has a
substantial stake in the resolution of this crisis. How Europe
manages this issue it currently confronts will directly impact
the United States economy. This crisis poses a significant
threat to global economic stability overall.
Again, I want to be clear that this is a European problem
that must be solved by Europe. That said, there is no question
that our economy will be impacted by the success or failure of
the measure to resolve the crisis, which is why the committee
will follow progress on Europe closely. We must work to
insulate U.S. taxpayers by ensuring that U.S. funds are not on
the hook for any resolution measures, and we must work to
insulate our own economy, given our trade and financial
markets' interconnectedness with Europe.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today and for
being able to present a good and honest, forthright testimony
of what is going on; and I yield to the ranking member for 3
minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you, Chairman Miller, for
holding this important hearing to examine the European
economical crisis and what the potential impact could be for
the United States.
The global financial crisis that we are continuing to
recover from set the backdrop for what have become
unsustainable debt levels and unsustainable financial
positioning for a number of Eurozone countries.
What has become the Eurozone crisis first started with the
solvency debt crisis in Greece in early 2010. Fear and concern
over the potential fall of Greece and how that could spread to
other countries set in across European and U.S. markets'
participations. European leaders responded to the situation in
Greece, followed by Ireland and Portugal, through a mix of
financial assistance through a newly created crisis fund and
several spending reductions.
The policy responses implemented thus far have been
reviewed by many in the international community as far too
short. Long-term solutions are necessary to address slow
economical growth, lack of investment confidence, and
undercapitalized banking systems which plague many of the
Eurozone countries. If Europe cannot contain the crisis, given
our strong economical relationship with the European Union it
could pose a significant risk to our economical recovery
efforts.
The President and the Administration officials have been
consulting with their European counterparts, encouraging bold
and aggressive action to stifle potential spread to other
countries and the international markets. As we await the
details of the final agreement by the European leaders, media
sources report solutions may include a leveraged European
Financial Stability Facility as well as new financing
instruments for the International Monetary Fund.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses today as we examine
the impact European's economic problems may have on our own
efforts towards economic recovery. Given the panel's expertise,
I am interested in hearing their thoughts on what the European
crisis strategy should be and ultimately how they pursue
economical recovery.
With that, I yield back my time.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Vice Chairman Dold is recognized for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I certainly want to
thank you for holding this important hearing.
I also want to thank you, Mr. Collyns, and the rest of our
panelists for your time and testimony here today.
Since the end of World War II, the United States has
maintained a very close and mutually beneficial relationship
with Europe. For many decades, our political, military,
cultural, and economic connections have served vital American
economic and national security interests. In the process, the
European Union, as a whole, has become our largest trading
partner, with over $4 trillion in annual commercial trade,
while the European Union alone accounts for over 20 percent of
all American exports.
Our financial and capital markets have become highly
interconnected with the European Union's financial and capital
markets. The United States has become the largest source of
foreign direct investment in Europe, and Europe has become the
largest source of foreign direct investment in the United
States. As a result, European economic conditions necessarily
have a meaningful impact on American jobs, exports, and
economic prosperity. So as Europe goes through these difficult
economic problems, the United States has a vital national
interest in how those European economic problems are resolved.
For example, if Europe's solutions don't inspire market
confidence or if they impose too many losses on creditors, then
American investors and financial institutions will be
negatively impacted, which will negatively affect American jobs
and economic growth. If Europe's solutions don't promote
European economic growth, then we could see significantly
diminished trade with Europe, which again could negatively
impact American jobs and economic growth.
Meanwhile, according to the Bank for International
Settlements, American financial institutions have over $600
billion of direct and indirect exposure to the most challenged
Eurozone countries. So for America's benefit and for Europe's
benefit, we need to see Europe resolve its economic issues as
quickly and as effectively as possible without exposing
American taxpayers to undue risk.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Collyns and our other
witnesses on how Europe's economic problems could impact the
American economy, especially with respect to trade, investment,
and jobs. I also look forward to discussing the European policy
options that are under consideration and America's role in
those policy deliberations; and, finally, I think that many
people are interested in hearing about the International
Monetary Fund's participation in resolving the Eurozone's
economic issues and how the IMF can provide meaningful support
without exposing the American taxpayers to undue risk.
Again, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the
hearing. I want to thank our witnesses for their time and
testimony, and I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch, you are recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
McCarthy, and members of the subcommittee for holding this
critically important and timely hearing. I want to thank you
also for your courtesy in allowing me to attend and
participate. I want to thank the witnesses for their
willingness to come forward and help this committee with its
work.
I have been increasingly concerned for some time now about
the growing sovereign debt crisis in Europe and its effect on
the American financial system and the global economy in
general. That is why I wrote to Chairman Bachus back in July
requesting a hearing on this very issue, on the effect of the
Eurozone crisis on U.S. banks, and that is why I asked to join
this subcommittee for today's hearing.
I commend the chairman and the ranking member for starting
what I hope will be an ongoing conversation in this Congress
about the economy's preparedness to cope with the growing
sovereign debt crisis in Europe. As the chairman noted earlier
in his remarks, the U.S. and Eurozone economies are more
globally interconnected and intertwined than ever before.
The relationship between the United States and the European
Union is particularly interdependent. The U.S. and EU combined
make up about 25 percent of global trade and 40 percent of GDP
and hold assets between 60 and 70 percent--excuse me, and hold
a share of 60 to 70 percent of the world's banking assets
between them.
As we have seen during our own financial crisis, closely
intertwined financial markets come with both benefits and
risks, one of those risks being the rapid and unpredictable
spread of financial contagion in times of financial stress.
While it is clear that the U.S. financial system's direct
exposure to troubled European economies appears manageable, our
indirect exposure through derivatives, contracts, and other
credit commitments is considerably less clear. The Bank for
International Settlements estimates that the U.S. banking
institutions' indirect exposure to Greece, Ireland, Portugal,
Spain, and Italy alone could total as much as $550 billion,
while the indirect exposure of other financial institutions,
such as money markets, insurance, pension funds is completely
unknown.
In short, we know the problem is bad. We just don't know
how bad it is. I hope we can get a little clarity today about
how bad the problem is and what we are doing to address it
before the European sovereign debt crisis becomes another
American economic crisis. I look forward to having a
constructive conversation with the witnesses here today about
steps Congress might take to address this crisis.
I thank the chairman and the ranking member, and I yield
back.
Chairman Miller of California. I would like to welcome our
first witness today. The Honorable Charles Collyns serves as
the Department of Treasury's Assistant Secretary for
International Finance. In this position, Secretary Collyns is
responsible for leading Treasury's work on international
monetary policy, international financial institutions,
coordinating with the G7, G8, and G20 in regional bilateral
economic issues.
Previously, Secretary Collyns served as the deputy director
of the research department at the IMF where he led the team
responsible for preparing the World Economic Outlook report.
Secretary Collyns received a doctorate in economics from Oxford
University after obtaining first class honors as an
undergraduate at Cambridge University.
Normally, we have a summary of 5 minutes, but I would like
you to take as much time as you deem appropriate to make your
presentation, and you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CHARLES COLLYNS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. Collyns. Thank you very much, Chairman Miller, Ranking
Member McCarthy, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss recent developments.
Chairman Miller of California. You might want to pull that
microphone closer. It is not picking up very well.
Mr. Collyns. Europe's financial crisis poses the most
serious risk today to the global recovery. As members of this
committee have noted, the United States has deep trade,
investment, and financial links with Europe; and stability in
Europe is crucial for our exports and for American jobs.
It is clear that the Europeans have the resources and
capacity to deal with the challenges they face. European
leaders have made progress over the weekend towards designing a
comprehensive framework for tackling this crisis; and leaders
will meet again tomorrow, aiming to reach agreement on this
framework well before the G20 summit in Cannes next month. This
agreement will need to be implemented quickly and firmly.
Stepping back for a moment, the macroeconomic and financial
challenges faced by several European countries since the 2008
financial crisis have exposed serious structural tensions
within the European monetary union. Recent experience has
revealed the need for a stronger mechanism to ensure financial
fiscal discipline, for more flexible markets that allow
countries to adjust competitiveness and achieve their growth
potential, and for an adequate crisis response toolkit to
respond to economic and financial stress.
In response to these challenges, Europe has taken wide-
ranging action, both to strengthen national policies and to
reinforce the overall framework for the euro area. At the
country level, over the last 18 months, much of the region has
embarked on accelerated fiscal consolidation, growth-oriented
structural reform, and banking sector repair. This is an
extremely challenging agenda, and completion will require
determined efforts over a sustained period of time.
In parallel, European leaders have pledged to do whatever
it takes to ensure the future of the euro. They have provided
financing, together with the IMF, to Greece, Ireland, and
Portugal as these countries undertake very difficult reforms.
Moreover, leaders have recently expanded the effective
financial capacity of the main European crisis facility, the
European Financial Stability Framework, the EFSF, and have
broadened the ways in which these resources can be deployed.
Meanwhile, the European central bank has played a crucial
role providing liquidity to banks and buying sovereign bonds in
the secondary market; and to prevent future crises, the
Europeans have agreed to governance reforms that include a
broader array of surveillance tools and enforcement devices to
improve fiscal discipline. They have also agreed on a permanent
crisis resolution mechanism.
In recent days, the Europeans have been working hard to
design credible and effective approaches to mobilize the
increased resources and greater flexibility of the EFSF with
the aim of reaching agreement at the leader summit tomorrow and
delivering a comprehensive plan to address their crisis by the
Cannes G20 summit in early November.
This plan will need to have four parts:
First, Europe needs a powerful firewall to guard against
contagion concerns to ensure that governments outside the
periphery can borrow at sustainable interest rates while they
bring down debts and strengthen growth.
Second, European authorities will need to ensure that their
banks have sufficient liquidity and stronger capital to
maintain the full confidence of depositors and creditors and,
if needed, access to a capital backstop.
Third, Europe will need to craft a sustainable path forward
in Greece as it implements its difficult fiscal and structural
reforms.
And, finally, European leaders must tackle difficult
governance challenges to address the root causes of the crisis
and ensure that every member state pursues economic and
financial policies that support growth.
Let me emphasize that the successful resolution of the
current European crisis matters deeply to us here in the United
States because our country has no bigger, no more important
economic relationship than we have with Europe. While the
direct exposure of the U.S. financial system to the most
vulnerable countries in Europe is limited, we have substantial
trade and investment ties with Europe, and European stability
matters greatly for American exporters and for American jobs.
Already, the crisis has slowed growth significantly in
Europe and around the world as increased uncertainty has
reduced risk appetite, undermined business and consumer
confidence, and reduced household wealth. These developments
clearly pose very serious downside risks to the outlook for the
U.S. economy and job creation. It is thus vitally important to
the United States that Europe is able to address its issues
effectively and in a timely fashion. For this reason, the
Administration has closely engaged with European leaders to
encourage them to move forward in an effective way. At the same
time, our supervisors have for some time been working closely
with U.S. financial institutions to identify risks and to
improve their ability to withstand a variety of possible
financial contagion stress events emanating from Europe.
In managing global risks, one key challenge is to ensure
sufficient financing in crisis situations. The European
countries themselves are appropriately contributing the bulk of
financing for countries in the Eurozone periphery.
In addition, the IMF has played an important role as a
source of financing and as a source of expertise in the effort
to contain the crisis. With its long experience and independent
judgment, the IMF sets strong economic conditions for its
loans, which help return countries to sustainability. By
promoting greater stability and safeguarding against a more
abrupt deterioration of economic conditions, the IMF supports
the global economy and with that, U.S. growth, jobs, and
exports. In addition to its involvement in Europe, the IMF has
continued to offer financial support more broadly to countries
all around the world at a range of income levels.
In closing, we appreciate the leadership and support of
this committee on these key challenges, and we look forward to
working with Congress as we engage with our international
partners.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Secretary Collyns can
be found on page 36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you very much.
Dealing with Greece specifically right now is a very small
percentage of the EU, which everybody recognizes; and it seems
apparent that there is some form of a write-off going to take
place as far as some of the debt that they currently owe, which
has to take place, the resolution of that, before you can move
on to Italy and Spain. You stated in your testimony that you
believe the EU leaders are finally ready to come to an
agreement, but what if it doesn't occur in the next few days?
What downside is there to that not taking place?
Mr. Collyns. There is clearly deep commitment from the
European leaders to reaching a strong agreement over the next
few days, because there is a deep understanding that failure
could have very damaging consequences within the euro area.
Although Greece itself is a relatively small share of the
European economy, there has already been a considerable
contagion affecting other countries in the euro area from
events in Greece, and European leaders have realized the
serious dangers if they do not act sufficiently quickly. The
longer action is delayed, the more the dangers increase.
That is why we do think that they are going to take actions
in a comprehensive way over the next few days to put in place a
framework for protecting the rest of the euro area from
potential contagion from events in Greece, strengthening the
capacity of Eurozone sovereigns to continue to access markets
at reasonable rates, and making sure the European banking
system is adequately capitalized and adequately funded, while
at the same time continuing--
Chairman Miller of California. But on that capitalization,
I think the concern is that our downturn, our banks held real
estate, theirs hold sovereign debt. The ones now who have
invested in Greece know they are going to take some form of a
loss.
Mr. Collyns. Right.
Chairman Miller of California. Are they moving rapidly to
make sure there is adequate capitalization for their banks so
they don't tend to pull their head in like a turtle and say we
are not going to get further involved based on the debt we
currently hold?
Mr. Collyns. European banks have already taken significant
action to strengthen their balance sheets, both writing down
the value of Greek debt and also raising additional capital
earlier this year. Despite this, we do think that they do need
to take substantial additional action to strengthen their
balance sheets, in particular to further boost their capital.
The concern that markets have is not only just with
exposure to Greece but also exposure to other sovereigns that
have come under pressure, and for this reason we understand
that agreement is likely as part of this comprehensive package
on an approach to ensure adequate bank capitalization and to
provide a path to raise European bank capital to at least 9
percent core Tier 1 capital relative to risk-weighted assets,
which would be a strong capital base.
Chairman Miller of California. What role has the
Administration played in the negotiations so far and what, if
any, commitments have they made on the part of the American
taxpayers to this issue?
Mr. Collyns. The Administration has been closely engaged
with the Europeans at all levels.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Chairman, could I ask that the witness move
his microphone a little closer to his mouth? I am really having
a hard time hearing him.
Chairman Miller of California. Just be proud of who you are
and belt it out.
Mr. Lynch. There you go.
Mr. Collyns. The Administration has been closely engaged
with European officials at all levels. The President himself
has regular contact with his counterparts in Europe to raise
the deep concerns that we have in the United States. In the
Treasury, we have continuing conversations. Secretary Geithner
has visited Europe many times. In international meetings like
the recent G20 meeting, the situation in Europe dominates the
conversation. I--along with Under Secretary Brainard and our
whole European team--am in constant conversation by phone and
visiting Europe.
We feel that we can play a constructive role by sharing our
own experience in the United States that we gained in dealing
with our own financial crisis. We think there are some useful
lessons that Europeans can learn.
I think the Europeans themselves are very interested in our
perspectives and our views, and they welcome our close
participation, but our participation does not involve any
commitments of U.S. taxpayer money. We believe that the IMF can
play a very important role in supplementing European financial
resources, and through the IMF, the United States can be very
supportive.
The United States has a substantial financial commitment to
the IMF, but involvement in the IMF does not put a material
risk on U.S. taxpayers. The U.S. taxpayers have never lost any
money from our financial commitments to the IMF. The IMF has
preferred creditor status, which means that the IMF is always
paid first before any other creditor; and the IMF, in fact, has
a very strong track record of being repaid by countries that do
run into continuing difficulties.
We also believe that the very strong commitment of the
European leaders and the very strong commitment to European
finances demonstrates the very strong likelihood that the
Europeans will achieve success and that, ultimately, countries
in Europe will be able to meet their financial commitments. So
we are not concerned about exposure of U.S. taxpayers.
Chairman Miller of California. Germany has been moving at a
very cautious pace, which I understand. I hope that pace picks
up rapidly in the next day or two.
The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Thank you for your testimony. I want to go on to two
questions.
The European Financial Stability Fund that is going to be
replaced in the year 2013 by a permanent lending facility, the
European Stability Mechanism, ESM. Do you anticipate the ESM
framework will complement the Dodd-Frank Act reforms that we
have here? And going back to some of the issues that you had
talked about with the IMF, if the IMF creates additional crisis
assistance mechanisms, how would that impact its lending
capabilities for the future?
Mr. Collyns. The ESM will basically be a device for
providing financing to sovereigns that run into difficulties.
It will have a somewhat different structure than the current
EFSF, but essentially it will undertake the same activities
that the EFSF does. So it is not directly related to the
implementation of the financial regulatory reforms in Europe
similar to the Dodd-Frank reforms in the United States.
Nevertheless, the Europeans are certainly taking actions to
implement regulatory reforms that largely parallel the reforms
that we are implementing here in the United States; and
certainly we in the U.S. Treasury are closely engaged with
European counterparts to make sure that, as we move ahead in
the financial regulatory area, we are maintaining a level
playing field and ensuring that we are achieving high-standard
regulatory regimes in Europe as well as in the United States.
In terms of the IMF's resources, the IMF has already
committed substantial resources to the Eurozone periphery
countries, to Greece, Ireland, and Portugal. Nevertheless,
those commitments are still a relatively small share of the
IMF's total available financial resources. There remains a very
substantial arsenal of financial resources to the IMF which it
could use if needed to extend financing to European countries
or countries around the world.
We think the IMF does play a very constructive role in
Europe but it is equally important that that role continues to
be in the context of a strong and comprehensive commitment by
the Europeans to dealing with the problems. The Europeans
themselves have the financial resources to deal with this
crisis. The IMF has a supplementary role. It cannot substitute
for European financial resources.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Good, I have another minute.
Following up on that, when the emerging markets are able to
adequately fill potential gaps created by reduced European
investments in the U.S. economy, the emerging markets, will
they be able to support it? If the EU is having a tough time,
can they fill that spot?
Mr. Collyns. Certainly, the emerging markets are playing an
increasingly important role in generating momentum for the
global economy. I think around 80 percent of global growth over
the past year or so has been, in fact, contributed from
emerging market economies like China, India, and Brazil, as
opposed to advanced economies like the United States, Europe,
and Japan.
We think the emerging markets could play an even stronger
role going forward by shifting the balance of their economies,
relying less on exports to other countries, and boosting the
strength of domestic demand in their own economies; and we, at
the same time as we have been working with the Europeans to
resolve the European crisis, we have also been working hard at
the G20 to encourage the emerging economies to take steps to
ensure that their own growth momentum is sustained by boosting
their own domestic demand momentum and by adopting more
flexible exchange rate regimes, which we think are fully
consistent with and would encourage the shift in the pattern of
global demand growth.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Miller of California. Vice Chairman Dold is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Collyns, thank you again for being here.
I would like to discuss, if I could, just your thoughts on
the International Monetary Fund's role in resolving the
European crisis. Could you tell me and tell us, the panel, how
the IMF is assisting the European countries and how the IMF's
participation benefits the United States and, if you could, the
degree to which the IMF participation exposes the American
taxpayers to potential losses?
Mr. Collyns. The IMF is playing a crucial role in Europe
through a variety of channels. The most obvious one, of course,
is the financial channel. The IMF has contributed around a
third of the financial resources that have been provided.
Mr. Dold. Can you give me just a rough estimate of what a
third is?
Mr. Collyns. A third is around maybe $150 billion. It is
around a third of the total commitments by the European
economies.
The IMF is also playing a crucial role in the design of the
adjustment programs, and it plays a crucial role as an
independent partner with the European countries to make sure
that the adjustment programs are strong and well-designed and
able to address the fundamental issues. So we are, in the
Treasury, strong proponents of the IMF playing this role.
As I mentioned before, the IMF can play and has played a
critical part in sustaining global financial stability through
this crisis management role without exposing U.S. taxpayers to
the risk of material losses. The IMF has a very strong record
of getting repaid by countries, given its preferred creditor
status. We believe that the IMF can continue to play this very
strong role, but, as I have said, it needs to be in conjunction
with the European commitment to the right policies and the
European commitment of adequate financing.
Mr. Dold. Secretary Collyns, from the U.S. economic
perspective, what do you think are the most sensitive issues in
resolving the Eurozone's economic problems, from our
perspective?
Mr. Collyns. From our perspective, the key issue is really
containing the contagion effects. As investors are concerned
about possible implications of what is happening in the
relatively small countries in the periphery, what are the
implications for larger countries in Europe that have
relatively slow rates of growth and relatively high rates of
public debt? These are countries that are much more significant
in terms of their trading relations and financial relations
with the United States. If there were to be a further
deterioration in investor confidence in these countries, that
would clearly have a very dangerous impact on U.S. financial
markets and global financial markets. So the key instrument
that is needed is to create imposing firewalls that break the
connection between difficult--counters the difficult situations
like Greece with the stronger countries that are closer to the
Eurozone core.
We know the Europeans are working hard. We have heard about
various devices that they are looking for to leverage the
resources that they have set aside in the FSF to build this
firewall. So a very important task in the days ahead is to
provide a mechanism that will work effectively, that will be a
mechanism that the markets can work with to continue to provide
adequate fiscal resources, adequate financing to meet
countries' fiscal needs.
Mr. Dold. Secretary Collyns, there are those who believe
the reason why the focus has not been on the United States is
because of the problems in Europe right now and that we are
going to be next. Do you believe that the United States has a
similar spending problem as Europe does? And how would you
compare Europe's problems to our problems? What are the
similarities and what are the main differences?
Mr. Collyns. The United States clearly has a serious fiscal
issue over the medium term.
Mr. Dold. ``Medium term'' being defined as what?
Mr. Collyns. The Administration has committed to a very
substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit over the next few
years. Under the President's plan, the fiscal deficit will be
reduced very sharply over the next 3 years, and it will be put
on a path that will lower the public-debt-to-GDP ratio
consistent with our commitments to the G20 at the Toronto
Summit.
At the same time, however, the United States does not face
the short-term fiscal pressures that are faced by some
countries in Europe. We believe that there is an important role
for providing additional fiscal support to the U.S. economy
over the next year or so to maintain the momentum of the
present recovery.
The present recovery is not as strong as we would like. The
progress on raising employment and reducing the unemployment
rate has not been as strong as we would like, and we think it
would make sense to provide some additional fiscal support to
slow the pace of the fiscal consolidation.
In Europe, there are other countries outside the periphery
that also have maintained the confidence of markets and where
the imperative of fiscal consolidation is not as urgent. A
country like Germany, for example, although its debt-to-GDP
ratio is quite high, it does have room to--within the
constraints of its own debt rate, it has room to let automatic
stabilizers work to support the German economy, which will play
an important part in sustaining the momentum of growth in
Europe.
So fiscal issues are certainly important in the United
States over the medium term, but if we are able to put in place
a convincing and credible approach to dealing with these
issues, that would also provide us with room to taking steps to
support our economy in the short term and supporting American
jobs.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Carson is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Collyns, in the wake of the 2009 financial crisis, the
United States passed comprehensive financial regulatory reform
designed to promote transparency, monitor systemic risk in the
financial system, and ensure that U.S. financial institutions
can withstand shocks to the system. How have these reforms
improved the ability of U.S. regulatory authorities and
financial institutions to mitigate the impact on the U.S.
financial market of economic turmoil in Europe?
Mr. Collyns. I think the financial reforms have played an
important part in strengthening the resilience of the U.S.
financial system and helping to contain potential risk coming
from Europe in a number of different ways. One is that Europe--
the United States' banks are much more strongly capitalized
today than they were before the 2008 financial crisis.
Chairman Miller of California. You need to move the
microphone a little closer. We are having trouble hearing up
here.
Mr. Collyns. The largest U.S. banks now have average Tier 1
core capital to risk-weighted asset ratio of over 10 percent,
substantially higher than it was back in 2008. There has also
been a major reduction in reliance on market funding, on
wholesale funding to fund U.S. bank lending, and a substantial
improvement in the liquidity situation of American banks. All
of this is consistent with the stronger capital, liquidity, and
funding requirements put in place by Dodd-Frank.
In addition to this, Dodd-Frank has put in place important
mechanisms to make sure that U.S. regulators work closely with
U.S. banks to anticipate potential risk events. In particular,
the Financial Stability Oversight Committee, the FSOC, has met
frequently to assess potential risks, and supervisors have
benefited from the insights of this work to work closely with
financial institutions here in the United States to strengthen
the financial institutions' capacity to deal with potential
risk events coming out of Europe.
Mr. Carson. What is the role for the G20 in coordinating
policy responses?
Mr. Collyns. The G20 has played an important part and
continues to play an important part, and one area where its
role is crucial is in the financial regulatory area. The Dodd-
Frank legislation has put in place very strong, very high
standards of regulatory requirements in the United States, but
it is important that the leading financial centers around the
world also adopt high-standard regulatory framework consistent
with what we are doing in the United States, and the G20 has
played an important part in making sure that this is achieved.
The G20 has also provided a forum in which challenges to
global stability such as those coming out of Europe are
discussed and where key countries, emerging market countries
can also express their concerns. So, for example, in G20
meetings, the situation in Europe is discussed extensively, and
the concerns that are expressed, it is not just the United
States that is expressing concerns but also the large emerging
market countries are also expressing their deep concerns and I
think helping the Europeans understand the critical importance
of addressing their issues in a fundamental and decisive way.
Mr. Carson. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. McCotter, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCotter. Thank you very much.
Just a quick question: How does what is happening in the
Eurozone and the policy prescriptions that are being put
forward differ from what the United States did during the TARP
situation back in 2008?
Mr. Collyns. In some respects, there are similarities, but
there are also important institutional differences, of course,
between the United States and Europe. Important similarities
are that this is a crisis of confidence and a crisis that has
led to a huge increase in uncertainty with potentially very
negative impact if not contained, both here in the United
States and in Europe. What is needed, therefore, is an
overwhelming, powerful response to reduce concerns, to reduce
the uncertainty, to reassure investors that the situation is
being contained.
In Europe, it has been more difficult to put this decisive
response in place because of institutional constraints. There
are 17 members of the Eurozone, and they all need to reach
agreement on steps to establish and develop these crisis
resolution mechanisms. That has taken time, and politics is
always complicated, but now we are talking about the politics
in a multiplicity of countries.
There is also a difference in the role of the European
central bank, the ECB, from the role of the Federal Reserve
(Fed). During our financial crisis, the U.S. Treasury and the
Fed were able to work very closely together and very quickly to
develop effective tools to reassure markets that funding would
continue to be available.
The ECB's legal constraints have meant that there could not
be such a close relationship between the ECB and European
treasuries, and for this reason the mechanisms that are being
created now to reassure markets that funding will be available
need to be more complicated and have taken more time to design.
Mr. McCotter. In discussing those differences, one of the
reasons that Europe seems to be having difficulty with this is
because, unlike the United States where we have a union of 50
sovereign States governed by a Federal Government, the
individual nations of the EU seem to be having trouble, I think
very understandably so, with the concept of their taxpayers
bailing out the investors for problems that were caused by
other nations' lack of fiscal discipline. In the United States,
that was clearly a much lower hurdle to get over for the
Federal Government to do, rather than trying to corral 50
different State legislatures to agree to do that.
But doesn't the central principle of what they are trying
to do in the EU equate with what was done in the TARP? In
short, whether it is by individual nations of the EU or done in
the United States by the Federal Government, the way they are
trying to solve this crisis of confidence is to essentially
tell investors to the greatest of their ability that you will
not lose money under any circumstance and that the taxpayers
will cover it if you run into this. Is that not the case?
Mr. Collyns. That is certainly the case. That is
particularly relevant for the creation of this firewall that we
have discussed.
But I think the problems in Europe go well beyond the
construction of the firewall. There also needs to be
fundamental economic reforms in a number of countries in
Europe, Greece being the most prominent example, a commitment
to massive fiscal consolidation and to deep-rooted reforms that
restore dynamism to the Greek economy. Ultimately, the European
crisis cannot be resolved until countries around Europe are
able to convince markets they are going to be able to achieve
the fiscal adjustments and the economic reforms that restore
sustainability.
Mr. McCotter. If I may, Mr. Chairman, just a quick point.
One of the problems that Greece experienced, much like it
once did during the time of the Athenian city-state, was when
people realized they could avail themselves of the public
treasury for their own benefit, and the absence of fiscal
discipline that you see out of a country like Greece where they
have an exploding public sector and an anemic private sector
are not necessarily constrained to Europe.
Thank you.
Chairman Miller of California. I like starting with
Athenian democracy, working through the Roman Republic. We
could go on. It would be a great way to start this. I like
that.
Mr. Lynch, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
McCarthy. Again, this is a very important hearing.
Mr. Secretary, one of the next panel witnesses, Desmond
Lachman from the American Enterprise Institute, has raised some
interesting questions; and he points out that now the IMF is
acknowledging that Greece's economic and budget performance has
been very much worse than originally anticipated. He points out
that there has been a 12 percent contraction in Greece's real
GDP over the last 24 months, their unemployment has increased
to over 15 percent, and that the situation there makes a
substantial write-down of Greek sovereign debt in the amount of
about $500 billion highly probable within the next few months.
So in many analysts' minds it is not a question of whether
Greece will default but when. That would be the largest such
default in history.
The IMF is proposing that the European banks accept a 50 to
60 cents on the dollar write-down on their Greek sovereign debt
holdings, and that would have a material impact on European
banks' capital reserve positions. So what I am worrying about
is whether these European banks or have these European banks or
will these European banks be required to mark to market their
Greek debt before the recapitalization plan goes forward.
Because that obviously represents a delta or a difference
between what they are saying their capitalization will be
versus what we determine it to be after stress tests and after
properly marking down this Greek debt. And do we have any sense
of the real strength, the real health of these European banks?
Mr. Collyns. The European banks have already been
significantly marking down--
Mr. Lynch. But the IMF now is saying, given today's
situation, they are looking for a 50 to 60 cents on the dollar
write-down of Greek debt.
Mr. Collyns. Right. Markets have already been pricing in a
very substantial discount on--
Mr. Lynch. But the banks aren't marking to market their
assets. That is the problem. The markets are discounting them,
but the banks--the banks are not showing that markdown on their
balance sheets. So if you are going to stuff those banks full
of money to save them, there would be a lot more money involved
than what the banks are saying. That is the problem I have.
Mr. Collyns. Right. The banks have, in fact, been making
progress in marking down their exposure to Greece on their
balance sheets. They haven't gone all the way.
Mr. Lynch. Not nearly, though. Fifteen percent. Not 50
percent.
Mr. Collyns. Over time they are moving--in the
recapitalization effort exercise that is now under way, this
exercise will take into account sovereign risk in assessing
banks' need for capital, and that assessment of sovereign risk
will be based on market valuations rather than book value
valuations of bank capital. So this exercise should be much
more effective in boosting bank capital than previous exercises
that the Europeans have undertaken over the past--
Mr. Lynch. Don't you think your analysis is unrealistically
rosy from what we are seeing? Just look at the data, look at
what is happening, look at the contraction in the economies,
look at the slowdown even in some of the core countries like
Germany and France.
I am not--look, I am not trying to take you to task for
anything. I think you are doing a great job. I just think that
we are not being realistic with what is coming down the road,
and that is inhibiting our ability to prepare for that. That is
all I am saying. I am not trying to be the bearer of bad news.
I just know what the numbers tell me. And you try to prepare
for that instead of constructing this.
From what we have seen so far and the response from the
European Union--and God bless them, it is difficult because
they are not unitary like we are, as Mr. McCotter pointed out
before. They don't have a single Fed and a single Treasury
totally committed to one program; it has been rather
fragmented.
But all I am saying is that we can't build our expectations
or our course of action based on the very rosy scenarios that
you are playing out here. Someone has to sound the alarm, and I
think your folks at Treasury are probably the people to do
that. And if you don't, then you are letting us walk this--we
are walking right into this, and we are not taking, I think,
reasonable precautions under the circumstances.
Mr. Collyns. We are certainly expressing our grave concerns
based on our perceptions of the downside risks. We don't just
look at baseline scenarios that may be optimistic, but rather
we try to think, well, what could go wrong, and how do we take
steps to make sure that the downside risks are not realized,
both by encouraging the Europeans to take more forceful action
to deal with their problems and by making sure that we have
adequate defenses here in the United States, and particularly
the U.S. financial system is adequately protected from
potential risk events. That is the crucial part of what the
FSOC has been doing.
Mr. Lynch. Have we done an assessment on what our exposure
is?
Chairman Miller of California. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Lynch. I am sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for your tolerance.
Chairman Miller of California. You and I have the same
concern. I wish Germany would use more of a Panzer approach to
getting this done, but they are very cautious on that kind of
concept. But them moving rapidly wouldn't hurt the market.
Mr. Huizenga, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here. And I apologize; I had a bill up in
front of another committee and I had to testify on that, so I
wanted to try to catch up based on some notes and some things
that were handed to me. I just thought if you could address a
little bit about U.S. exposure, whether there is direct
exposure or exposure through other organizations that were
involved in IMF, for example, and what that may mean to the
taxpayer.
Mr. Collyns. U.S. direct exposure to the weakest countries
in the periphery to Greece, Portugal, and Ireland is really
quite minimal. Financial institutions have been aware of the
risks, they have been lowering their exposure, and the residual
risk is very small.
The concern is that there is a deep interconnectiveness
more broadly between the American financial system and the
European financial system. The exposure to financial
institutions in the European core is very large indeed, and
these are institutions that themselves are exposed to risk in
the European periphery. So any increase in volatility and
market uncertainty about the financial institutions in the
European core very quickly translates into increased
uncertainty in U.S. financial markets.
We have seen that playing out over the past couple of
months, and this is an area where U.S. financial supervisors
have been working very closely together with U.S. financial
institutions to try to identify these risks and contain the
risks, an important topic for--an important focus for the FSOC
as they consider the financial system.
Mr. Huizenga. It seems to me that exposure and risk might
be two different things to a way--I understand the mitigation
of the risk, but do we have exposure through the IMF or through
some other organizations? If and when--because I think I agree
with my colleagues here as well. I am very concerned about what
may be happening and how does that translate, and then adding
into that some of the requirements that may be coming under
Basel III and those types of things, how does that all play
into their ability to recover?
Mr. Collyns. The U.S. Government has minimal direct
exposure. We do not lend significant sums to countries like
Greece. We are supportive of the IMF playing a significant role
in helping Europe to deal with this crisis. The IMF has
provided around a third of the financing for countries like
Greece, Ireland, and Portugal. The United States makes a
financial contribution to the IMF; however, this financial
contribution does not put the U.S. taxpayer at material risk.
The IMF has preferred creditor status, which means it gets
repaid first. In the past, the record of repayment to the IMF
has been excellent. The U.S. taxpayer has never lost a cent
through its exposure to the IMF. So the IMF is an ideal vehicle
for us to make sure that the European programs are well
designed, based on the IMF's role joining on its long
experience and expertise in dealing with financial crises,
while at the same time providing a certain amount of financing.
Mr. Huizenga. We have just over a minute, and I am
wondering if you could touch on Basel and what that may mean as
they are trying to recover?
Mr. Collyns. Basel III is very important to improve the
capital adequacy standards in banks in the United States and in
Europe in reducing reliance on--excessive reliance on market
funding and improving liquidity. As banks have moved towards
strengthening their positions in these respects, their exposure
to potential risk is correspondingly reduced. So we think that
Basel III is already playing an important factor. The rules
themselves do not yet come fully into effect, but financial
institutions are anticipating in advance the requirements that
they will face.
Mr. Huizenga. In my closing seconds here, you just used a
phrase, ``excessive reliance on market funding.'' So you are
expecting that there needs to be government funding as opposed
to the market?
Mr. Collyns. No. By market funding, I mean wholesale
funding rather than deposit funding. Banks need a stable
funding base based on consumer deposits, retail deposits, and
other resources that can be relied upon to be stable rather
than using wholesale funding from the market to an excessive
degree that could expose a bank to risk in a volatile financial
market. I am certainly not talking about official funding for
banks, either in the United States or in Europe.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. That concludes our first
panel. The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this witness which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to this
witness and to place his responses in the record..
We have many more questions, and you have a lot of answers.
We just don't have the time. Secretary Collyns, thank you for
your testimony today, and the panel is dismissed. Thank you,
sir.
Now, I invite the second panel to come forward. I would
like to welcome our witnesses.
Mr. Peter Rashish is vice president for Europe and Eurasia
at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Rashish leads a team
focused on advancing the broad and deep economic and commercial
relationships that exist between the United States and the
European Union in developing new opportunities in the
continent's emerging markets.
Dr. Desmond Lachman is a resident fellow at the American
Enterprise Institute focusing on the global macroeconomy,
global currency issues in multilateral lending agencies.
Previously, Dr. Lachman served as deputy director to the IMF
Policy Development and Review Department. In this role, he was
active in staff formulation of the IMF policies. Dr. Lachman
has written extensively on the global economic crisis, the U.S.
dollar, and the strains in the European area.
Mr. Douglas Elliott is a fellow at the Brookings Institute
and focuses on issues surrounding both public policy and
private financial institutions. Mr. Elliott was an investment
banker for 2 decades principally with JPMorgan and was
president and principal researcher for the Center on Federal
Financial Institutions.
I would like to welcome you all here today. And, Mr.
Rashish, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETER RASHISH, VICE PRESIDENT, EUROPE AND EURASIA,
U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Rashish. Thank you. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
McCarthy, and distinguished members of the House Financial
Services Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and
Trade, my name is Peter Rashish, and I am vice president for
Europe and Eurasia at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. The
transatlantic commercial relationship is by far the largest in
the world, with the United States and the European Union
surpassing $4.3 trillion in trade, investment, and sales by
foreign affiliates of companies in one another's markets. U.S.
companies have over $1 trillion invested in the EU. In Ireland
alone, the stock of U.S. FDI totaled $165 billion at the end of
2009, which is more than the United States has invested in
China, India, Russia, and Brazil combined. EU investment in the
United States supported 3.6 million jobs in 2008. Its
investment in California alone supported 287,000 jobs, while
its investment in New York supported 255,000 jobs.
These figures make it plain that the fate of the U.S.
economy is intimately entwined with the fate of the European
Union and the Eurozone. Because of the deep level of
integration between our two economies, we will sink or swim
together.
The collapse of the Eurozone would not only mean the end of
the common currency and the efficiencies that it has brought to
the European economy, but would also likely lead to the
disintegration of one of the EU's crowning achievements, the
single market enacted in 1992. Without the single market and
its four freedoms of movement of people, goods, services, and
capital, not only would Europe's economy suffer, but U.S.
companies would no longer be able to benefit from operating
across a barrier-free internal EU market just as European firms
do.
While Europe's political commitment to finding a solution
to the crisis is strong, it is struggling to identify the right
policy tools that contain financial contagion, shore up the
banking system, and rein in fiscal deficits, while at the same
time boosting economic growth. Without economic growth, no
amount of budgetary austerity or financial rescue programs will
provide a long-term solution to Europe's economic woes.
Where can Europe find the economic growth it needs which
would ensure that the United States continues to reap the
enormous commercial benefit from its trade and investment with
the European Union? One avenue is for the EU and its member
states to pursue structural reforms of their economies that
would liberate growth.
Another path is for Europe to invigorate its push to
complete its internal market. While most barriers to trade
across the EU have fallen, an important number remain in the
services sector. The creation of the single market has led to a
surge in intra-EU investment, and this internal dynamism has
been a key source of the EU's economic growth. The elimination
of the remaining barriers in a single market would have major
benefits for its economy, but also for ours.
There is, however, one area that until now has been
neglected as a source of increased economic growth in the EU,
and for that matter in the United States, and that is the trade
relationship between these two commercial partners. If the two
transatlantic economic powers want to inject more dynamism to
their economies in a noninflationary way, there is one quick
step they could consider: Agree to eliminate all tariffs in
transatlantic trade.
While these tariffs are low between the United States and
the EU, because of the enormous size of the economic
relationship, even small steps can yield very large gains in
prosperity. According to a report by a Brussels-based think
tank, the European Center for International Political Economy,
such a transatlantic zero tariff initiative--elimination
initiative would increase combined U.S.-EU GDP by $180 billion
over 5 years. That is more added growth than we would receive
from the completion of the Doha Round of multilateral trade
talks.
Now, while the Doha Round is facing serious obstacles to
its completion, a transatlantic zero deal could be agreed to
quickly as the kinds of issues that have in the past held up
bilateral trade pacts such as social, labor, and environmental
standards shouldn't be a factor between the U.S. and the EU.
The U.S. and the EU should be ambitious and not stop at
eliminating tariffs. They should be aimed at opening up their
services markets to each other, create a single investment
area, and pursue compatible regulatory regimes. Such an
initiative does not have to be a traditional free trade
agreement, based upon what is called a single undertaking, and
which could take years to complete if progress in one area is
dependent on how far negotiators have gone in another area. But
to avoid the unfulfilled solemn declarations that have
characterized the U.S.-EU relationship in the past, the two
sides should commit themselves in a legally binding way to the
achievement of a barrier-free transatlantic market.
On November 28th, the United States and the European Union
will hold a summit meeting in Washington in which President
Obama will welcome European Council President Van Rompuy and
European Commission President Barroso. An announcement at the
summit of a bold transatlantic initiative for jobs and growth,
including elimination of tariffs on trade, would inject a
sorely needed sense of confidence into both the U.S. and EU
economies and would produce significant gains to both sides.
Such an agreement would not in itself free the EU and the
Eurozone of the task of finding lasting solutions to the
current crisis, but it would create prospects of growth in
Europe without which the crisis will likely endure.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce looks forward to working with
the members of the subcommittee to seek the full benefits of
the transatlantic economy for American workers and companies.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rashish can be found on page
56 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Without objection, the written statements of all of the
witnesses will be made a part of the record. I should have
announced that beforehand, but I didn't.
Dr. Lachman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DESMOND LACHMAN, RESIDENT FELLOW, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Lachman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
inviting me, and thank you, Ranking Member McCarthy.
What I propose to do is divide my remarks into four
groupings: first, I want to talk about the intensification of
the crisis in Europe; second, I want to touch on the
implications for the United States; third, I want to discuss
what the Europeans are doing to address this crisis and why I
think their efforts might fall short; and fourth, I just want
to touch on the United States' role, what the appropriate role
for the United States is in this crisis.
Turning first to the intensification of the crisis, there
is little doubt in my mind that we have seen a substantial and
very disturbing intensification of this crisis that is all too
likely to create real problems for the U.S. economy in 2012.
Among the indications of an intensification of the crisis are
first, that Greece looks like it is on the cusp of defaulting.
This would be the largest default, sovereign default, in
history. It would involve something like $450 billion.
I think that one really has to dismiss the notion that
Greece is a small economy. The fact that it is a small economy
doesn't mean that it is highly indebted. A lot of that debt is
sitting on the banks of the core countries in Europe, which
could really have serious concerns. We have already seen
contagion to Portugal and Ireland. If we include Portugal,
Ireland, and Greece, we are talking about $1 trillion of debt,
a lot of that with the banks.
What is of real concern in terms of the intensification is
that this crisis has now spread to Italy and Spain. The
Europeans are trying to create the narrative that Italy and
Spain are innocent bystanders of the crisis, when, in fact,
they have deep problems. Italy has serious budget problems.
Spain is very exposed externally.
We have seen strains in the European banking system that
are of concern. If they get a big hit now, this is going to
cause a real credit crunch. And the IMF is estimating that the
shortage of capital of the European banks is around about 200
billion euros, whereas market estimates are about 300 billion
euros.
Finally, in terms of intensification, what we are seeing is
France and Germany moving into a downturn. If we get
intensification of the crisis, that is going to cause Germany
and France to move into a meaningful recession, which will
really complicate the issues for the Eurozone.
Being brief on the implications for the United States, my
two fellow panelists have touched well on the trade channels
and the investment channels. I would emphasize the exposure
that we have to the banking side through our banks. While the
Administration is indicating that we don't have too much in the
way of direct exposure to the periphery, the exposure of our
financial system to the European banking system, which does
have enormous exposure to the periphery, is huge, and therefore
I would say that our financial system has very big exposure.
What I am referring to is our money market funds have something
like $1 trillion lent to the European banks, the U.S. banks
have about $1 trillion of exposure to Germany and France, and
our banks have written a lot of CDS and other derivative
products, which really expose us enormously if things go wrong.
In terms of what is to be done, the agenda in Europe is to
try to deal with the Greek situation in a definitive way, to
try to ensure that banks are properly capitalized, and to erect
a firewall around Italy and Spain. I have my doubts as to how
effective they are going to be this time around. The whole of
this crisis has been characterized by a ``too little, too
late'' response, and I think that this is going to be another
indication of that.
There are indications that the banks are resisting the 50-
to 60-cent writedown that the Europeans are proposing on them.
It is not clear whether the Europeans are going to come up with
$2 trillion that would erect a firewall around Italy and Spain,
and that money is certainly not going to be nonconditional
money..
And I have misgivings about the way in which the bank
restructuring is being done in France and Germany and the core
countries in the sense that this is all too likely to provoke a
credit crunch. As banks are given time to raise capital on
their own, what they are going to do is they are going to opt
for deleveraging rather than raising the capital that will
dilute their shareholdings.
Finally, in terms of the U.S. role, the United States has
been providing support both through the Federal Reserve as well
as through the IMF. It is not clear to me that the United
States should be doing a whole lot more. The problems in Europe
are ones of solvency rather than liquidity. I am not sure that
throwing more money at this provides a solution. We would
certainly be putting taxpayers' money at risk, I am not sure
that is a good idea. The Europeans did not help us in bailing
out our banks in 2008-2009. I am not sure that I understand the
logic of why the United States should now help them.
Finally, I would say that relying on the IMF is not the
most indicated course. They haven't covered themselves with
glory in the way in which they have dealt with this crisis. And
I take issue with the fact that using the IMF to lend more to
these countries doesn't expose the U.S. taxpayer to risk. I
would just note that in these countries the IMF has never lent
as much money to a country as Greece. The lending to Portugal
and Ireland has been huge to date, so I wouldn't take much
comfort in the track record that in the past, the IMF has
always been repaid. When you have exposure of this size, you
really are taking risks with U.S. taxpayers' money.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lachman can be found on page
50 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Elliott, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS J. ELLIOTT, FELLOW, ECONOMIC STUDIES,
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Mr. Elliott. Thank you, Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
McCarthy, and members of the subcommittee.
The euro crisis is deeply concerning, in part because the
path it follows is likely to be the main determinant of whether
we go back into recession. If Europe were to be shaken by a
series of nations defaulting on their government debt, I am
convinced that the continent would plunge into a severe
recession. Their recession would trigger a recession here
because of a number of links across the Atlantic. I think
everyone before me has done a great job of talking about these
links, so I am going to just touch on them very briefly and
then move on to other parts of this.
Trade: We export about $400 billion to Europe. We have
about $1 trillion of foreign--of direct investment of things we
own in Europe. The financial flows, we have about $5 trillion
of lending and other commitments to Europe as a whole. A good
chunk of that is the U.K., but the U.K. is also very closely
tied to the Eurozone. And then, as we have talked about, there
are the effects on business and consumer confidence partly that
come through the financial markets. We saw in August how badly
we could be hit once people get scared about Europe.
Now, let me be clear, I believe Europe will probably muddle
through, ugly as the process has been and will continue to be,
and frightening as it has been; however, the problem is there
is perhaps a 1 in 4 chance that something really bad will
happen that would lead to a series of national defaults that
run from Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, and take Italy as
well. There is also a small chance of an even worse outcome in
which one or more countries leave the euro.
Now, my 1 in 4 probability estimate is very rough. There
are many different ways that things can go wrong, because we
have 17 different countries, each with their own political,
social, and economic systems. So there are a lot of ways things
can go wrong. Each of them has a low probability, but there are
just so many of them that they add up to give me certainly very
serious concern.
I think the actions that are going to be announced this
week in Europe are generally positive, but I agree with Desmond
that it is once more a case of saying they are going to do a
lot more than they actually are. I have serious concerns about
what has been proposed so far. The three steps they are taking
are interlinked, and because they have political constraints
that are really very binding, they are not doing enough on any
of them. For instance, they are going to try to lever up the
EFSF so they have something closer to 1 trillion or 2 trillion
of euros to deal with the potential problems; however, because
they are not willing to commit the base amount of money that
they put in, they are not willing to increase that, it makes it
hard for them to do anything terribly effective with the EFSF.
They are talking about providing insurance so that if you
own, say, a new Italian bond, you know at least 20 percent of
it will be paid. Given that Greece is about to have a 50
percent hit, that is not going to bring substantial new
investors in, so I think it is an ineffective way of doing it
that is being forced by not being willing to increase the 440
billion euros of base commitment of real money.
This also means they don't have a lot to do for the banks,
so they are trying to shoot for about 100 billion euro
recapitalization. The IMF thinks the losses on the sovereigns
on market terms is 200 or 300 billion euros. There is $1
trillion of capital already there, so $100 billion is only a 10
percent increase. And there is a staggering $27 trillion of
assets in the European banking system. So you are talking about
the 100 billion euros is less than half a percent of the total
amount of assets. Now, the assets are generally pretty safe,
but there is just a lot of them if they go wrong.
So all these things tie together, and they are not, I
think, going to be doing enough to deal with them. So whatever
happens this week, I think we need to be prepared in case the
crisis worsens. We should continue to encourage the Europeans
to do what they need to do, and I think they need to do a lot
more. We should continue to provide the U.S. dollar swaps
through the European Central Bank that will allow them to
provide banks with dollar funding. And our regulatory agencies
should continue to monitor very closely our financial
exposures, but not do it in a way that causes a panic reaction
that makes the Europe situation worse.
And I do think that we ought to be prepared, if needed, to
have the IMF provide substantial further assistance. The
Eurozone has the joint resources to do what they need to do,
but it is very helpful to have the IMF. It shows the markets
there is more funding available; it brings the ability to place
conditions, which, as a third party, the IMF can more easily
do; and the technical aid they can provide, which is
substantial, gets listened to much more readily if they
provided money as part of it.
So this is a European problem. They need to provide the
backbone of the solutions, but it is strongly in our interest
to help in any reasonable way that we can.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Elliott can be found on page
40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
In my previous statement. I wasn't trying to underestimate
the impact of Greece. My comment was associated with the fact
that they are approximately maybe 2 percent of the EU, yet if
it is not handled properly, it can be a significant impact; and
that the EU has to somehow move rapidly to capitalize, whether
the joint financing, resources, or however they do it, to make
sure there is liquidity in the banks so the banks, if that is
not done beforehand, and they take the hit on Greece, they
might be very reluctant based on their own interests to not get
further involved, especially with a situation that might occur
with Italy and Spain.
That was my concern. If they do not hit rapidly and Greece
hits first, there might not be motivation on the part of the
banks to move rapidly to help others if they know they are
going to take a further hit on that.
And I guess my question would be to all of you, what would
happen to the U.S. recovery if European countries
simultaneously implement all of the austerity programs, and
what can we do to protect the U.S. economy and U.S. exports if
that occurs? We will start with Mr. Rashish, and work right
across.
Mr. Rashish. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think that one thing we can make sure to do is keep our
markets open to trade and investment. It is certainly not the
time, if there ever is a time, to close them when our major
partner is going through the challenges we see right now. We
want to encourage companies from Europe and around the world to
invest in the United States. We want to pursue an export-
oriented policy of our own.
But I think what is attractive about trade policy in this
context is that it is something we can do together, in fact we
need to do together, with the European Union. The European
Commission negotiates trade policy at the European level for
all of the 27 member states, including all of the 17 euros and
member states. And if you look at our trade policy agenda, I
think that we have now--the good news is we have passed the
three free trade agreements, we have the Trans-Pacific
Partnership which is still on the table, but I think that there
should be some room for us to think about some additional trade
policy initiatives, and I think that one with the European
Union recommends it.
So I would say, why not look at the policy tools we have at
our immediate disposal which don't have any implication for the
taxpayer, don't have any implication for budgets, but which
instead would liberate growth in the United States and Europe?
And that is why we put forward this idea of a zero tariff
initiative.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Lachman?
Mr. Lachman. I think your question really goes to the heart
of the problem in Europe, which is that the IMF is imposing a
massive amount of austerity on countries in a fixed exchange
rate system. When you do that amount of austerity, and I am
thinking about countries like Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and
Spain, what you have to expect is deep recessions in those
countries. We have seen that already in Greece, we have seen it
in Ireland, we are going to see it in Portugal, and we will see
it in Spain. That has a material impact on those countries'
growth prospects, and it also has a material impact on the
European banking system, and through that, we get recessions in
France and Germany.
I think the implications for the United States should be
that there is a sense of realism in making our policy
decisions, that we shouldn't be making our policy decisions on
the basis of a rosy global scenario that is going to help the
United States get out of its difficulties. I think that rather
this, in my mind, would have a bearing on how quickly one does
the withdrawal of stimulus from the U.S. economy. That would be
one aspect that one would have to look at.
But the other aspect is when one does one's budget
projections, one should be basing this not on the rosy
scenarios that the CBO is doing, but rather on what is likely
to happen in terms of growth over the next year or two because
of the European crisis. What that would argue for is a much
more serious effort at medium-term budget consolidation,
because what this is going to do is to cause our budgets to
really blow out.
Chairman Miller of California. What my concern is, and it
is not being talked about much, is we looked at what happened
to U.S. banks in 2008. When they lost trust, when they lost
faith, they quit lending to each other. A similar situation
could occur in the EU if Greece takes a huge hit first before
they capitalize improperly. And I guess I will let you try to
respond, Mr. Elliott. You are the one who is left, and I am out
of time.
Mr. Elliott. Actually, it works out because I am
principally a financial sector expert, so you have asked me
something that I do focus a lot on.
First of all, I want to echo something Desmond said. I am
quite worried that the banks may be pushed to restore their
capital ratios by shrinking at a time when we don't want them
to be shrinking. So your concern about austerity measures and
private sector initiatives that all move in the same direction
of slowing the economy down is a very valid one.
Chairman Miller of California. And they are not moving
rapidly to solve the problem. That is my concern.
Mr. Elliott. No, they really are not. I would like to see a
significantly larger fund available to infuse capital because
this would give them an incentive to keep doing the business
and the ability to do it.
In terms of the United States, it is difficult to be 100
percent sure, but I do think our financial system is a lot
stronger than it was a couple of years ago. I do think we are
much better prepared to handle the shocks that will come out of
this, but certainly we ought to do everything we can to keep
ourselves with a stable financial system.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you very much.
The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Mr. Elliott, just going back to something that you said a
little bit earlier, with the factors that are going on with the
euro on a zone agreement, that measures a country's credit
worth, what it is worth. If not, should there be something in
place so that the 17 countries that are coming together--so
that everybody actually knows? Like we have the Federal Reserve
system. Some people disagree with that. But when you are trying
to deal with 17 countries and the solvency of those individual
countries, how can they all come together when you basically
only have 1 or 2 countries that possibly might be able to help
them out?
Mr. Elliott. That is a really central question. My belief
is that because the governments have not moved fast enough to
show the markets that they will take this seriously, they have
blown several chances now by doing the minimum to get past the
immediate crisis, that the market is going to force a great
deal of fiscal integration where they act more like one
country. There are multiple ways that can be done. There are
so-called euro bonds that would be backed by joint and several
guarantees of all the countries. If the European Central Bank
could simply step up very considerably its purchases of
government bonds in the secondary market, you would come to the
same effect. Or you could make this stabilization fund a lot
bigger so that it could provide that. So there are various
mechanisms.
What I believe will have to happen is that the European
leaders will have to come to the edge of the abyss. Things will
have to get considerably worse than they are now so that they
see that they can either lose the next election by doing
something their public is reluctant to do, or they can lose the
next election by letting Europe fall apart. So they might as
well at least do the right thing.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. But when you talk about that,
and I am sure there are many Members here in Congress saying
the same thing, but our country also, in my opinion, is in
trouble, and yet we don't seem to be really doing a lot. To me,
I thought when you came to Congress, you made the tough votes
to do what is best for the country, and if that means losing an
election, so be it.
Mr. Elliott. I think the good and the bad thing is that the
U.S. situation has a longer fuse. I think the European fuse is
very short right now.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Rashish, with the
significant saddling of the Eurozone countries and the urgent
need to recapitalize the European banking system, how do you
think this will impact the U.S. trade relationship with Europe
in the near future? And just one other thing. I asked this
question before. Do you also see the underdeveloped countries
filling that gap at that particular time?
Mr. Rashish. Thank you, Ranking Member McCarthy. Let me, if
I might, just quickly add something to what Mr. Elliott said. I
think one distinction to the United States and the European
Union is that we are institutionally mature, whereas the
European Union is still building its institutions. It started
out with the coal and steel community in the early 1950s, so
the common market, they moved to the single market, then they
passed the euro.
And I think that one of the distinguishing features is that
in Europe, you still have a large number of people both at the
level of the public and the level of the leadership who are
very strongly committed to creating a stronger European
cooperation for the good of all, and I think that motivates a
lot of the decisions that are being made, it motivates a number
of the leaders, and it motivates the public. And I think that
impetus to create more cooperation at the European level for
the good of all is something that shouldn't be underestimated
as a driving force.
I think that if things go well, historians may look back at
this time as one of those sort of crucibles where the European
Union tested itself, and it came up--found that it had the
strength to do what it needed to move to that next level of
European cooperation. So let me just say I think that is one
thing that distinguishes the United States from the European
Union.
And my colleagues have spoken eloquently about the nature
of the banking and financial interrelationships. Clearly, if
you are going to increase trade, you are going to have to make
sure the financial sector is enabling and there is going to be
liquidity for our companies to take advantage of that. But I
think that we need to be able to do more than one thing at a
time.
I think that the Europeans need to find the solutions to
their problems that are outlined here today, and at the same
time, I think that in terms of what the United States can
contribute, I think certainly, and I am not sure ``contribute''
is the word, but in terms of the U.S. role, I think that at the
same time as the Europeans are doing things on their level of
financial policy and institution building, one of our roles can
be in trade policy and to take initiative, a joint initiative,
with the Europeans in our common interest to liberate economic
growth through trade.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. With that I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Vice Chairman Dold, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lachman, if short-term loans by the U.S. money market
funds to the European banking system exceed $1 trillion, or
more than 40 percent of their overall assets, how could a
European meltdown affect the average American?
Mr. Lachman. Basically, what we could get if there were to
be defaults in European banks if they didn't honor their loan
commitments to the money market funds, we could be back into
the situation that we were in 2008-2009 where money market
funds were to break the buck, so the consequences would be
extremely serious, to say the least. So hopefully, the
Europeans aren't going to allow that to happen. But the fact
that money market funds have as much as 40 percent of their
assets loaned out to Europe is not a very comforting thought.
Mr. Dold. Okay. I would agree.
Mr. Elliott, we talk about a plan about how to get out of
the mess that Europe is in right now, and they are trying to
solve this issue. You mentioned that a badly designed plan
could do more harm. And so what types of provisions do you
think should be included in any final plan? But more
importantly, what serious considerations are being given right
now to things that should not be part of a plan?
Mr. Elliott. Sure. Let me start with the latter since that
seems to be the core of your question.
I do worry, as I know Desmond has also mentioned, that the
way that the bank recapitalization is being designed is likely
to send very strong incentives, very strong messages that you
are better off shrinking, because right now it is very
expensive to raise new equity capital in Europe. If you are a
bank, and their system again has $27 trillion of assets, they
have a lot of assets there, it is going to be a fairly
compelling argument to say, well, let us just be 10 percent
smaller, and then maybe we don't need the additional capital.
Because again, the $100 billion is about 1/10th of the current
capital. So shrinking by 10 percent would be a very bad
outcome. That is one thing.
I mentioned in passing this idea of providing insurance
from the fund for, say, 20 percent of the value of the new
government debt. I just don't think that is going to do any
good, so it will tie up the funds that could be better employed
in other ways without really solving that problem.
In terms of what should be there, I think they need to bite
the bullet and just say that they have failed to this point to
do what has to be done, this is maybe their fourth try, and
they have to really show that the Eurozone is standing
together, and multiple mechanisms, as I mentioned a minute ago,
to do that, but they just have to bite the bullet.
Mr. Dold. What can we do here in the United States, what
can the Administration do, in order to try to help facilitate
that?
Mr. Elliott. It is really limited. It is like watching a
family member who is about to marry somebody they really
shouldn't marry. You can provide advice, but there is not a lot
more you can do.
Mr. Dold. Let me just take that another step further, and,
Dr. Lachman or Mr. Rashish, please chime in if you would like.
But what can we do in the United States--recognizing the issues
that are over in Europe right now and how potentially
disastrous they could be, what can we be doing here in Congress
to try to help insulate that crisis for the American taxpayer?
Mr. Lachman. I think that what one can do is base one's
policy on realistic assumptions. I would agree with Mr. Elliott
that there is not much one can do about a dysfunctional
political union where the problems, the political problems, are
huge; that I don't think that it is a question of dithering
leadership, I think that it is a question that you have
electorates that really don't have their heart in wanting to
bail out countries, you have really very deep divisions on how
the burden should be shared politically, that the Germans have
a different view of the world than the French do. These are
very deep differences that I am not sure that there is a whole
lot that we can do to resolve them.
The point is they have gotten themselves into a currency
arrangement that made very little sense. They didn't play by
the rules for 10 years. I don't think that you can expect a
very easy solution. These problems have been building for a
long, long time. And in my career at the International Monetary
Fund, I have never seen such huge public financing, balances
and external imbalances, in a fixed currency arrangement than
we have in Europe, which doesn't give me much hope that this is
going to have a happy outcome.
Mr. Rashish. The one thing I would add to that is that the
United States can in various fora, the G20 and bilaterally with
the European Union, make the case that it is in our economic
interest, the U.S. economic interest, and frankly in the
Europeans' own economic interest, that, in addition to
austerity measures to consolidate budgets, that the European
Union member states and the Union as a whole need to take steps
to liberate economic growth by, for example, getting rid of a
number of barriers in the services sector by liberalizing labor
markets and the professions. There are a number of steps that
individual member states can take and that the European Union
can take across its single market which would be growth-
friendly, and I think that is certainly a point we should be
making.
Mr. Dold. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. My time has
expired.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Carson, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for the entire panel. What is it about the
nature of the Eurozone institution that makes this crisis
especially difficult to manage?
Mr. Elliott. If I may, what they did is they agreed to
merge their monetary policy and to have a common currency, but
they didn't do what you have to have to create the
preconditions for it, which is you either have to have a group
of countries that are very similar so that the right policies
will be right for everyone, or you have to agree to operate in
a much more closely integrated manner. So they set up a system
in which each country could manage its own fiscal policy,
decide what its budgets were, and, within very loose limits,
follow divergent policies. And that simply doesn't work within
one's zone. That is now recognized.
So the real question will be, can they overcome the
political limitations to come to an approach in which they have
much more commonality? I want to say briefly, remember, the
Constitution we are on, which is so beautifully designed, is
our second Constitution. We had the Articles of Confederacy for
a few years with the same problems. A bunch of States didn't
want to be one Federal Union. So it doesn't surprise me they
are dealing with this now, but they have to make some hard
decisions.
Mr. Lachman. I would agree that initially the mistake was
to get into a currency union without having the political union
right there to start to support it. That was the original sin,
but then they spent 10 years flouting their own internal rules.
They had a Maastricht Treaty that required countries not to run
budget deficits in excess of 3 percent of GDP. That didn't stop
Greece having a budget deficit of 15 percent of GDP, Ireland 14
percent of GDP, Portugal and Spain close to 10 percent of GDP.
Once you build up those imbalances in a fixed exchange rate
system, it is too late to be talking about how we should have
more political union and a better structure.
You really have to address those imbalances, and it is very
difficult to do that without having the benefit of a devalued
currency that promotes export growth as an offset to the kind
of fiscal adjustment. These countries are having to do 4 or 5
percentage points of fiscal adjustment in a year right in the
middle of a recession. This just doesn't work.
Mr. Rashish. If I may pick up on the history lesson Mr.
Elliott was recounting, if you look at the United States, I
believe I am correct that we didn't have our Federal Reserve
until the second decade of the 20th Century, so it was over 100
years after our founding. It has only been about 60 years that
the European Union in any shape as it has been around. So while
there is no question that the current challenges they face are
enormous, I think if we look at it in that perspective, I think
that they have made a lot of progress and that their record is
that they have always met the challenges they face, although
this is the most serious one that they are facing, that they
have ever faced.
Mr. Carson. Thank you all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Miller of California. I want to thank the--oh, Mr.
Lynch, I was going to ignore you, wasn't I? I will cut you a
reasonable deal. How about 5 minutes?
Mr. Lynch. That is great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that. Thanks for your kindness again, and I also
thank the ranking member for your courtesy in allowing me to
participate.
I want to thank all the witnesses. This is all very
thoughtful testimony that you have offered here today and very
helpful. I am not always in agreement, but I think very
thoughtful and extremely helpful.
Mr. Lachman, in your--Dr. Lachman, I am sorry, in your
testimony you point out, I think very astutely, that if what we
think is going to happe
n here, if we do have a
Greek default, then I think immediately Portugal and probably
Ireland would be destabilized to a certain extent. And if we
had a further contagion, we worry about Spain and Italy. The
end result for us is that we would see a destabilized currency
there. I don't know how they reconcile that, but it would
certainly undermine the euro. And some have written, I think
you have all written at some point, about the euro as we know
it would no longer be sustainable if you had all these
peripheral countries and then the core countries also impacted.
I am looking at the U.S. interest here, and in that
environment with defaults going on, the European economy is
going to retrench somewhat. That is going to affect us as an
exporting Nation, but it is also going to affect us, as Dr.
Lachman has pointed out, from a currency standpoint. We are
going to have a very strong dollar by doing nothing; by just
not defaulting, we are going to have a very strong dollar. They
are going to have a very weak currency. It is going to put our
producers at a strong disadvantage. And I think then it is
going to have a real impact on jobs here in the United States
as those facts play out.
What is it that we could do to try to adopt provisions that
might mitigate some of those circumstances in such a short
amount of time, because that is the problem that Greece has--I
think that is the problem that the EU has--is this has to turn
around in a fairly short period of time. Even the austerity
measures that have been adopted or at least are being debated,
those measures will take a long time. Right now I think, as Dr.
Lachman has pointed out, the Greek public debt is about 180
percent of GDP, or growing to 180 percent of Greek GDP. That is
simply unsustainable, and it is going to take them a while to
bring that down. Just like in our country we are struggling
with this supercommittee, and we are going to drop some
reductions, but it is going to take us a while to do that. But
are there steps that we might take to cushion that impact in
the face of these defaults in Europe if they do occur? Dr.
Lachman?
Mr. Lachman. I am pretty sure that the defaults do occur
just given the very size of the ratio of their public debt to
GDP has reached. IMF is putting this at 180 percent. We know
that the safe level, prudent level of public debt is below 80
percent. So a debt writedown in Greece of something like 60
percent is almost a certainty.
If you get that default in Greece, what that is going to do
is have huge damage on the Greek banking system, which has to
get nationalized. You are going to get capital flight. You will
then get the contagion to Portugal and Ireland, which will then
have a material impact on the European banking system that it
is very likely to weaken the euro against the dollar. I think
that is very likely an economic area. Having a banking crisis,
very weak growth, is almost certain to have a weak currency.
I am not sure that the United States can do much in terms
of that currency arrangement, but I would think that what it
does is it heightens the concern about other countries in Asia
that are manipulating their currency. We should really be
putting pressure on those current countries to help this
adjustment program. But I am not sure that we can do very much
about the bilateral United States-euro exchange rate. The
United States is very much likely in those sort of
circumstances to become the safe haven that it was in 2008-
2009. All of the money would pour into the United States.
Certainly, it would not be going to Europe.
But I think that what should be done is pressure should
be--greater pressure should be exerted on China to play a
constructive role in the international adjustment process. That
would be my suggestion.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Manzullo, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Manzullo. I am sorry that I could not be here until
just now to glean the rest of your testimony, but I have an
intriguing question. Perhaps it is more philosophical than
financial or practical. But early, maybe in the past year,
there were talks or at least thoughts that Greece would get out
of the Eurozone and go back to the drachma. I would like your
thoughts on that. I don't think that is going to happen, but I
think that it could pinpoint some of the problems that are
going on that would be an alternative. But whomever would like
to handle it? Maybe none of you would like to handle it.
Mr. Lachman. No, I should mention that I wrote a Financial
Times piece 2 years ago indicating the reasons why Greece would
exit the euro; and, sadly, events have already borne that out.
Basically, the problem is that Greece, having as large a
public sector deficit problem as they have, you can't reduce
that in a fixed exchange rate system without promoting an
enormous recession. Greece's economy has already contracted by
12 percent. They still have a budget deficit that is 10 percent
of GDP. If they persist in the IMF approach of not devaluing
their currency, not writing down the debt, but simply engaging
in savage fiscal austerity, they are going to drive that
economy totally into the ground. It is creating political
unrest. It is making it very difficult for them to meet the
budget targets.
The logical thing for Greece to do would be to write down
its debt by 50, 60 percent, but they would also be well advised
to exit the euro. That would at least give the economy a chance
to grow through exports, through improving the tourist sector.
Otherwise, I am afraid that Greece is condemned to a decade of
not only deep recession, but this is more like a depression.
Mr. Manzullo. Anybody else?
Mr. Elliott. Yes, if I may--and I am a financial sector
expert more than an economist. So let me just say, Dr. Lachman
is in a minority among the economists I have spoken with, as I
think he would admit. That doesn't mean he is wrong.
Mr. Manzullo. He seems like a nice guy.
Mr. Elliott. No, he is, and a tremendously smart guy. I
just wanted to try to provide a little balance in the sense
that most economists that I speak with and read think that the
transitional cost would be really awful. Because there are so
many things you have to get exactly right in making that
change, it is extremely unlikely to work out quite that way.
You also have political constraints.
The damage of them coming out of the euro to the rest of
the Eurozone is quite considerable partly because of contagion
issues. The people then have to start worrying in Portugal,
etc., as to whether they will find themselves with escudos
again instead of euros, and that can create a lot of flight.
In addition to the direct effect of that, it has a
political issue, which is right now something like 4 percent of
Greece's GDP comes from regional aid from the rest of the EU.
If the rest of the EU is really annoyed with Greece because
they have just broken out of the euro and caused all these
other problems, that regional aid may or may not continue.
There is a whole series of reasons to be concerned about the
change in addition to the potential benefits that Dr. Lachman
has mentioned.
Mr. Rashish. I would also add that it is key whether it is
Greece alone. Because if it does lead to several countries
leaving the Eurozone, then what you are going to have is a kind
of very hard currency area, in fact, dominated by Germany and
the Netherlands and Austria and Finland, who have very strong
economies; and the lower exchange rates and interest rates, let
alone the purchasing power that you had in the south of Europe
because they had the euro, is going to go away. And so, the
ability of a country like Germany to be the export superpower,
which has really been the main fuel for its growth, is unlikely
to continue. And I think that would have a very serious impact
on the performance of the European economy as a whole. So I
think we need to think about how it would impact all the
different members of the Eurozone and what it could do to the
competitiveness of the main drivers of growth right now.
Mr. Manzullo. Dr. Lachman?
Mr. Lachman. If I may say, I heard these arguments in
December 2000, just before Argentina broke from the
convertibility plan. I heard similar arguments about the time
of the ERM in 1992 when that broke up. I wasn't around during
the gold standard, but those were the kind of arguments that
ran around before countries left gold in the 1930s. So I think
that there are political dynamics.
It is not necessarily going to be the most rational choice
for the country, but when countries are in as dire straits as
Greece does when its politics gets very polarized, when we see
the kind of street action that you get in Greece, you have to
expect politicians to be suggesting alternatives to the hair
shirt kind of approach that is being offered to them by the IMF
and EU.
We have just seen 2 years GDP has literally imploded.
Offering that--if that is the future you are offering, people
are going to want to take chances with a different kind of
policies, and I think that that is the reason why I see them
both defaulting and, in time, leaving the euro.
Mr. Manzullo. Thank you.
That was an interesting question, wasn't it?
Chairman Miller of California. Very good.
I want to thank our witnesses. You have all been very
excited about answering the questions, which is very rewarding
from our perspective, and you are a wealth of knowledge. I
appreciate your talents, and your time that you have given us
today.
The Chair notes that some members may have additional
questions for this panel which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 30 days for members to submit written questions to these
witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
This hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 25, 2011
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2617.025


