- THE U.S. HOUSING FINANCE SYSTEM IN THE GLOBAL CONTEXT: STRUCTURE, CAPITAL SOURCES, AND HOUSING DYNAMICS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE U.S. HOUSING FINANCE SYSTEM
IN THE GLOBAL CONTEXT: STRUCTURE,
CAPITAL SOURCES, AND HOUSING DYNAMICS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 13, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 112-73

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-614 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Vice          BARNEY FRANK, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
RON PAUL, Texas                      NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               BRAD SHERMAN, California
GARY G. MILLER, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            JOE BACA, California
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
Pennsylvania                     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
NAN A. S. HAYWORTH, New York         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JAMES B. RENACCI, Ohio               JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
ROBERT HURT, Virginia
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York
FRANCISCO ``QUICO'' CANSECO, Texas
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee

Larry C. Lavender, Chief of Staff
Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade

GARY G. MILLER, California, Chairman

ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois, Vice       CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
RON PAUL, Texas                      GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
THADDEUS G. McCOTTER, Michigan       JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 13, 2011.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 13, 2011.............................................    43

WITNESSES
Thursday, October 13, 2011

Dorfman, Richard A., Managing Director and Head of Securitization
Group, The Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association (SIFMA)............................................     9
Farrell, Michael A.J., Chairman, CEO, and President, Annaly
Capital Management, Inc........................................     7
Veissi, Moe, 2011 President-Elect, National Association of
REALTORS......................................................    11
Wachter, Susan M., Richard B. Worley Professor of Financial
Management, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.....    13

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Miller, Hon. Gary............................................    44
Dorfman, Richard A...........................................    47
Farrell, Michael A.J.........................................    67
Veissi, Moe..................................................    70
Wachter, Susan M.............................................    78

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Wachter, Susan M.:
``Research Paper No. 06-12, The American Mortgage in
Historical and International Context,'' by Richard K.
Green, George Washington University, and Susan M. Wachter,
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, dated Fall
2005.......................................................    82
``The Rise, Fall, and Return of the Public Option in Housing
Finance,'' by Adam J. Levitin, Georgetown University Law
School, and Susan M. Wachter, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, dated September 12, 2011.......   105

THE U.S. HOUSING FINANCE SYSTEM
IN THE GLOBAL CONTEXT: STRUCTURE,
CAPITAL SOURCES, AND HOUSING DYNAMICS

----------

Thursday, October 13, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on International Monetary
Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gary G. Miller
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Miller of California,
Dold, Huizenga; McCarthy of New York, Scott, and Perlmutter.
Also present: Representatives Garrett, Green, and Watt.
Chairman Miller of California. This hearing will come to
order. Without objection, all members' opening statements will
be made a part of the record. The hearing today is entitled,
``The U.S. Housing Finance System in the Global Context:
Structure, Capital Sources, and Housing Dynamics.
I ask unanimous consent that Mr. Garrett and Mr. Green,
both of whom are members of the Financial Services Committee,
be permitted to sit with members of the Subcommittee on
International Monetary Policy and Trade for purposes of
delivering an opening statement, hearing testimony, and
questioning witnesses.
We have limited the opening statements to 10 minutes for
each side. With the ranking member in agreement, I recognize
myself for the first 5 minutes.
Today, the subcommittee meets to discuss the U.S. housing
finance system in the global context: structure, capital
sources, and housing dynamics. As Congress grapples with how to
change the current U.S. housing finance system, it is important
to understand the domestic and global economic implications of
such changes.
In addition, as we contemplate changes to our system, it is
useful to consider differences between the U.S. mortgage
structure and housing finance systems in other countries. Our
goal today is to shed light on these important considerations.
There is no question that instability in the housing market is
harming our U.S. economic recovery. Housing has historically
led economic recovery in this country, and if you look back at
every recession, it has always been there. This time it is not.
According to the Federal Reserve, the slowdown in the
aggregate demand is centered on the household sector. People
are not consuming because of the wealth lost in the housing
sector. We must stabilize the housing market.
The importance of the U.S. mortgage market to the global
economy is substantiated by the average amount of agency
mortgage-backed securities traded each day. In the second
quarter of 2011, it was $302 billion. Only the U.S. Treasury
had a higher trading volume, of over $600 billion.
Given this significance, changes to the U.S. housing
finance system have the potential to impact the national
housing markets, financial markets, and the domestic and global
economy. Banks, pension funds, insurance companies, and foreign
investors are the most significant non-U.S. Government
investors in agency mortgage-backed securities, MBS--meaning
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae securities.
Foreign sources of capital include investment companies,
foreign wealth funds, and other government entities. Foreign
investors hold approximately 14 percent of agency MBS. Risk-
averse investors, both foreign and domestic, prefer agency
mortgage-backed securities because of their safety and
liquidity.
The U.S. securitization process facilitated private
investment capital from investors around the world that has
flowed to U.S. home mortgages. Change to the safe investment
options of agency MBS could impact investment decisions for
these investors and, as a result, limit the flow of capital to
the mortgage market.
Such a result could cause a reduction in the availability
of, and increase in, the cost of mortgage credit. This would
impact lenders, investors, consumers, and ultimately the
domestic and global economy.
The ideological approach in the discussion about what
changes need to be made to the U.S. mortgage finance system has
resulted in a stalemate on reform. This is not what working
Americans need. It is leading to confusion and a lack of
consumer confidence. People need to be confident that their
home price will not continue to fall.
It does not help consumer confidence in the housing market
when proposals are being considered in Congress to eliminate
Freddie and Fannie, with no viable replacement and no concern
for the health of the housing sector.
The American people deserve better. We need to put
ideological absolutes and politics aside and have a thoughtful,
honest, and constructive discussion about a U.S. housing
finance system that is based in fact. We must be mindful how
critical the housing market is to the economy, and not
contribute to uncertainty in the housing marketplace with
conversations about unrealistic policy approaches.
Today's hearing is about getting the conversation about
U.S. mortgage finance back on track. It can be instructive to
compare the structure of the U.S. market with other countries.
The size of the U.S. mortgage market is greater than any other
country in the world. It exceeds the entire European mortgage
market combined. While there is not a housing system in another
country that is directly comparable to the United States,
characteristics of the U.S. market are found in other housing
systems.
At today's hearing, we will focus on the following: the
relation between the health of the U.S. housing finance system
and global financial stability; how the U.S. mortgage market
structure compares to other countries, including with respect
to the U.S. securitization system and a mortgage product
offering; the unique features of the U.S. finance housing
system and the benefits and weaknesses of the characteristics;
and foreign involvement in the U.S. housing finance system,
including the motivations for foreign investors to purchase
residential mortgage-backed securities.
I look forward to hearing from the distinguished panel
today. I strongly believe that housing is a critical and
stabilizing force in the economy. The housing market requires
action now. There is no question that private capital must be
the dominant source of mortgage credit in the future, but we
have to get to the point that we can attract private capital
back to the market. A viable secondary marketplace is key.
I introduced a bill with my colleague, Ranking Member
McCarthy, to refocus the debate on real solutions now. Our bill
presents a way forward for the mortgage finance system. We
provide comprehensive reform of the housing finance system to
other countries in desperate need. While this is not a
legislative hearing on that specific legislation, I do think
our witnesses will help us begin the process of refocusing the
conversation to ensure that this confidence and liquidity in
the U.S. market is achieved.
We have to do something in Congress other than just talk.
Talking and offering different confusing directions, without
moving in any given direction, is creating so much instability
in the marketplace that it is hampering the recovery. We need
to do something to focus the debate on what is good for the
American people, how do we return mortgage value to the
housing, and how do we get the market stabilized.
And I yield to the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I
thank you for holding this important hearing. I also will say
that I stand by your words.
Restoring our housing market is a vital component to our
economic recovery. The Financial Stability Oversight Council
recommended comprehensive reform of our housing financial
system, which the Treasury Secretary reaffirmed when he
testified before the full committee last week.
As we contemplate how to reform our housing system, it is
important to understand its role in facilitating the flow of
private capital and liquidity to our mortgage market. Through
our securitization system, private capital provides the
liquidity necessary to fund mortgage lending. Because of the
integration of housing finance into marketplaces, the United
States has formed a strong link to global capital markets.
Traditional housing finance that was limited and funded
through savings deposits has increased through the transition
to market-based systems. Although there is not a housing system
in another country that exactly mirrors the U.S. model, we must
find characteristics of other housing systems that are similar
to our own.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today, and
learning more about how other countries have structured their
housing systems, as well as the successes and failures of those
systems.
Most importantly, we must keep in mind that any reforms
instituted in our housing finance system have the potential to
impact the Nation's housing market, the financial markets, and
the domestic and global economy. That should serve as a stark
reminder that we must proceed with reforms that bring
confidence, stability and certainty back into our housing
market. Without a stable housing system, we cannot achieve a
full economy recovery.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Dold is recognized for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I certainly want to
thank you and the witnesses for your time here today. The 30-
year fixed-rate mortgage has been the primary American mortgage
financing instrument for many decades. But from a lender's
perspective, it is a very difficult loan product, assuming a
reasonably low 30-year fixed-rate.
Carrying a particular individual borrower's credit risk for
34 years is a particularly difficult proposition, and a 30-year
fixed-rate loan subjects the lender to 30 full years of
interest-rate risk and 30 full years of inflation risk.
Even if the borrower fully performs, inflation over 30
years can effectively reduce or eliminate the lender's real
inflation-adjusted returns. Meanwhile, both increasing and
decreasing interest rates over 30 years can negatively impact
the lender, as many of you know.
Increasing interest rates leaves the lender with capital
tied up in long-term assets that produce lower returns than
those available at the higher subsequent market rates.
Decreasing interest rates leads many borrowers to refinance and
return to lender's capital when the lender's capital
redeployment will likely result in lower returns than those
that had existed under the original loan.
To help deal with these and other problems, the Federal
Government and the American housing finance system developed
the GSEs and securitization. Lenders could now always transfer
mortgages directly or indirectly to the GSEs or to private
investors while also having access to GSE credit default
guarantees.
So lenders could offer mortgages with reasonably low 30-
year fixed-rate interest rates, while diminishing or
eliminating long-term credit risk, inflation risk, and interest
rate risk. The system worked reasonably well for many years.
However, beginning in the early 1990s, the Federal Government
went much further in promoting homeownership by pressuring the
GSEs and private sector lenders to substantially reduce
traditional underwriting standards and by turning the GSEs into
the always-available market outlet for lower-quality loans.
Over time, more and more lower-quality loans entered the
system. Inevitable increasing default rates led us to the
financial crisis, as the mortgage-backed asset values decreased
suddenly and dramatically.
Mark-to-market accounting immediately degraded the bank
capital ratios, and the credit market fear and uncertainty
quickly imperiled liquidity and solvency. Housing prices
declined severely, and the Federal Government made the American
taxpayer liable for hundreds of billions of dollars in GSE
losses.
And now, those same troubled GSEs that exposed taxpayers to
so much liability are essentially the only remaining market
participant in the mortgage industry as private sector lenders
and investors have abandoned the field. So we need to somehow
create the conditions for more private sector entities to
reenter the mortgage market, diminish the taxpayer liability
risk, and stabilize the housing market.
I look forward to hearing your testimony today, and I
appreciate your time.
Mr. Chairman, my time is up, and I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Scott, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Miller and Ranking Member
McCarthy, for holding this very important hearing. The Dodd-
Frank financial reform legislation addresses a number of
weaknesses in the financial regulatory system--in particular,
Title 14.
It responded to pervasive concerns about lending practices
in the mortgage lending market that produce loans that had
great uncertainty of being repaid. This practice thus adversely
impacted the loan holders as well as the borrowers, who often
did not have a complete understanding of the agreement or did
not have the means to repay the loan.
Title 14 was enacted to correct such abuses, including new
duties on the part of the mortgage originators to act in
consumers' best interests, ensuring that they will have the
ability to repay such loans. Clearly, the crisis in our housing
finance has contributed to the domestic economic climate we all
face now.
Many Americans continue to struggle to stay in their homes,
especially in my congressional district in Georgia--I represent
the suburbs of Georgia--where the problem is very, very
serious. Most recent data shows that in my district, 12 percent
of mortgages are over 90 days delinquent, and nearly 4 percent
of homes are in foreclosure.
And this is why, each year, I bring the banks, I bring the
lenders, I bring Treasury together and hold a major, major home
foreclosure prevention event in my district, which has been one
of the most successful ventures that we have done to correct
this problem.
In some cases, my constituents purchased homes obtaining
mortgages that many of them originally thought they could
repay. However, with unemployment passing 10 percent in my home
State--in many communities, it is over 20 percent--many
Georgians are finding it very difficult to do just that.
I know that the reforms enacted by the financial reform
legislation will prevent Americans from falling into similar
situations when seeking to purchase a home. But despite the
progress in the United States, I am concerned about the
implications that a financial crisis in other nations could
have on the economy in our own country.
I am interested to know if the lending practices that
contributed to the United States' financial crisis are still in
use in other countries. This is important for us to find out,
and how this might affect our own economy.
Also, I am curious to know if there has been similar
legislation enacted to prevent such abuses. So I want to thank
the witnesses for coming and I particularly want to say hello
to Dr. Susan Wachter of the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. I received my MBA from the Wharton School of
Finance. So when you go back, please give my regards to
Dietrich Hall.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Garrett, you are recognized for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Garrett. I thank the chairman for holding this hearing.
And because the focus of the hearing is to look at the U.S.
housing market and policy in a global context, I went back and
reviewed an analysis by the International Monetary Fund back in
April on housing finance issues.
And in it, it says, ``Compared to other developed
countries, only a couple even come close.'' According to the
economist and one of the authors, John Kip, ``Everything you
could possibly name for supporting homeownership for everybody,
regardless of whether they can afford it or not, it's all in
the United States.''
The IMF report states, ``Since the 1930s, the U.S.
authorities have provided a wide range of support to facilities
to access mortgage credit. And while this has provided access
to stable and affordable long-term mortgage financing, there is
very little evidence that it has actually boosted
homeownership, made the system more efficient, or provided
buffers against economic stress.''
``Meanwhile,'' it said, ``it may have exacerbated the boom-
and-bust cycle.'' The report went on to note, ``During the pre-
crisis boom period, government participation in housing finance
tended to amplify the relationship between housing prices and
mortgage credit growth, particularly in advanced economies.''
``Also, countries with more government participation
experienced,'' note, ``a deeper house price decline in this
recent crisis. These findings suggest that the government
participation exacerbates house price swings for advanced
economies over a long period of time.''
Further, it said, ``The results might reflect both the
lower cost of pre-crisis due to government subsidization, and a
relaxation in lending standards by the private sector due to
increased competition between the private sector and the
government.'' That is all in the report.
And so, it is clear that with the extraordinary and
unprecedented levels of subsidy the United States provides this
mortgage market directly, it benefits mortgage market
participants before us today.
There is much less evidence that all these subsidies
actually provide much benefit to the borrower. In fact, based
upon the objective look of the IMF and the terrible impact on
our country's housing finance policies we have had, I believe a
strong case can be made that at least some of these policies,
at the end of the day, do more harm than good.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Miller of California. I would like to welcome our
distinguished panel today.
Mr. Michael A.J. Farrell is the chairman, CEO, and
president of Annaly Capital Management, Inc., the largest
residential mortgage REIT in the country.
Prior to founding Annaly, Mr. Farrell was the managing
director of Wertheim, Schroder & Company, Inc. in the fixed
income department. He had previously served on the executive
committee of the Public Securities Association, Primary Dealer
Division. And as chairman of the Primary Dealer Operating
Committee and its mortgage-backed securities division, Mr.
Farrell served on the executive board of the National
Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts. Welcome.
Dr. Richard Dorfman is managing director and head of the
securitization group in the Securities Industry and Financial
Market Association, SIFMA. Prior to joining SIFMA, Mr. Dorfman
was the president and CEO of the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Atlanta. Prior to that role, he was managing director and head
of the U.S. agencies and mortgage business at ABN AMRO. He also
worked for Lehman Brothers mortgage division as the managing
director and head of the organization for U.S. Government and
agency business. Welcome.
Mr. Moe Veissi is the 2011 president-elect of the National
Association of REALTORS. Mr. Veissi has been a Realtor for
over 40 years. He is a broker-owner of Veissi & Associates in
Miami, Florida. Welcome, sir.
Dr. Susan Wachter is the Richard B. Worley professor of
financial management and professor of real estate and finance
at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr.
Wachter served as Assistant Secretary of Policy Development
Research at HUD and was Principal Adviser to the Secretary,
responsible for national housing and urban policy.
Dr. Wachter is the author of over 200 publications
regarding housing and real estate finance. She served as
president to the American Real Estate and Urban Economic
Association and co-editor of Real Estate Economics, and
currently serves on multiple editorial boards.
It is a distinguished panel. We are glad to have you here.
First of all, I would like to thank you all for your
flexibility. We have had this hearing scheduled, as you know,
on numerous occasions and had to reschedule it. I want to thank
you for being here today. Without objection, your written
statements will be made a part of the record and you can
summarize your statement in a generous 5 minutes, as you so
choose.
And Mr. Farrell, you are recognized first for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL A.J. FARRELL, CHAIRMAN, CEO, AND
PRESIDENT, ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC.

Mr. Farrell. Good morning. My name is Michael Farrell. I am
the CEO of Annaly Capital Management, the largest residential
mortgage real estate investment trust, or REIT, in the country.
Through Annaly and our subsidiaries and affiliates, we own
or manage a wide range of mortgages and other real estate-
related assets, including agency and non-agency residential
mortgage-backed securities or MBS.
I represent the mortgage REITs and the other secondary
mortgage market investors who provide the majority of the
capital to finance America's homes. Through our MBS holdings,
my company and its affiliates alone are responsible for funding
almost 1 million American households.
At this point in history, while our Nation's banks have
about $13 trillion in total assets, the amount of mortgage debt
outstanding totals about $10.5 trillion. There is not enough
capacity in our banking system to hold the outstanding mortgage
debt. And as a result, about two-thirds of that total, or $6.8
trillion, is held in securitization, $5.5 trillion in agency
mortgage-backed securities, and the balance in private-label
mortgage-backed securities.
The American mortgage finance system needs to have an
effective long-term holder of mortgage credit outside of the
banking system. It is thus axiomatic that without a healthy
securitization market for our housing finance system, we would
have to undergo a radical transformation. Some have argued that
this should not be a problem because other countries have
similar homeownership rates and manageable low mortgage costs.
These arguments miss some very significant points.
First, the U.S. mortgage market is unique. In the United
States, securitization is the largest mortgage funder, with
banks a distant second--while Europe is almost exactly the
opposite, with about two-thirds of mortgages funded by bank
deposits, covered bonds a distant second, and very little
securitization.
So the European model is largely dependent on the deposits
and individual credit ratings of European banks. As proof,
consider that in the United States, bank assets total about 80
percent of GDP, while in Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, and
Spain, bank assets are anywhere from 2 to 4 times their GDP.
Moreover, most mortgages in other countries are recoursed
to the borrower, shorter term, pre-payable only with a penalty
and a variable rate, which makes it a much more different
product than the typical American mortgage with much different
risks for the borrower and the lender.
Second, our current housing finance system is the most
efficient credit delivery system in the world. Securitization
allows borrowers of similar creditworthiness using similar
products to receive the benefits of scale and pricing. In
addition, the government guarantee to make timely payments of
interest and principal of a large portion of these mortgages
scales the process even further.
The TBA, or To Be Announced, market is the window through
which much of this scale occurs. It maintains a consistent
underwriting standard, levels the playing field for smaller
loan originators and community banks, and enables lenders to
offer longer-term rate locks to borrowers. It is an important
tool for making possible the availability of the very popular
30-year fixed-rate pre-payable mortgage with a manageable
downpayment for a wide swath of creditworthy borrowers.
Third, unlike the smaller domestically-financed housing
markets of other countries, our system attracts a much broader
investor base for residential mortgages, including
institutional investors here and around the world.
These investors include U.S. and foreign banks, central
banks and sovereign wealth funds, mutual funds, State and local
governments, and the GSEs themselves. According to Freddie Mac,
foreign investors constitute the third largest single holder of
agency MBS. What attracts these investors to fund U.S.
residential mortgages? It is the size, scale, and flexibility
of the agency MBS market, its homogeneity, liquidity, ease of
pricing and, importantly, their capital risk weightings.
Finally, I want to get to the heart of the matter of the
current debate. Can the private label MBS market come back and
fill the credit gap that is currently filled by the GSEs? The
short answer is, not at the same level of mortgage rates, and
certainly not in the same size. Many, if not most, investors
and agency MBS will not invest in private label MBS at any
price or in any reduced amounts because of their need for
liquidity or the restrictions of their investment guidelines.
Some of these are so-called rates investors, and they could
cross over. And investors in other asset classes might be
attracted to a deeper private label MBS market, but we cannot
say for sure how many or at what price or in what timeframe.
Analysts at Credit Suisse have estimated that the U.S.
housing market could lose $3 trillion or $4 trillion in funding
from domestic and foreign investors if agency MBS were replaced
by credit-sensitive products. The impact of this loss could
have adverse consequences for the housing market and the
economy for years to come.
In conclusion, the American mortgage market and the sources
of funding for Americans' mortgages are unique. The domestic
and global investors who provide so much capital to buy
American homes will adapt to whatever Congress decides to do
with housing finance policy, but they may adapt by not
investing at all.
I believe that a housing finance system that does not
include the homogeneity of liquidity made possible by
government involvement will be smaller, more expensive, and
potentially have negative consequences for home prices and
homeowner flexibility.
I welcome any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farrell can be found on page
67 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you very much.
Mr. Dorfman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD A. DORFMAN, MANAGING DIRECTOR AND HEAD OF
SECURITIZATION GROUP, THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY AND FINANCIAL
MARKETS ASSOCIATION (SIFMA)

Mr. Dorfman. Good morning, Chairman Miller.
Chairman Miller of California. I think you need to turn
your microphone on. We will start your time over. Thank you,
sir.
Mr. Dorfman. There we go. Good morning, Chairman Miller,
Ranking Member McCarthy, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am Richard Dorfman, managing director and head
of securitization for the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association, known in the trade as SIFMA.
We appreciate the opportunity to discuss key issues
affecting housing and housing finance from the perspective of
international products, policies, and practices. I am
personally pleased to have played a central role in the
development of international markets. And certainly, I am
honored to be here today.
We estimate that non-U.S. investors currently hold 15
percent of all mortgage-backed securities or privately issued
non-agency MBS and government-guaranteed agency MBS. The
markets for both agency and non-agency MBS have become truly
global markets.
Further, concerning unsecured longer-term debt, the GSEs--
Fannie, Freddie and the Federal Home Loan Banks--have
historically seen about 20 percent of their debt investors come
from the global markets. At that market's high point in 2008,
approximately $3.2 trillion was outstanding. And that figure is
today approximately $2.3 trillion, with about 20 percent still
held abroad.
However, in terms of late news, we are concerned, according
to press reports, that a growing number of central banks are
reporting not feeling comfortable with the U.S. Government
guarantee of MBS and implied guarantee of debt products, and so
may be progressively withdrawing from that market, with some
concern.
Foreign holdings of both agency and non-agency MBS create a
strong correlation between the health of the U.S. housing
finance system and global financial stability. I note that only
a few years ago, I observed that The Economist news weekly
carried a cover story about the U.S. housing market being the
dominant driver of the U.S. economy, and perhaps even of the
world economy. Over the last 20 years, the housing sector has
represented approximately 15 percent of U.S. GDP.
U.S. MBS structures are generally based on traditional 30-
year, fully-amortizing, fixed-coupon and fixed-payment-
structure home loans, although there are MBS based on
adjustable-rate mortgages and other more complex secured loans.
Other countries prefer to seek a different balance of these
risks, through adjustable rate or renewable loans. In these
instances, the interest rate risk portion of the loan
dominantly remains with the borrower.
We caution, however, about direct comparisons to other
nations. Although instructive, they are not determinative. The
size of the U.S. mortgage market enormously exceeds other
mortgage markets. Additionally, it differs in that the funding
of the U.S. mortgage market is largely through securitization,
whereas in many countries securitization is less prominent and
mortgage lending is more of a bank balance sheet activity.
Foreign investors, especially central banks, hold vast sums
of U.S. dollars. Therefore, foreign investors hold vast sums of
very liquid, low-risk agency MBS and debt, especially Ginnie
Mae MBS. Some foreign investors became significant players in
the markets for non-agency MBS until those markets froze in
2008. Foreign agency MBS far exceeded non-agency investment
because many foreign investors simply will not invest in
products with credit risk.
The critical TBA, or To Be Announced, trading market
provides vast liquidity and plays a key role in attracting
tremendous global capital. The TBA market also gives the
consumer the important ability to obtain long-term rate locks,
by allowing lenders the ability to confirm forward MBS sales
into a liquid market and, through this mechanism, to recycle
investment capital back into the community as rapidly as
possible.
The daily trading volume and TBA markets over the past 3
years has, indeed, exceeded $300 billion a day, second only to
U.S. Treasuries and fixed-income markets. We discuss this
market extensively in our written testimony.
The U.S. housing finance system has features that create
both historic benefits and current policy questions that must
be addressed in the near term. A few such examples are long-
term fixed-rate loan structures and their relation to the
distribution of interest-rate risk. And secondly, U.S. home
mortgage loans have more recently featured downpayments below
the traditional 20 percent, implying lower credit standards,
but greater homeownership accessibility.
It is critical for our country that we restore, modernize,
and rationalize the housing business model in order to restore
housing markets, including those for housing finance and
securitization, to their maximum sustainable potential.
Without this important engine of housing driving the U.S.
economy, we will continue to see weak growth in jobs, income,
and the overall economy. The global financial markets have been
a critical component sustaining the financing of housing in
America, and we must ensure that this continues in the future.
I thank you very much for this opportunity and, of course,
I will be pleased to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dorfman can be found on page
47 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Veissi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MOE VEISSI, 2011 PRESIDENT-ELECT, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS

Mr. Veissi. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member McCarthy, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this
important hearing to examine the United States housing finance
system.
My name is Moe Veissi, and I am the 2011 president-elect of
the National Association of REALTORS, which represents 1.1
million members. They all practice some area of residential or
commercial real estate. When my father purchased his first home
for my mother in the late 1960s, it was more than just an act
of love or even an investment. For a first-generation European,
it was a symbol of a place to celebrate family, friends, and to
help knit a broader base for the community that he and my
mother lived in. It was both of their American dreams realized.
So in addition to our members, it is my honor to give voice
to the 75 million Americans who own a home, of which 50 million
have mortgages, as well as the 310 million Americans who
require shelter and want to own a piece of the American dream.
I would like to share NAR's review on why the U.S. housing
finance system and its key product, the fixed-rate mortgage,
remain the key element in the system for the American consumer.
Realtors believe that the U.S. housing finance system,
which utilizes securitization to recapitalize mortgage lenders,
works best for a nation like ours, the size of ours, and with
the population who have a deep desire for homeownership. This
does not mean, however, that Realtors are opposed to reforming
the current system. To the contrary, Realtors have indicated
time and again the need for repairs to the U.S. housing finance
system.
It is our strong belief that from its creation in the 1930s
until very recently, the underlying system worked well to
provide well-qualified American families the ability to
purchase a home. Realtors are some of the most fervent
believers in free markets. However, our members are also
practical and understand that in extreme economic conditions,
private capital will retreat from the housing market.
They understand that a well-functioning housing market,
indeed a well-functioning economy, requires mortgage financing
available to qualified buyers in all markets, regardless of
economic conditions.
And finally, Realtors agree that taxpayers should be
protected. Private capital must return to the housing market,
and the size of government participation in the housing sector
should decrease if the market is to function properly. Where we
continue to disagree with some is how these aspirations would
be accomplished.
Congress has chartered Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to
support homeownership and provide a solid foundation for our
Nation's housing finance system. The Government-Sponsored
Entities' housing mission and the benefits that are derived
from it, such as long-term fixed-rate mortgages, have played a
vital role in the success of our Nation's housing system and
its overall economic growth.
As the market turmoil reached its peak in late 2008, it
became apparent that the role of the GSEs, even in
conservatorship, was critical, as private mortgage capital
effectively fled our marketplace. If no government-backed
conventional mortgage market entity existed as private mortgage
capital fled to the sidelines, the housing market would have
receded even more significantly and thrown our Nation into an
even deeper recession and maybe even a depression.
Currently, consumers are moving toward the 30-year fixed-
rate mortgage more than ever before. It is the financial
product of choice because of its easily-understood terms and
predictability in its payment schedule. In these uncertain
times, predictability becomes even more important to consumers.
For this reason, the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has been,
and continues to be, the bedrock of the U.S. housing finance
system. If there is a full privatization of the secondary
mortgage market, we run the real risk of elimination of long-
term fixed-rate mortgage products and an increase in the cost
of mortgages to consumers.
In fact, based on early data from a survey that NAR is
conducting on the impact of new lower FHA and GSE loan limits,
we are already seeing that consumers looking for mortgages
above the conventional conforming loan limit are experiencing
significantly higher interest rates and are being required to
come up with substantially larger downpayments. Making matters
more difficult, according to this data, this experience is
leading to a loss of interest in real estate sales.
Lose a healthy real estate market and you jeopardize any
chance of economic recovery. I encourage you to resist this
course of action. Realtors firmly believe that comprehensive
reform of the secondary mortgage market is in the best
interests of the consumer and the long-term viability of
America's housing finance market.
Toward that end, the National Association of REALTORS
supports H.R. 2413, the Secondary Market Facility for
Residential Mortgages Act of 2011. The legislation, introduced
by Chairman Miller and Ranking Member McCarthy, will serve
homeowners today and generations into the future, as well as
support a strong housing market and economic recovery.
It offers a comprehensive strategy for reforming the
secondary mortgage market. It gives the Federal Government a
continued role to ensure a consistent flow of mortgage credit
in all markets, all economic conditions, and it protects the
taxpayers and ensures safety and soundness through appropriate
regulation and underwriting standards.
Moreover, the bill supports and emphasizes the use of long-
term fixed-rate mortgage products in a manner that is
consistent with qualified residential mortgages, exemptions to
the Dodd-Frank Act as it was crafted by Senators Isakson,
Landrieu, and Hagan. This is important. The bill's
comprehensive reforms will open the door to lenders of all
sizes, without favoring large lenders over small or mid-size
institutions.
In conclusion, I thank you for the opportunity to present
our thoughts on the U.S. housing finance system, which we
believe is unique and serves a unique group of people who
strongly desire to own a piece of America and participate in
our country's community fabric.
As always, the National Association of REALTORS is at the
call of Congress as we continue to work toward the best
solutions for consumers, the housing industry, the economy, and
our Nation.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Veissi can be found on page
70 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you, sir.
I ask unanimous consent that Mr. Green, who is a member of
the full Financial Services Committee, be allowed to
participate in the subcommittee. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
Ms. Wachter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SUSAN M. WACHTER, RICHARD B. WORLEY PROFESSOR OF
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, THE WHARTON SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Wachter. Thank you, Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
McCarthy, and members of the subcommittee.
The U.S. housing finance system relies on global capital
sources for funding. The mortgage-related bond market, as of
the second quarter of 2011, amounts to approximately $7
trillion, most of which today is securitized and guaranteed by
the U.S. Government.
As the subprime crisis demonstrated, disruptions in the
U.S. mortgage system destabilized financial markets across the
world. The structural soundness of this sector is important for
U.S. home borrowers, the U.S. economy, and for overall global
financial stability.
The U.S. housing finance system prior to the crisis was
financially sound. The system prevalent in the United States
provided U.S. homebuyers, unlike buyers elsewhere, a choice of
fixed and variable rate mortgage products, and provided
financial stability for mortgage borrowers and for global
capital markets.
The unique features of housing finance in the United
States, which undergird the system, include access to stable,
long-term, fixed-rate mortgages and the financing of these
mortgages by a sound securitization system. The long-term,
fixed-rate mortgage prevalent in the United States, what
Richard Green and I term the ``American mortgage,'' in research
that I request be entered into the record, is unique to the
United States.
In most developed countries, with few exceptions, the
adjustable rate mortgage prevails. The fixed-rate pre-payable
mortgage, with the ability to lock in financing at the point of
home selection, is found solely in the United States. While
adjustable rate mortgages are a good and safe alternative to
fixed-rate mortgages in periods of stable or declining interest
rates, the weakness of such mortgages is that they threaten
borrowers with payment shock when interest rates rise.
Shocks to household balance sheets due to rising interest
rates or limited availability of finance threaten the financial
system as a whole in a system of variable rate mortgages.
Indeed, versions of this scenario played out in the subprime
crisis and in the Great Depression.
The U.S. mortgage system also differs from most of our
developed country peers in the use of securitization, as
opposed to the holding of mortgages on bank balance sheets. In
research with co-author Adam Levitin, which I also request be
entered into the record, we show why the fixed-rate mortgage
requires securitization.
Securitization first arose out of the need to replace
short-term, variable rate mortgages with so-called ``bullet
payments'' implicated in the high foreclosure rates of the
Great Depression. While the fixed-rate, long-term, self-
amortizing mortgage developed in the aftermath of the Great
Depression protects borrowers against interest rate spikes, as
shown by the savings and loan crisis, short-term demand
deposits cannot be relied upon to fund these long-term
mortgages.
Securitization is a necessary replacement for demand
deposit bank portfolios, and can appropriately deal with
interest rate risk. The system of fixed-rate mortgages financed
through stable securitization provided for a period of
remarkable stability in the U.S. economy, coinciding with what
economists termed, ``the Great Moderation,'' a period of
economic growth, sustainable homeownership, uniform and
intrinsically safe underwriting practices, and, importantly for
the committee, the ability to access global capital markets.
This system underwent major shifts beginning in the late
1990s. The changes over the subsequent decade caused the system
to fail, undermining global financial stability with outcomes
that still threaten the U.S. economy. In the period from 2000
to 2006, non-traditional mortgages, previously niche products--
such as adjustable rate teasers, subprime, interest-only with
bullet payments--grew to represent, in 2006, almost half of
mortgage originations.
The origin of the mortgage system failure was credit
expansion through private-label securitization accompanied by
the undermining of lending standards, despite the Triple-A
credit rating granted for much of the MBS debt. Global capital
funded this expansion, in part relying on credit ratings.
Foreign investors purchased residential mortgage-backed
securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and they
did so because these instruments are perceived to have
essentially no credit risk.
Private-label securities, which were also purchased by
foreign investors, were understood to have little credit risk,
in part due to high credit ratings, and in part because the
U.S. mortgage and housing market was perceived to be impervious
to decline. The expansion of credit that this perception
allowed, and the deterioration in lending standards, fueled the
price bubble and bust when the limits to lending expansion were
reached, accompanied by the epidemic of foreclosures and value
destruction that we currently face.
Failure in the U.S. mortgage system directly caused the
2009 recession. We were not alone in this. The United Kingdom,
Spain, and Ireland suffered recessions, accompanied by mortgage
market crises and sharp housing price declines. Nonetheless,
the size of the U.S. market means that it relies on global
finance, and the failure of the U.S. financing system put the
global finance system at risk.
The response in the United States--bailouts of failing
financial institutions and the conservatorship of Fannie and
Freddie--is ongoing. Private securitization has not come back
and we are reliant on a Federalized system.
The key in moving forward is rebuilding confidence in the
U.S. mortgage system. This is necessary for potential
homebuyers to come back to the market, and is also key for
global investors on whom this market depends to provide capital
for what, once again, must be perceived to be, and must be, a
system that is structurally sound and safe for home purchasers,
investors, and the overall economy.
I thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wachter can be found on page
78 of the appendix.]
Chairman Miller of California. I want to thank the
witnesses very much. I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
There is little doubt that the GSEs went beyond the intent
of their original mission, and reform is necessary. But if the
United States were to end all government guarantees for housing
products, how would that affect the overall economy? And what
are the consequences of actually delaying GSE reform?
Anybody who would like to answer? Yes, Mr. Farrell?
Mr. Farrell. We operate three public companies, Annaly,
Chimera, and Crexus. Chimera does non-agency securities in a
residential side. The securitization market in that part of the
credit curve is extremely difficult to price at the current
interest rate levels.
We estimate from our research that in order to get
securitizations operating in the private sector for all of the
re-pooling of these assets would probably be 200 to 300 basis
points higher in terms of cost to the consumer. You can see
that in the fall-off of private securitizations over the past
couple of years especially. So it would be a very painful
experience to move to that kind of rate structure.
The GSE balances have changed in terms of what those
origination fees are. And, in fact, we have found that
investors still continue to embrace that. We have grown
dramatically over the past few years especially, and navigated
through 2008 with a company that was totally exposed to agency
debt.
So globally, we still think that there is a market for this
which is well-structured and financed, but it is important to
understand that there are two sides to the market: the assets;
and the liabilities.
The assets themselves, that we have all described here
today, are part of an important infrastructure within the
United States to provide credit. The liability side, much of
this secures bank balances and credit balances from investments
throughout the world that are all dollar-denominated that would
need to be filled by some other entity that would be similar in
credit structure. If not, they will have a higher price.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Dorfman, you had a--
Mr. Dorfman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was very
appropriate that Mr. Farrell speak first because, really, it
must be understood that as we engage in reengineering the
mortgage financing system in the United States, the final
judge, the court of appeals so to speak, will always be the
institutional investor.
Will the institutional investor invest? Will they come to
the bid? And what will they bid at what spread, at what price?
What will it cost the consumer in order to participate in a
given structure?
So it is important to note that the institutional investor,
in the end, is the final determinant, and must be convinced by
traditional, respected, analytical methods and models that any
substitute idea which may evolve for the U.S. Government
guarantee is creditworthy and worthy of the institutional
investor's attention and bid at a level that works for the
consumer.
It is also very important to recognize that no matter what
anyone may wish or believe in terms of whether the government
guarantee is good or not good, we must take the market just as
we must take the golf ball, if I may say, where it is and play
it from where it is.
And where it is today is that the government guarantee
provides the degree of security to the vast world of non-credit
risk investors who will not buy that product without the
guarantee or whose participation will be diminished or at a far
higher price.
Thank you for recognizing me.
Chairman Miller of California. On that, could it be
structured in a way where the taxpayers' exposure is minimized
and the long-term benefits are basically capitalized on,
expended? Because the goal right now is making sure we protect
taxpayers.
Mr. Farrell. I would say, my perspective as a risk taker
who has to go around the world and raise this capital to
provide the return for investors, it essentially negotiates a
compromise between borrowers and lenders in our structure.
There are two elements that I think really need to be
understood. And the perspective that I want to bring to it is
that when you look at the guarantee fee and what went off of
the wheels in the 1990s--from the perspective of a private
company operator providing private capital--if we did not have
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's balance sheets at the size that
they were in the late 1990s, trillion-dollar companies who
essentially were serving two separate masters--they were
serving Congress and they were serving the private markets
simultaneously as listed companies. And were, as we viewed
them, friendly competitors in the market.
Once those balance sheets went over a trillion dollars
each, that created a competitive edge in the markets for others
to go in and dilute the credit. If we were not still unwinding
those legacy portfolios, I would suggest to Congress that the
total balance and issues that we have been faced with would be
similar to what we faced in the RTC on a inflation-adjusted
basis. We would already be past this and moving on.
So the structure that you suggest in your legislation I
think is very important because it discusses a well-priced
insurance ``G'' fee, no portfolio intervention by the
government at any level--I do not think there is any appetite
for that any longer--and let the private market everyday do
what we do, which is price that against its benchmarks off of
either treasuries or corporate rates.
That, to me, is the way it would work and it would minimize
the risk to the taxpayers.
Chairman Miller of California. Hopefully, we can come back.
My time has expired.
The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Dr. Wachter, at what point do we begin to see less
investment in the securitization markets due to the uncertainty
of the GSE reform as well, as our own long-term economic
recovery?
Ms. Wachter. That is a very difficult, but very important,
question. I do not think there is a definitive answer.
I think, as we have heard from Mr. Dorfman, that markets
may already be, to some degree, considering risk issues. That
is, will there be a replacement to Fannie and Freddie that
brings about a safe and sound investment structure?
Mortgage markets are forward-looking. And, indeed, if there
is not in place a structurally sound mortgage system, then
today's investors in these long-term instruments will begin to
appreciate the risk. Exactly when that will happen, exactly how
that will unravel, is very difficult to say. But clearly,
uncertainty will have a potentially dire impact at some point.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Veissi, what impact do the
legislation proposals aimed at reforming the GSEs have on the
30-year fixed-rate mortgage products?
Mr. Veissi. Would you repeat that question?
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Sure. What impact do the
legislative proposals aimed at reforming the GSEs have on the
30-year fixed-rate mortgage products?
Mr. Veissi. Let me first say that while we concentrate on
the secondary market and the investor side of the secondary
market, we pay less attention to the consumer invested in the
performance of both the purchase and the sale of a real estate
home.
They do not have the expertise, nor do they care to become
invested in understanding the expertise of the secondary
market. What they do know and what they do understand is that
they have been privileged to have the benefit of a marketplace
that offers them a fixed-rate mortgage for a long period of
time with no uncertainty. They know what their payment is going
to be.
The average holding time for that mortgage is about 7
years. Now, that was not the case during the period of time
from 2005 to 2007. It was a much smaller period of time, about
2 or 3 years. So on average, the investor is expected to have
the mortgage, that 30-year mortgage, satisfied in the average
time of about 7 or 8 years, and in good times, was about 2 or 3
years.
When you take away the opportunity for an individual to buy
with the kind of securitization that they feel comfortable
with, especially the ones that show less than 20 percent down,
NAR has found that about 70 percent of every new home or first-
time homebuyer uses an instrument that has less than a 10
percent, or a 10 percent down, structure.
So all of those instruments are important to our
marketplace and important to the first-time homebuyer and to
American homebuyers. To take that away from the home-buying
market might further cause a recessionary cycle, and certainly
would inhibit both the construction of residential and
commercial property and the resale properties which generally
help us assume a better economic spiral.
Mr. Dorfman. Thank you, Mrs. McCarthy.
I wanted to further comment very briefly that in terms of
the GSEs going forward, first, SIFMA, on behalf of its members,
absolutely applauds each and every bill that comes to the
table. That contributes to the dialogue that is so difficult
and so necessary to repair the housing finance system. And that
is important. Every bill is a contribution.
Now having said that, in terms of GSEs, the market, the
institutional investor, again, must come to the view,
necessarily, that the GSEs have products that have integrity,
are assembled with skill; that the guarantee of the GSE without
the government behind them is immensely creditworthy and
believable; and that there is integrity throughout the process.
Next, it is essential that GSEs be able to finance
themselves as efficiently and as liquidly as they have in the
past. High volume and liquidity hold each other's hands. They
work together. And we must be very careful that GSEs, whatever
they may be in the future, are able to address the market with
their individual securities perhaps with a single combined
security.
Whatever that form may be must be a huge predictable flow
that will serve the liquidity needs of investors worldwide who
use those investments from the GSEs just as though they were
United States Treasury securities with the same liquidity and
the same utility.
If we do not achieve that, it may be all right. But the
price to the consumer will be higher, as every cost will be
traced back to the homeowner. We want to be protective of that
homeowner, and we want to be protective of the housing market
in the United States.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
My time is up.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Huizenga, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
that.
I just wanted to maybe continue that conversation, Mr.
Dorfman. If I recall, what you were just saying in your closing
is you want to protect the homeowner and protect the
marketplace. Is that correct?
Mr. Dorfman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. Obviously, there have been actions that did
not do that. And you have to understand my perspective. I am a
former Realtor. My family has been involved in construction
for about 40, 45 years. I have been a developer, primarily
single-family housing. I have been extremely concerned about
what happened.
And one of my concerns has been, when first getting out of
college, doing my first real estate development, the lesson I
learned is that you owned the lot. You used that lot as
collateral to go get a construction loan. Now, I am not saying
that the 50 percent down that my parents used was maybe a good
number, but having significant skin in the game.
For me, buying my first home almost 20 years ago and seeing
those standards of 20 percent down being the norm and being
able to make that up with PMI, private mortgage insurance, was
a positive thing. But we saw the 20 percent become 15, become
10, become 5, become 2, become zero, become 120 percent loan-
to-value. And that concerns me because we have now put people
into homes that they frankly cannot afford.
And I take blame for that as somebody involved in the
construction industry. Speaking as a 42-year-old, I will take
blame for a generation that demands it now. ``What do you mean
I cannot have the three-car garage and a walk-in master
bathroom suite? We have expectations, and doggone it, they
better be met.'' We have distorted the marketplace here.
And I think the question is, how do we restore that common
sense? How do we get back to an equilibrium here, where we have
good, solid housing stock that people can afford and they can
be in? And, now with the literally hundreds of millions of
dollars that people are upside down in their homes across the
Nation, that does not add to that.
Mr. Veissi, I think you were just sort of wanting to
address that a little bit?
Mr. Veissi. Yes. Your questions are pointed, and they are
fair and accurate. Our problem, especially during the middle
part of the 2000s, was maybe that we did not understand the
value of real estate and the longevity of real estate.
Real estate has never been a short-term investment. It
never has been a turn-and-flip. If you want to do that, you go
into equities. Vegas might even be a better place than real
estate. But real estate on a long-term investment has always
has been a substantial wealth-builder.
The other thing that is really interesting, your comment
about skin in the game is important. And my knee-jerk reaction
would be yes, the more cash you put in the less likely you are
to walk away from that deal.
But I take a look at some of the mortgages that are out
there today--especially those that were put forth in 2004,
2005, and 2006--and those underwriting standards were horrible.
They were not horrible; they were atrocious. They should never
have been placed. The consumer should never have had that
responsibility for those underwriting standards because they
just did not exist.
Take VA for example, with a zero downpayment. One of the
lowest, as a matter of fact the lowest foreclosure rate in the
entire country is a veteran loan. And there are two good
reasons for that. Number one, education. The veteran is
educated on what happens: one, if they should get into trouble;
two, what they do immediately upon getting into trouble; and
three, how they react when that situation occurs. And, too,
their underwriting is absolutely terrific.
Mr. Huizenga. Very different standards, yes. And I believe
that. When I was first in real estate, it was extremely unusual
to have an FHA loan. And now, everybody has FHA loans. What is
it, about a third of all transactions, roughly, something like
that?
Dr. Wachter?
Ms. Wachter. Yes. Thank you for recognizing me. The
deterioration in underwriting conditions that Mr. Veissi just
referred to is absolutely key here. A very large percentage of
the homes that are in foreclosure and in default in fact were
10 percent and 20 percent down loans. And part of the reason
that they are in foreclosure and default today is that loan
values were artificially propped up.
With a 30 percent decline in home values--and in fact, in
the United States, home values on average declined 30 percent.
Even with 20 percent down, you will have underwater loans, and
you will have few options if you lose your job and do not have
an income flow but to go through default and foreclosure.
What we must avoid going forward is volatility in housing
prices, to which underwriting deterioration contributed.
Mr. Huizenga. I think my time is up. But ultimately, this
is about making sure people have jobs. We have to create an
atmosphere here that is going to allow people to have a good,
solid job. I just want to make sure when that is happening--as
someone who lost a significant amount of his value on a home,
all in those areas of those years--we have to make sure then
that we have some sort of reasonable level of skin in the game,
from my perspective.
And I do not think that there is anything magical about 2
percent or 20 percent. But somewhere in there, we have to make
sure that consumers know what they are getting into and that
there is significant responsibility with that.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Scott is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Yes. Thank you very much.
Let me just start off with a general question that each of
you might answer very quickly for me. You have great expertise.
I would be interested to know, how much longer do you think
that we have before we can dig our way out of this hole and get
back to normalcy, or do you we think ever will? Is it too deep?
Mr. Veissi. Let me give you really quick numbers that might
help you out. I am from Miami, Florida. During the period of
time when you could fog up a mirror and get a mortgage, about
2006, we were consuming, or absorbing, about 1,000 brand new
condo units a year. That is not used product. That is just
brand-new condo units.
We had on the books--permitted, ready to come out of the
ground or coming out of the ground--at that same time, 67,000
units: almost 70 years' worth of inventory.
Mr. Scott. Right.
Mr. Veissi. Now, about a third of those never got built.
Folks walked away from their deposits. About a third of those
are holes in the ground in Miami. But about 20,000 to 25,000
got built. The reality is that most people looked at that and
said, ``How are you going to absorb 20 years to 25 years worth
of brand-new condo inventory?''
Mr. Scott. I know, Mr. Veissi.
Mr. Veissi. It is almost gone.
Mr. Scott. Right. Is there anybody here willing to say 5
years, 10 years? To give us some hope about how long you think
it is going to take for us to--
Mr. Veissi. Some of the statistics that we see, we think
places that were overbuilt like Miami--portions of California,
Arizona, Nevada, but especially Miami--may see double-digit
appreciation even in 2012, predicated upon the absorption of
existing oversupply.
Mr. Scott. Five years from now, do you see us being in this
same mess?
Mr. Veissi. No, absolutely not.
Mr. Scott. Right. Anybody? Three, four years? What is our--
Mr. Farrell. I would say that, from our view, the
underwriting standards tightened up in 2007. So we are in the
fourth year of the recovery of underwriting standards that were
diluted.
And just to weave this into the previous testimony in
question, with a 45-year history in the family of building
properties, this window of dilution, and this reach for
homeownership up into the 70 percent range, is a very small
sample, but a very powerful deterrent to what has happened in
underwriting and dilution of underwriting to get there.
So for the past 4 years, we have been underwriting loans
and accepting loans in our secondary market companies with much
better underwriting standards and, as a result, much better
performance.
Mr. Scott. I only have 2 minutes left, and I have another
question. I want to get to Dr. Wachter here. You all are
hopeful that, let us say within the next 5 years, we will be
above water on the situation of housing?
Mr. Dorfman. I think that is fair.
Mr. Scott. All right.
Mr. Dorfman. But it must be added that whatever set of
reforms we come to institute through the U.S. Congress must be
right the first time.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Mr. Dorfman. Therefore, we must not take this cake out of
the oven before it is baked.
Mr. Scott. Very good. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Wachter, let me ask you this: My concern is what
happened overseas and some of the abuses. Were the abuses
experienced in the United States mortgage market present in
other countries?
Ms. Wachter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Scott. And how have these other countries responded?
Ms. Wachter. They are also undergoing a period of
tightening of underwriting standards similar to that in the
United States and are also considering long-term reforms. I
must say, a country which did not experience our turmoil,
Canada, is considering reforms at this point.
Mr. Scott. Would you say, then, that we do not have
anything to fear from these other countries having a negative
impact on our own economy?
Ms. Wachter. No, by no means. I do think we have a
tremendous amount to fear from these other countries coming
through sovereign debt failure. For example, Spain has a
banking crisis which is very much related to its housing and
mortgage market.
Mr. Scott. And they have GSE structures in these other
countries, as well. Are there any differences--
Ms. Wachter. I am sorry. I missed that point.
Mr. Scott. The GSEs? They have GSEs?
Ms. Wachter. No, they did not have GSEs in Spain. They had
a similar problem, but without the GSEs. It is a bank-led
crisis with underwriting. And it was essentially with the
cajas, which are similar to savings and loans.
Mr. Scott. With these other GSEs that are overseas, what
are the differences in the structure between the GSEs that are
in foreign countries and our GSEs?
Ms. Wachter. Most other countries do not have GSEs. What
they have is a banking system which has implicit and explicit
government backing. The governments come to the rescue of
failed banks, for example, Northern Rock in the U.K.
So these large banks, four or five large banks, in some
sense, operate as though they are GSEs, with implied, and in
some cases explicit, government backing.
Mr. Scott. And is there any reason why some countries have
put together GSEs and others have not?
Ms. Wachter. Absolutely. Countries with fixed-rate
mortgages have securitization systems. We have a few examples
other than the United States. There is Denmark, and to some
degree Germany as well.
Germany did not have a crisis. It maintained lending
standards. That is a fixed-rate system, and they maintain
lending standards. No crisis. Denmark did have a crisis. There
was a bubble and a bust, and the bust was associated with a
sudden shift to adjustable-rate mortgages.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. My time has been expired. Thank you
for giving me a few extra seconds there, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it.
Chairman Miller of California. Vice Chairman Dold, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Dorfman, if I can start with you, in your testimony you
talked about the housing industry in the United States
representing roughly 20 percent of the GDP. That has fallen to
about 15 percent of GDP. What share of the GDP does the housing
market represent in other developed nations?
Mr. Dorfman. In other developed nations, as a general
statement, it is significantly less.
Mr. Dold. Ballpark? Five percent, eight percent, roughly?
It depends, obviously, on the nation. But can you give me a
ballpark figure?
Mr. Dorfman. Can be. It is a big world. Those numbers are
fair to work with.
Mr. Dold. Okay.
Dr. Wachter, if I can just jump to you for a second.
Government guarantees obviously are, I think, one of the
reasons why we are in part of the mess that we are in. We have
the guarantee, and yet we still have the private sector upside
with the GSEs.
Why has the government guarantee been so important in the
United States, when many other countries around the world do
not provide that government guarantee?
Ms. Wachter. If I may, Congressman, other countries do
provide government guarantees to the banking system and make
loans through the banking system. In our country, we have made
loans, to some degree, through the banking system.
And again, we have implied guarantees, or explicit through
demand deposit, and also securitization--and up until the
conservatorship, there was an implied guarantee. So I would say
that most countries do have implied guarantees.
Mr. Dold. Okay. I appreciate it. Then just building on
that, not only for you, Dr. Wachter, but for the rest of the
panel as well. When we look at that guarantee, certainly we
know that an overhaul of Fannie and Freddie, I think, is
certainly something that we are talking about over here.
What should we be doing? What should this panel take away
and bring back to our colleagues in terms of saying, what do we
need to do to make it better, more efficient, for the housing
sector and for our economy in general?
Ms. Wachter. I think the legislation that has been already
presented is a very good starting point. And I would say that
in whatever legislation that you go forward with, the key is
transparency.
The problem in the 2000-2006 deterioration was that the
deterioration in underwriting standards was not known except
anecdotally. So we need to have transparency in the mortgages
that are being underwritten and in the structure of the
securitizations themselves so regulators can track and
investors can also can bring market discipline to bear.
Mr. Dold. By all means, Mr. Farrell, please chime in.
Mr. Farrell. Thank you. I would like to introduce the
thought that if we did not have the GSEs today, we would be
trying to create them, because of the support that they have
created over the past few years. And, in fact, when Congress
created the GSEs, they were dealing with the same sorts of
issues of private mortgage capital, along with public capital
and GSE fees dealing with it.
I think it is extremely important to understand the
structure of the United States for jobs when you talk about the
government guarantee. And that is the perspective that I think
we need to really think about how we re-craft the government
guarantee, if it is to be done.
The 30-year mortgage, and the GSE fees nationally, allow
American consumers the flexibility to move to where the jobs
are. And if you look at the 1930s, you were not able to do that
nationally because you could not sell your house with the
certainty of pricing in one State and moving to another State
to move to jobs.
If you are moving from New York to Texas, or you are moving
from New Jersey to California, one of the things that the GSE
market allows you to do is have capital formation for 120 days,
as a family, to make that move. And to have the certainty that
that mortgage is going to be available for you when you buy
your house under the same standards.
That is much different than any of these other countries,
and it is very unique to the United States and it is unique to
the structure of the United States. And I think that needs to
be respected in the way that we think about the legislation and
the way we think about what we want to provide our homeowner
population with.
I am not saying that we should be 70 percent. I am saying
that we should find a balance between whatever the right
insurance amount is at the GSE form, and allow that flexibility
for consumers to continue to move between States to where the
jobs are.
Ultimately it led to job creation, for most of my life.
Unfortunately, for a 10-year period in there, it has now led to
a bubble that is broken and being cleaned up. That will be
dealt with. But the purity of the mobility in the United States
and job creation off of that I think is an important feature to
understand.
Mr. Dold. Mr. Dorfman?
Mr. Dorfman. Very briefly, I would just like to cite a
historical example. We, as Dr. Wachter said, look to Canada
today as an excellent example of a banking system and a housing
finance system that has been relatively unaffected by this
crisis. And they have done many things right.
I had the privilege of helping to create the first
mortgage-backed security in Canada, and that security was
issued and remains under the guarantee, and remains guaranteed
directly by the Crown, as they call it. Treasury directly
guarantees Canadian securities.
So when you go outside the banking balance sheet into the
global capital markets, some anchor of credit must be there to
give confidence to all of those who are rapidly making choices
about whether to invest or not, and at what price.
Mr. Dold. Can you give us a better understanding in terms
of the underwriting principles that they are putting in place?
Mr. Dorfman. I am sorry, I missed--
Mr. Dold. Underwriting principles? Obviously, that would be
one of the problems I would argue that the GSEs--yes.
Mr. Dorfman. Underwriting principles, or the larger
rubric--which I like, regrettably, to call the failure of
discipline across the industry--are absolutely essential to
have integrity in their creation and integrity in their audit
and review and enforcement. All levels, private and public, who
are looking at mortgages must be acutely conscious of quality.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Perlmutter, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
That last question by Mr. Dold prompts a question for me. I
would like to break this down into two timeframes, if we could:
all time; and then that period from 2004 to 2007. Because
having sat on this committee now for several years, there were
some abuses in the period of 2004 to 2007.
Mr. Dorfman, you mentioned the fact that there was a big
accumulation of foreign holdings of our Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac types of debt. There was a whole foreign policy aspect to
this to repatriate money from other countries that then may
have let us get into some poor underwriting standards.
So let us go back to the underwriting standards question
Mr. Dold just asked. In that period, we had loose underwriting
standards. Would you agree, Mr. Dorfman?
Mr. Dorfman. Progressively?
Mr. Perlmutter. Looser. Answer it however you want.
Mr. Dorfman. Yes. Ever more loose until we had a crash.
Mr. Perlmutter. And now the pendulum has swung to the other
side, which is very restrictive. Pretty loose, pretty
restrictive, and we need to get back in balance so that we can
sell some houses out there, in my opinion. But how, in these
two different periods, did our Federal Home Loan Banks, which
are other GSEs that we have, compare to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac?
Mr. Dorfman. Federal Home Loan Banks as a group
outperformed, meaning they did not suffer anything close to the
economic financial demise of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. And
the essential reason for that, despite the fact that Federal
Home Loan Banks are as large as Fannie Mae, is that the Federal
Home Loan Banks own virtually no mortgages for their own
accounts on their balance sheet.
The hundreds of billions of dollars held by Federal Home
Loan Banks are held as collateral against obligations of member
banks, not as directly-owned assets of the Home Loan Banks
themselves.
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay.
Mr. Farrell, you talked about the RTC for a moment. Is
there a way, as we go through this process--because I believe a
lot of this had to do with the underwriting standards in that
period of time of 2004 to 2007, which may have been appropriate
for other reasons, but ultimately were not so good for the
housing market.
Is there a way to do a good-bank/bad-bank kind of a system,
where maybe we do not throw Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac out with
the bathwater, but we separate what appears to be a period of
time where we had some lousy loans and put that over here. Just
deal with it, pay it. If we owe China, if we owe Saudi Arabia,
if they are the investors in that, we continue to pay it--that
is a foreign policy decision we are making--and then just move
forward with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?
Can we do that? And I will just add one more thing--in this
public-private setting that exists for those two entities?
Mr. Farrell. I would say two things. If I may, one of the
things that we need to understand as a nation is that there are
only two companies in the entire world that can do what Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac do. And that is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
And I would argue--and I have discussed this in our
earnings calls with investors and discussions with investors
globally--that they are, for many of the elements of what they
provide, a national asset that needs to be protected.
And I am not sure that we are protecting them right now.
What I mean by that is, if you look at them as an integral part
of the banking system, they hold insurance deposits, municipal
escrow receipts. They take cash flow monthly from investors and
borrowers throughout the world, and flow it through into the
banking system.
And we are certainly not creating jobs there, where 20-
somethings are coming in and going to build their career. Those
systems are extremely unique. I have watched them my entire
career. They are a valuable asset to the government. And I urge
you all to consider that they need to be protected in some way,
shape or form.
And, in fact, I agree with the precepts of this legislation
that Congressman Miller has put in, about merging those two
companies to get the best, strongest asset that we can,
nationally, to do that. That servicing aspect is an extremely
important piece of the way that our Nation's mortgage market
works. And a bad step for us would be that anything happen to
that. A disgruntled East German hacker breaking into that
system? You want to break into a bank? They are over there.
So I would say, yes, the RTC concept is doable. There is
the ability to have a bad-bank/good-bank scenario. We need to
allow clearance of prices, which means the unfortunate pieces
of having some parts of the system fall to distressed prices
that would occur faster than they would have occurred if we had
not tried to manage the spiral down the way we have.
But I would be the first one to get on the road and go get
the money to do that. The RTC was a pretty good example of
bipartisan work in putting that together to cleanse the system,
do it quickly, provide risk capital standards and risk-takers
the window to come in and provide tax receipts ultimately back
to the government.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Garrett, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garrett. And I thank the Chair.
I thank Dr. Wachter for her comments, early on, with regard
to the problems here with this housing market in this country
causing the ripple effect, if you will, over in Europe as well
as on the results that came from it. And also to the point as
to what this all caused, which was one of the seminal questions
of the chairman.
And, Mr. Dorfman, I think you answered this and said what
is the overall cost. And other members of the panel, too,
answered that question as far as what is the cost if we did not
have the GSEs and what is the cost of, basically, in essence,
answering that in terms of we are going to see higher basis
points of 100, 200, 300 basis points.
I guess that is one way of putting what the price is, what
the cost is to the system as if you did not have the GSEs there
as the backstop, if you did not have the taxpayers there as a
backstop to the system, that you would see higher basis points.
I guess I look at it, though, in a different way. I look at
the fact that we did have the GSEs, and what was the fact that
they basically drove the market off the cliff and what that
cost has been overall to the economy. That cost has been
without a price. The fact that people have lost their homes is
a cost. The fact that people have lost their livelihoods has
been an insurmountable cost.
The fact that we have an economic situation in this country
of 9 percent sustaining unemployment and people cannot ever
again get jobs in the later part of their lives now, that is a
cost that we cannot put a price on. That is a significant cost
because of the fact that we have relied upon these two entities
for so long.
There is a cost also to the taxpayers. There is a cost
right now of around $150 billion. There is a cost over the next
10 years up to $400 billion. Now, how does that relate to what
we do in some other things?
This past week, I have had people meeting with me in my
office saying, ``What is Congress going to do in the area of
more dollars for breast cancer research? What is Congress going
to do in the area of more money and more investment in the area
of Alzheimer's research? What is Congress going to do in the
area of benefits for senior citizens and their needs?''
And we have to say, ``We are in deficit now.'' And they
say, ``Where is all the money going that we pay in taxes?'' And
one of the quick answers I can say is, ``To bail out the GSEs
to the tune of $150 billion, to the tune of over $400 billion,
and who knows how much more than that.'' But it is going to all
the myriad of other programs, good and bad, that Congress has
put in place since that time to try to help sustain some of the
neighborhoods.
Maxine Waters is not here. But she can speak most
eloquently as to what is happening in neighborhoods because of
the effects of the GSEs, and the fact that they have created
bubbles in the marketplace, and neighborhoods are now
devastated. And now, we have put in place other programs to try
to stabilize those neighborhoods.
That is a cost that I think goes beyond when we make
somewhat of a trite answer, and say, ``It is going to be a
little bit more expensive in the future if we do not have the
backstop of the GSEs there.''
I know we are talking about a global message, a global look
at this. I looked at it from a U.S. perspective and sort of a
back-of-the-envelope sort of analysis. What do we have here so
far to try to make sure that we have a housing market of
whatever range--5, 10, 15 percent of the marketplace? This is
what we have.
The range for institutional backstop, if you will: the FHA
as a government mortgage insurer; Ginnie Mae as a government
MBS guarantor; Fannie and Freddie as GSE guarantors--we have
had those--Fannie and Freddie as a GSE portfolio investor; we
have had that. Federal Home Loan Banks as GSE lenders through
their advanced program; we have had that. Federal Home Loan
Banks as the GSE portfolio investors through their housing
programs, we have had that.
What else do we have? We have the promotion of affordable
housing generally. FHA, Fannie, and Freddie affordable housing
goals, HUD's National Homeownership Strategy, Community
Reinvestment Act, HUD's best practices initiative, Federal Home
Loan Banks Affordable Housing Program.
On top of that, what do we have? Promotion of additional
borrowed leverage and increased reliance on debt. You have
FHA's leadership and loan downpayment lending, HUD's
regulations of the GSE affordable housing, Fannie and Freddie's
leverage in preferred stocks, risk-based capital rules, stable
rules for secondary mortgage lending, tax deductibility of
interest, overreliance on the Fed of lower interest rates.
On top of that, you have limited use of prepayment
penalties, de jour and de facto limits on recourse and
deficiency judgments, liberal capital gains exceptions,
procyclical loans. We have all that here.
Can anyone on the panel compare this to any other country
in the world that has anything close to this, any other country
in the world that has anything close to this that manages
theirs in an effective, perfect implementation of these?
And if so, how is it that these other countries without
this myriad--and I did not go into all of them; this is just
what we came up with--are able to sustain their mortgage rates
and not have the crisis that we have had in this country in
housing?
Mr. Dorfman. Your examples, your exhaustive examples, are
compelling and accurate, and I would add the postscript that
before Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and others throughout the
housing and finance system lost all discipline and success went
to their heads, and then some--
Mr. Garrett. By the way, Dr. Wachter said that was in the
2000s. That really goes back to 1992 or so, is that not, when
it began--
Mr. Dorfman. Oh yes, but there certainly was a time when
they were, Fannie and Freddie, great net Federal taxpayers and
far more simple than they were in the days of demise. So may I
argue on behalf of SIFMA? It is not necessarily true that the
fundamental architectures of Fannie and Freddie are useless and
decrepit, but how did something good become so bad?
Chairman Miller of California. Your time has expired.
Mr. Garrett. I think, Mr. Farrell, you want to--
Mr. Farrell. If I may add to that, I think when I listened
to that litany of programs and elements of government support,
many of those programs were Band-Aids for problems that were
bleeding out of different cuts in the housing system.
I would question today, and I am sure this is part of your
thought too, how valuable those are and how active are they? If
we look at some of these other programs that have been
implemented only in the past few years with the genuine goal of
trying to keep people in homes, very few people qualify for
those programs. And, in fact, they are very hard to put through
the system.
And I would say, as a mortgage investor, that, ultimately,
mortgage investors are going to judge the cash flow of American
mortgages against the cash flows of any other asset class on
the debt side, including Greek debt. And one of the things we
need to decide as a nation, is do we support our neighbors or
do we support Greek debt and other asset allocations like that?
So I would be in favor of a complete review of a lot of
these programs, and trying to figure out exactly how effective
they have been and how much support do they cost and why we are
doing them.
Mr. Garrett. It is pretty hard to get rid of a program, I
will tell you that.
Ms. Wachter. If I may quickly just say that many other
countries have much deeper involvement in the housing market
than the United States. Canada is an example of a country with
government guarantees, both implicitly and explicitly, whose
system works quite well.
I also just quickly wanted to address that it is not simply
a matter of 200 to 300 basis points if we withdraw Fannie and
Freddie. It is probably a matter of a second double-dip, a
recession, for the United States.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Mr. Green is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you and the
ranking member for allowing me to participate in the hearing.
It seems that invariably when we have these hearings, we
get into a discussion of what actually caused the crisis, and
we relate that to Fannie and Freddie. Before I go on, I would
like to say to Mr. Farrell, I just want to thank you and other
members for some of your comments, your comments about Fannie
and Freddie, that if we did not have it, we would probably try
to create it. That is a pretty strong comment, and it is not a
comment that you hear too often. Thank you for taking a
position with reference to an institution, or institutions,
that were of benefit to us.
Now back to where I was. When we talk about Fannie and
Freddie and what caused what we will call, for my purposes, the
demise of Fannie and Freddie, we do not always remember that
the products they received became the problem. And they
received faulty products because of changes in the law in 1980
and 1982.
In 1980, we did away with the usury rates. We made it
possible for loans to become predatory, in a sense, by not
having those usury rates. Then in 1982, we passed the
Alternative Mortgage Transaction Parity Act. And that one
allowed for a lot of what we call the exotic products, because
it allowed for us to go to the adjustable rates.
For a long time, we had the 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
And then when we got into adjustable-rate mortgages, we had
prepayment penalties that coincided with teaser rates. We
decided that we would have 3/27s and 2/28s and they became
almost commonplace. So a lot of the products created the
problems that we ultimately had to, and still are, dealing
with.
So I just want to get that side of the record out there,
that Fannie and Freddie continued to do what they were designed
to do. But the products, when you have originators who no
longer concerned themselves with the quality of the mortgage--
just the quantity they can originate--that has an impact, and
it had an impact.
They were originating these products and pushing them into
other markets, and not concerning themselves with whether the
person who qualified for the teaser rate would qualify for the
adjusted rate. And we are still having some of that to contend
with currently.
So the products became a real problem for us. And I cite
two laws, the Alternative Mortgage Transactions Parity Act of
1982 and the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary
Control Act of 1980 as part of the problem.
Having said that, I want to now ask--let us start with Ms.
Wachter, is that correct? You said a very strong statement. You
said only the United States has a fixed-rate long-term product.
Did I correctly state your position?
Ms. Wachter. There are other countries with fixed-rate
products. A 30-year product is unusual. But more to the point,
a pre-payable with lock-in capacity is unusual. In fact, all of
those features together are characteristics solely of the
United States.
Mr. Green. All right. Now, what I would like to ask each of
you is this. Give me the one difference between the GSE's as
currently structured, or perhaps the system as constructed
before FHA-FHFA took over the GSEs. The difference between that
structure and the structure being proposed that is important? A
significant difference.
And if you could each just give me one quickly, I would
greatly appreciate it. If my time expires, I will accept that
it is expires.
Mr. Farrell. I would say it is most important that the
government does not run portfolios, and that capital is brought
in by the private sector. Where I think the wheels went off the
bus was in trillion-dollar balance sheets at the Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac level, which essentially forced the banking system
into a lot of dilutive activities.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Dorfman?
Mr. Dorfman. I want to agree with Mr. Farrell entirely. It
was as I mentioned before, the portfolios as the mark of
difference between Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the Federal
Home Loan Banks, for example. Or between the U.S. GSE's and
Canada. There is no need for those Enterprises to be investment
companies.
Mr. Green. And this new system would prevent that?
Mr. Dorfman. As I read it.
Mr. Green. As you read it.
Okay. Mr. Veissi?
Mr. Veissi. I would say the explicit government guarantee
that backs those is enormously important, plus one thing we
have not said. We have talked about underwriting standards. We
have talked about the impractical investment standards in the
2006-2007 era. We never talked about educating the public about
the instrument itself. And you are right.
Mr. Green. Ms. Wachter?
Ms. Wachter. I think the portfolios are a key difference.
Mr. Green. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for going over.
Chairman Miller of California. We are going to go a second
round of questioning. I think this is a very informative panel.
If we are in agreement with that, does the panel agree to a
second round of questioning?
There has been a lot of discussion in Congress about
Freddie and Fannie and the marketplace. And a lot of it is
justified. Freddie and Fannie made some big mistakes. The
problem with much of the debate is Freddie and Fannie are
outperforming the rest of the marketplace.
So, are they the largest? They are. Is their default rate
less than the private sector? It absolutely is. Have they made
mistakes? Without a doubt, they have made mistakes.
A lot of the problems that we have seen out there were
caused by underwriting standards. They did not have them. If
you could sign your name on the line, people made a loan, and
that was a problem. And the bill the ranking member and I
introduced deals specifically with that. You have to be an
approved lender. If you do not comply with underwriting
standards, you buy the loan back. Very simple.
This should have been the case with Freddie and Fannie. I
think the biggest problem that went wrong with Freddie and
Fannie was they went public. All of a sudden, they were looking
for market share, rather than looking to be a conduit for
secondary money into the market, as they were intended to be.
And as they fought for a market share they lowered their
standards, closed their eyes. And many things Congress did
enabled them to do that, and encouraged them to do that. Some
say that there is a secondary market out there without
government involvement. If you are talking about Countrywide,
that has to be the greatest example of what went wrong in the
marketplace.
They were trying to emulate the GSE's in coming up with a
mortgage-backed security that looked like a GSE. But the
problem is, it was not. They were junk bonds. I know in 2000, I
started introducing language in this committee that said we
should define predatory versus subprime, got it to the Senate 5
times, but could never get the Senate to act on it.
Had we done that, we could have defined what a good
subprime loan was versus predatory, which is what they were
making, in the last few years, that basically were bad. The
best loans the GSE's are making today are in the high-cost
areas. They have written underwriting standards that are very
good, solid. And these loans are performing very well.
The problem I have with putting our head in a hole like we
have done, and allowing GSE's to continue as they do today, is
we are continuing to lose money and the taxpayers are going to
pay for it. You have reviewed my bill. If you took and put all
the assets of GSE's into that bill, allowed them to take the
foreclosures, hold them for up to 5 years, lease them out, they
would recoup all of their money invested. And they would not
continue to lose money in the future.
So the problem is, by doing nothing, they are putting the
taxpayers more at risk. Would you agree or disagree with that
today? Anybody on the panel?
Mr. Dorfman. Certainly, doing nothing allows the clock to
tick and the calendar to turn. American taxpayers and American
homeowners are suffering every day. And SIFMA members are
acutely aware of this.
On the other hand, as I said before, we cannot take this
cake out of the oven before it is baked. As we have seen by all
these intelligent questions this morning, this is an enormously
complex issue that resists easy resolution. But the debate has
to occur. The debate absolutely, sir, yes, has to occur. And I
applaud this committee for pushing it on, and SIFMA is prepared
to study exhaustively each and every proposal coming out of
Congress and to render a view.
Chairman Miller of California. One question I will let each
of you answer if you would like to, the housing bubble was, in
part, the result of increased access to credit in the form of
mortgages. Without correct balance of risk assessment analysis
and financial controls, how can that balance be corrected?
Mr. Farrell. I think that the market has corrected.
Darwinism has taken place.
Chairman Miller of California. I agree. I wanted to hear
you say that.
Mr. Farrell. We cannot fund--and everyone who is in the
mortgage market, including us, we just celebrated our 14th year
as a public company--navigated that differently. And some of us
navigated it better than others. One of the most interesting
aspects, I think, of the past 3 years' experience for me, is
that for the first time in my career, I am not competing with
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac for issuance in the market for their
portfolio.
And in fact, mortgage REITs have absorbed almost the entire
net supply being created out of the 95 percent market share
that the GSE's create today. Private capital is available. It
is mostly domestic. It comes to us in the form of REITs and
REIT-share offerings. So we have a domestic solution for a
domestic problem.
This is clearly, in our business model, investors
nationally and internationally and of all sizes supporting
their neighbors. And we have these solutions in place. The
underwriting standards that occurred were unfortunate, but
recognizable by significant players. And I always go with the
one-man statement. If one man could recognize it, whether he is
running a hedge fund or a public company, and he can identify
that risk, then those information points were open to everybody
and all could have avoided it.
But the markets run on two aspects, greed and fear. And as
Warren Buffet would say, it is best to be greedy when everyone
else is fearful, and it is best to be fearful when everyone
else is greedy. And I think that Darwinism has already occurred
in these markets, and that a lot of the instruments that
existed will not exist because the history now is out there.
Chairman Miller of California. I agree with you. I think
whatever facility is created to replace the GSE's, these will
actually act as a conduit. As the private sector is willing to
step up, the GSE or facility should step down in percentage.
They should not fight for 60 or 70 percent of the marketplace
or even 50 percent. If they are only needed for 30 percent,
that is adequate if the private sector is putting the funds in
there.
But when they start to recede, and the private sector is
not available, that is when the facility needs to step back up
to keep liquidity in the marketplace and the balance in the
marketplace. But the big mistake, like I said, I believe is
when they went public they started fighting for market share.
They should never be put in a position to fight for market
share. They should strictly be a conduit.
I yield to the ranking member.
Ms. Wachter. I have a partial disagreement with Mr.
Farrell, although I agree with almost everything he has said.
However, regarding the statement that what was known to a few
was therefore known to everybody, or knowable to everybody, it
certainly was known to insiders that credit conditions were
deteriorating and how they were deteriorating
However, it was not systematically known. It was
anecdotally known to regulators, and even to the Federal
Reserve Board. In 2006, according to the public record, the
Federal Reserve Board did know that housing prices were
probably in a bubble of about 20 percent. But they did not have
systematic information on the nature of the underwriting
conditions.
It would have been very difficult to actually take note of
all of the possible ways that underwriting was being
undermined. Also, the validity of the data, of the reporting of
the underwriting data, is clearly in question. Now going
backwards and attempting to verify the underwriting is
difficult.
Chairman Miller of California. The ranking member will be
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
This has been actually very educational. One of the things
that I have been doing, not only on this committee, but also on
the Education Committee, is financial literacy. You brought
that up as far as people do not really understand what their
debt ratio is or anything like that.
In the housing market, we have found that those who went
for counseling to buy housing--it is not just a mortgage, it is
the insurance, it is your taxes, it is utilities--these are all
things that add up. So people who were buying homes and were
not educated about what they were doing obviously got into
trouble.
And some the instruments that were being used, in my
opinion, were way out of line. Someone who is earning $40,000 a
year should have never been allowed to buy a $700,000 house.
That is common sense. And yet it was happening, and we saw it.
There are two questions that I basically want to ask, one
to Ms. Walker?
Ms. Wachter. Ms. Wachter. Thank you.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Wachter, sorry.
One of the things, basically for this hearing was talking
about what other countries are doing on how they do their
mortgages. So how do mortgage products offered in other
developed countries shape views on homeownership?
We have been pushing homeownership. That is the great
American dream. And yet I know that over in Europe,
homeownership is there, but it is not as prevalent as here, or
they do not seem to be pushing it as much.
The second part, for Mr. Farrell, and I am not sure whether
anybody can answer this, when we look at the private mortgages
and the mortgage market, it is another part of the economy. Our
pension funds that have invested. And they can only invest in
something if it is backed, basically, by the Federal
Government.
So if we could have those two answers?
Ms. Wachter. Yes. It is very difficult to make
homeownership comparisons that are fair across countries. Many
countries do not have a vibrant rental market. In fact, the
expansion of REITs is now ongoing in other countries to
establish financing for a rental market.
There may be rent controls or social housing for rentals.
However, because of this, many countries do not have the option
for renting. Homeownership is very high in these countries.
Other countries do have a vibrant rental market, and some
of them, with mortgage markets similar to ours have lower
homeownership rates. In particular, Germany has a homeownership
rate which is significantly lower--in the 50 percent range.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Dorfman? I saw you shaking
your head ``yes.''
Or Mr. Farrell?
Mr. Dorfman. I was only agreeing with Dr. Wachter.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Oh, okay. I am sorry.
Mr. Dorfman. Thank you very much.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. I thought I saw you shaking your
head when I was talking about the securities market.
Mr. Farrell. I would like to, if I may, answer the second
part of your question about the private mortgages. First off,
there is a very good report, with a summary of comparisons,
that I would like to make available for everyone on the
committee--that was sponsored by the Research Institute for
Housing American Mortgage Bankers Association--called, ``The
International Comparison of Mortgage Products Underwriting'' by
Dr. Michael Lee, which gives you a full picture of the
different products and the different kinds of policy measures
being taken in different countries.
But to your question to me about investment, one of the
characteristics of mortgages is their cash flow. And that is a
characteristic that is endemic to every investment, whether it
is an equity or a debt instrument. And big investors and small
investors alike--but for the most part people who are making
significant amounts of capital injections into the market
everyday, whether they are rolling over debt or they are
purchasing new debt for a liability that they have, a pension
fund, retirement fund, etc.--essentially are analyzing those
cash flows.
And they will price on top of that what they think that
guarantee is. I would submit that most sophisticated mortgage
investors never valued private mortgage insurance as added into
cash flow, because mortgager products in general, that
guarantee, is extremely difficult to put back through the
system and get claims on. It is not an efficient thing.
So you need to compare the post-bubble market and the pre-
bubble market the same way, as though mortgage insurance would
not pay off. In the case of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie
Mae, that mortgage insurance has proven to be reliable. It may
be mispriced, it should have a higher guarantee fee against it,
which should be beneficial for the communities and beneficial
for the taxpayers. It should provide some sort of revenue
income.
But there is a risk in unwinding that guarantee too
quickly. Because many investment entities across the globe are
invested on the precept that guarantee is sacrosanct. And
because of that, they trade it and they give it a benchmark
status in terms of risk status, risk-adjusted status, on their
balance sheets. And that includes our own pension funds here,
our own banks, and other investment companies throughout the
world that we speak to.
I would say that one of the most interesting outcomes in
the past 50 years for me personally has been that you would
have thought that the safest mortgage market in the world was
the Irish mortgage market. It was almost 100 percent variable
rate, so it would have adjusted with anything that happened in
interest rates and, in fact, had a homeownership rate around 50
to 60 percent. When in fact, Ireland has suffered the most, and
they had no government guarantee behind it. It was all linked
into the banking system.
So this was almost inescapable. It is unfortunate that it
has leaked into the government's coffers the way it has, but
this is global problem. We can be the first out. And we have a
huge opportunity in front of us if we get this answer correct.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Miller of California. Thank you.
Vice Chairman Dold is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I certainly want to
thank you again for your time. It has been informative.
One of the things that I think we have not really discussed
as much in the hearing is foreign investment in the U.S.
market, and certainly with our mortgage-backed securities. What
I would like to do if I can is just talk about the structure
that we have right now.
Do foreign investors still consider the United States a
good place to invest in terms of our mortgage-backed
securities? Are they an attractive investment?
Mr. Farrell. I would say there are questions about the
ongoing commitment because of the noise and the actions that
have happened over the past 2 years. But I would say
domestically that gap is being filled by investment companies
within the United States. Certainly, as I said earlier in my
testimony, we have absorbed in the mortgage REIT industry
almost all of the supply that has been created over the past 3
years, primarily through domestic investments.
Some of that is linked to the dollar, the weakness in the
dollar and the currency transactions against it. That is one of
the judgment calls. We have investment pools throughout the
globe. It is easier to do it in the United States today than it
is to do it offshore.
Ms. Wachter. Absolutely key to the stability in the housing
market and recovery of the overall economy is the willingness
of foreign investors to hold Fannie and Freddie mortgage-backed
securities. In fact, the ability of the Fed to assist the
overall economy in keeping interest rates low, at historic
rates--and that is the one major plus for the U.S. economy
today is low mortgage rates--is, hand-in-hand, requiring also
confidence by foreign investors and domestic investors. But in
mortgage-backed securities, and the guarantee by the Federal
Government at this time.
Mr. Dorfman. There are certainly a significant number of
foreign investors who simply will not buy an un-guaranteed
mortgage-backed security. However, there are also a significant
number, especially those who are heaviest in investable funds,
who recognize that behind the guarantee there ought to lie,
there must lie, and at an earlier time, did lie an underwriting
checks-and-balances system that was intended to ensure that the
guarantee would never have to come to be exercised.
Unfortunately, that came out rather differently. But it is
very critical to stress, as many of you have, that the quality
of the product going into the process is the very first step to
ensure that it is going to go out the back end to an
institutional investor, whether domestic or international, on
terms that are eagerly bid for and on spreads that are
ultimately affordable in financing costs to the U.S. worker and
taxpayer.
Mr. Dold. Thank you, Mr. Dorfman.
There is no question, when we talk about underwriting
standards of old and how we got into this mess, that we are
longing to try to make sure we are holding more people
accountable, which I think, Dr. Wachter, goes into your
transparency argument.
If we can, obviously, I am of the belief that the GSEs hold
far too much of the mortgage market right now. I think that is
not really healthy, from my perspective. But can you, Mr.
Farrell, talk to me--or anybody else on the panel--with regard
to, if we were to go in more of a privatized route.
You were talking about the REITs taking up and soaking up a
larger portion, or putting additional capital at play. How
would that affect foreign investment? How does that affect
foreign investment, especially if we are going to see
additional--
Mr. Farrell. The REITs are internationally accepted. In
fact, many countries are trying to replicate the U.S. REIT laws
in order to create the same kinds of liquidity that we have in
this Nation. In fact, REITs, whether they are property REITs or
mortgage REITs, have indeed absorbed much of the supply from
the de-leveraging that is going on globally across the world.
We have done transactions in the U.K., taking back U.S.
assets into the United States. So it is a recognized,
internationally recognized, investment vehicle to do that. That
capital in the private capital sector is available. It is not
available at the same price as it was 2 years ago. We would
concur with you that the GSEs hold way too much debt.
We think that overhang needs to be cleared out. It is like
an overhang of inventory that needs to be cleared out into the
secondary markets. We will be in favor of a more rapid
downsizing of those portfolios to establish those clearing
prices into the private sector while the environment is in the
position it is today to finance that.
Mr. Dold. Okay. And, obviously, the glut of excess
inventory, if you will. How do we get around that? Because that
is obviously significant. And I talk to a number of people who
are in the financial markets. They are saying we have way too
much inventory out there right now.
How do we solve that? How do members of this panel try to
deal with that? Is there some suggestions that you have? And I
recognize that my time has expired, but that is obviously a
critical point that we need to address.
Ms. Wachter. That is the key question. And that goes back
to the previous point that we do need to, at some point deal
with the portfolio. But at this point, there is no way that the
portfolio can be priced and absorbed by investors without a
guarantee behind it.
If it were, it would not be a matter of 200 or 300 basis
points. It would be a matter, I believe, of a perception of a
much greater risk to the overall economy.
Mr. Dold. And I know I am stating the obvious, but is not
it any investment that is guaranteed always a more attractive
investment? Of course--
Ms. Wachter. And it is a question of the moment of time.
Mr. Dorfman. Not necessarily. It is always a question of
what is the risk versus what is the return. So, clearly your
lowest risk, the guaranteed product, is going to get you a
return which is commensurately less because it is less risky,
and vice versa.
If I may just take an additional second to expand on Mr.
Farrell's comment, there is no question that REITs are playing,
and growing in their activity to play, a critical role in this
market in terms of absorbing flows of product. On the other
hand, it also needs to be recognized that in terms of
maintaining that critical global sector, a key factor,
especially for a foreign central bank, is liquidity.
The ability to trade at or near par at a moment's notice
because central banks have certain duties, including defending
the national currency when they need cash quickly. The way you
get liquidity is through uniformity. And guarantee is an
immense help there because it takes away the question is there
a credit risk here. We are only dealing with interest rate
risk. That is, too, a factor to be borne in mind.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Green, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to take just a moment and thank
you and the ranking member for this straightforward piece of
legislation. I think it deals with the concern raised about the
explicit nature of the guarantee, which is something that seems
to be of paramount importance in terms of impacting the global
markets.
Have we done enough to deal with the underwriting
standards? Are there some things that we should do more to help
with underwriting standards? Because those standards did have a
significant role in the crisis that was created.
So if I may, I will start with the lady and just this time
go from my right to left.
Ms. Wachter. I do not believe we have done enough,
Congressman. I think that we need more transparency going
forward. If there was more transparency, then we would have
more involvement from the private sector at the table. And the
private sector itself would be more assured, going forward, of
investor discipline.
I believe that the Office of Financial Research, the new
office under Dodd-Frank, could have a role to play in the
tracking, transparently, of underwriting standards and how they
evolve over time. Today's underwriting statements, as has
already been noted, have swung the other degree of the
pendulum.
That approach will not and should not be maintained going
forward. But where will the pendulum swing? Will it swing all
the way over to the other side again? I do not think so, not in
the short run. But who knows? And that very uncertainty is, I
think, troubling and will, going forward, undermine confidence
in the housing and mortgage market.
I think we need to take that on. So to address the question
that was raised earlier by the Chair regarding predatory
subprime lending, we need to be able to track--in this
important capital market for homeowners and for the United
States--the conditions of the underwriting. We need to do a far
better job of that than is currently being done.
And that means that there need to be additional steps.
Whether they are on the regulatory side or on the legislative
side, they need to be forward.
Mr. Green. Mr. Veissi?
Mr. Veissi. The buyback rate, as you mentioned, from Fannie
and Freddie was probably 3 percent or 4 percent during the same
period of time as the major banks were at 15 percent and 18
percent of foreclosure base. What was said here is enormously
important to understand, especially in the marketplace. And
that is that you can go to Fannie and Freddie and their
parameters for accepting a loan are fairly adequate.
But the lenders are so conservative today that they have
constricted themselves not to be in a position to be forced to
buy back any loans at all. So, if you do not have a 800-plus
credit score, if you are not lily-white, if you do not have 20
percent down, if you do not register all those things--which
you do not have to do to sell that loan back to Fannie or
Freddie--but if you do not do that, they will not loan.
So yes, the underwriting standards are enormously important
both in the areas of the 2005-2006 area, where it was
completely out the window, and today where it swung in the
opposite direction.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Dorfman?
Mr. Dorfman. Just a few comments. First, the market,
largely because of huge losses taken, has self-cleansed. There
is no bid for trash. The trash business is finished.
Second, consumer education is absolutely critical. SIFMA is
a large supporter of consumer education. Homebuyers,
homeowners, must understand, as you illustrated before, that
there is a whole lot more than the mortgage coupon involved in
owning a house. It is a compendium of expenses.
And third, and very importantly, just as consumers must
know what they are doing, institutional disclosure laws and
institutional due diligence laws--in other words, explain in
high detail what you are selling and understanding in high
detail what you are buying and that your price is reasonably
arrived at--has been introduced. It is under consideration, and
will ultimately be a tremendous additive to the overall health
and growth of the market.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Farrell, I am going to have another question for you. I
apologize. I will get your answer, but I have another question.
You mentioned the $1 trillion threshold. And are you
referencing this number as it relates to the share of the
market that Fannie and Freddie had at that moment in time?
Hence it could be a trillion, but if the share of the market is
a lot less, then it could be acceptable.
Could you just give me a brief explanation?
Mr. Farrell. Sure. Thank you for letting me clarify that. I
am speaking about their debt-to-equity on their balance sheets
as publicly traded companies, which we estimate from our
research was around 77-to-1 debt-to-equity when you include
derivatives.
So it is not about market share, per se, as it was actually
the stretch of those balance sheets and the ability to hedge
those balance sheets, and using tools and techniques that
really proved unworthy of the size of the dimensions of that
balance sheet.
But to answer your other question, I would say that you
have gotten a very good summary from my colleagues here. I
would agree with all their bullet points. But I would offer
also one or two observations.
From an investor's point of view, the consumers actually
behave very rationally. When we give them money for nothing,
they take it. When we offer them 4 percent money, and they have
to bring more money to the table in order to provide that rate
because underwriting standards are tight, they are doing that.
For the first time in my career, most of the closings that
are going on now involve consumers bringing money to the table
that they did not have to bring before in order to keep their
loan-to-value ratios in time. So the Fannie-Freddie credit
stack, if you will, is getting much stronger as we sit here
today because of rational behavior by consumers.
Where we failed was offering them an un-rational rate and
an un-rational expectation about what the buyout would lead to
in terms of house price depreciation, etc. None of the models
could do that. And I think that is--to my colleague's
statement--``trash is no longer for sale.''
For a long time, as investors we assumed that house prices
would always go up 3 percent to 5 percent per year. Every
investment model also agreed with that. In fact, when it went
flat and it went negative, that is what destroyed these assets.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller of California. Mr. Garrett, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garrett. Just very quickly, because I was due on the
Floor 5 minutes ago.
The entire panel believes that there should be more
transparency in underwriting. Yes? So there should be more
transparency in the securitization process? And would there
also be more transparency as long as we have the GSEs, as far
as going to fair-value accounting for the GSEs?
Mr. Farrell. Yes, I think GAAP accounting is extremely
important.
Mr. Garrett. Okay for that. So basically the GSEs, both
their debts and their liabilities, should be corporately
represented on the balance sheet?
Mr. Dorfman. In order to attract private capital, private
capital must know what it is buying into.
Mr. Garrett. Right. And so far, the Administration has
opposed all of that. But you would all support that?
Ms. Wachter. I have not spoken to that.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. So you disagree?
Ms. Wachter. I do not have enough information to respond.
Mr. Garrett. I would like to take a look at that. Because
that is something that we will be looking at.
Ms. Wachter. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Garrett. Also, because my time is limited, I would
appreciate--in my opening comments, I spoke about the IMF
report back in April. And you do not have to give me your
opinion now, but I would appreciate--since they seem to be
somewhat contrary to some of the opinions here, where they said
their study showed, with regard to these, that there is limited
evidence that it boosted homeownership, made the system more
efficient, and provided buffers against economic stress. So I
would appreciate that.
And finally, on the issue of foreign investment, I think
Hank Paulson wrote the book, ``The Brink.'' And in it, he
talked about the fact that somewhere in the year 2008 when all
this was all happening, there were phone conversations between
some of our largest foreign investors, which would be Russia
and China--the largest investors, holders of the GSE debt--that
perhaps they should get together and begin dumping that on the
marketplace. You probably heard those stories back then.
If that is true, and I realize, Mr. Dorfman, all of your
comments with regard to the importance of foreign investors. Is
that really something that we need to be concerned about? That
we are looking to those very same type of investors to be
holding the debt that potentially could put us in this quagmire
again?
Mr. Farrell. I think international investment is an
important piece of any diversification. The large outstanding
share of United States GSE debt, I would say more than 78
percent is held domestically.
Mr. Garrett. And what was the percentage back in the 1990s,
ball park?
Mr. Farrell. That study is actually in this paper here. I
think that it is pretty consistent that it would be somewhere
in the 75 percent to 80 percent range.
Mr. Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Farrell. It is mostly held by the banking system. REITs
have grown. We were 1 percent a few years ago, and now we are
at 3 percent to 4 percent because we have been filling the gap.
So other domestic entities have grown to do that.
But I think you do need diversification of capital across.
It becomes a currency issue, if I may introduce that thought.
If we are doing trade with China and we are doing trade with
Russia, and they are getting dollars back, they are going to
look for the highest investment asset that they can put that
into.
And in many cases, it is going to wind up being things that
are not linked to treasuries. They are not going to buy
treasuries.
Mr. Garrett. So you also agree, from their comments, that
they probably have other interests other than economic. They
have political issues, as well.
Mr. Farrell. I would love to have a self-dependent,
independent United States.
Mr. Garrett. Yes. And just a clarification. I think it was
Mr. Green, but maybe not--someone made the point with regard to
the nature of the defaults that are out there and the fact that
we have all the 30-year fix. That is what everybody wants and
that sort of thing, and they are sort of better for various
reasons.
But generally speaking, the default rates that we are
looking at right now, is it not something like 80 percent or 88
percent of the defaults that you are looking at are in the 30-
year fixed marketplace?
Mr. Farrell. That is because the vast amount of our assets
are 30-year fixed--
Ms. Wachter. But the fixed-rate mortgages have lower--
Mr. Garrett. So then, basically--
Ms. Wachter. If I may say so, the fixed-rate mortgage
rates, all else being equal, have a lower rate of default.
Mr. Garrett. How can that be? What is the percentage?
Ms. Wachter. A lower rate of default. But as we just heard
from Mr. Farrell, they comprise a very large part of the
market.
Mr. Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Dorfman. Yes. If I may?
Mr. Garrett. Sure.
Mr. Dorfman. Investors everywhere ought to responsibly
review their holdings and rebalance, or even enter or exit
markets completely as they see fit, in their own self-interest.
Mr. Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Dorfman. One. And so in your example, China, Russia,
whoever it may be--and we hold no brief for anyone for or
against them--whatever they may be, they are very likely not
suicidal. And the idea, if that is the idea, of a rapid-fire
wholesale dumping-off of a portfolio would be suicidal. Its
value would plummet, and that becomes a very problematical
scenario.
Mr. Garrett. Sure.
Mr. Dorfman. I thank you very much.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
Chairman Miller of California. I want to thank the
witnesses. You are very, very wise in what you have said. You
are educated. You spoke from your heart. I think we have come
away with something I have believed all along, that we have to
do something to correct the problem. This economy is not going
to start to turn until we correct the housing problem.
If you just could put that sector back to work again, the
unemployment rate would be well below an acceptable rate. And
the problem that many have and they do not want to accept is
that GSEs have done poorly but they are doing better than the
private sector as far as default rates. They just happen to be
the large elephant in the marketplace. They have the largest
holdings.
I agree with you. We need to move forward with something
that is very thoughtful. We need to not have a knee-jerk
reaction. Whatever we do, we need to do it right, do it the
first time. We need to create stability in the marketplace,
confidence where people do not assume that their house is going
to be worth less next year than this year.
We have to do something to stop these foreclosures being
thrown to the marketplace, further driving the value of homes
down and creating just unrest out there. I know a lot of
builders are having problems because their appraisals are
coming back with liquidation values rather than completion
values, and it is killing them as far as being able to get
loans.
That concludes our hearing. The Chair notes that some
members may have additional questions for the panel--and I want
to thank you for your time on that again--which they may wish
to submit in writing. Without objection, the hearing record
will remain open for 30 days for members to submit written
questions to these witnesses and to place their responses in
the record.
At this point, the hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 13, 2011

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

