- HAS TSA MET THE DEADLINE TO PROVIDE EXPEDITED SCREENING TO MILITARY SERVICE MEMBERS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HAS TSA MET THE DEADLINE TO PROVIDE EXPEDITED SCREENING TO MILITARY

SERVICE MEMBERS?
=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 11, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-104

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
79-846                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Peter T. King, New York, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Daniel E. Lungren, California        Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Henry Cuellar, Texas
Gus M. Bilirakis, Florida            Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Paul C. Broun, Georgia               Laura Richardson, California
Candice S. Miller, Michigan          Danny K. Davis, Illinois
Tim Walberg, Michigan                Brian Higgins, New York
Chip Cravaack, Minnesota             Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Joe Walsh, Illinois                  Hansen Clarke, Michigan
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Ben Quayle, Arizona                  Kathleen C. Hochul, New York
Scott Rigell, Virginia               Janice Hahn, California
Billy Long, Missouri                 Ron Barber, Arizona
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Robert L. Turner, New York
Michael J. Russell, Staff Director/Chief Counsel
Kerry Ann Watkins, Senior Policy Director
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

Mike Rogers, Alabama, Chairman
Daniel E. Lungren, California        Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Tim Walberg, Michigan                Danny K. Davis, Illinois
Chip Cravaack, Minnesota             Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Joe Walsh, Illinois, Vice Chair      Ron Barber, Arizona
Robert L. Turner, New York           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York (Ex              (Ex Officio)
Officio)
Amanda Parikh, Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Deputy Chief Clerk
Vacant, Minority Subcommittee Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Alabama, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security.......................................................     1
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security........................................     9
The Honorable Chip Cravaack, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Minnesota.........................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Christopher McLaughlin, Assistant Administrator for Security
Operations, Transportation Security Administration, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     2
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
Mr. Todd M. Rosenblum, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Homeland Defense and Americas' Security Affairs,
U.S. Department of Defense:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

HAS TSA MET THE DEADLINE TO PROVIDE EXPEDITED SCREENING TO MILITARY
SERVICE MEMBERS?

----------

Wednesday, July 11, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Rogers, Walberg, Cravaack, Turner,
Jackson Lee, and Barber.
Mr. Rogers. The Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee
on Transportation Security will come to order. The meeting
today is to examine TSA's implementation of Public Law 112-86,
the Risk-Based Security Screening for Members of the Armed
Forces Act. I would like to thank everyone for being here, and
thank our witnesses for taking the time to be here, and also to
prepare your opening statements. I know it is not something
that you just do automatically. So I appreciate that.
Last May, my good friend from Mr. Minnesota, Mr. Cravaack,
introduced a bill directing TSA, in consultation with the
Department of Defense, to implement expedited screening
procedures for members of the military traveling in uniform
through U.S. airports. The bill made its way through regular
order and was signed into law by the President in January.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to hear from TSA and DOD on
what actions have been taken to meet the 6-month deadline in
the law, which fell on July 2. I commend Mr. Cravaack for his
leadership on this issue, for his distinguished service in the
U.S. Navy, and his continued efforts to support our troops.
At this time, I would like to yield the rest of my time for
an opening statement to Mr. Cravaack for any comments he would
like to make.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, while
I am glad to see some of the preliminary steps that have been
taken, I would like to refer to the legislation itself that was
signed by the President. It reads, ``Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this act, the Assistant
Secretary shall--'' now in military jargon that means will;
there is no compromise--``implement the plan required by this
act.'' One hundred eighty days after enactment was July 2 of
this year. The bill didn't restrict the plan to three airports.
It is tied to expedited security screening for all members of
the Armed Forces at all times and all airports. We need to have
this implemented wherever our servicemembers are flying.
Just last week, I spoke to a servicemember returning from
the battlefields in Afghanistan. The member was asked to strip
search down to his--basically, his boots, T-shirt, and without
a belt, holding up his britches, and in his stocking feet to go
through security after returning back from defending our
country. I spoke to another servicemember a few weeks before
that. Same situation.
We have spoken about the consistency of TSA procedures in
earlier hearings, but this is now happening after the law was
passed by Congress and signed by the President of the United
States.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about the
failure of implementation of this plan, how it will be fully
implemented, and who will be held accountable if it is not done
in what this body considers a timely manner. I consider it in
violation of the law. I look forward to hearing the corrective
actions, and I do not have to remind you our troops deserve
this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Ranking Member is in
another meeting, hearing right now. She is on her way. When she
gets here, we will go to her opening statement. But in the mean
time, we will go ahead and get our witnesses to summarize their
opening statements. I would recommend to other Members that
they can submit written statements for the record.
Our first witness is Mr. Christopher McLaughlin. He is the
assistant administrator for security operations at TSA. Prior
to his employment to this position, Mr. McLaughlin was the
federal security director at Denver International and Fort
Collins-Loveland Airports. Before joining TSA in 2009, Mr.
McLaughlin was senior director and director of station
operations for Frontier Airlines. The Chairman now recognizes
Mr. McLaughlin for 5 minutes to summarize his testimony.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER MC LAUGHLIN, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR
FOR SECURITY OPERATIONS, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. McLaughlin. Good afternoon, Chairman Rogers,
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify about the Transportation Security
Administration's efforts to implement the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act.
As this subcommittee is aware, TSA is taking steps to
employ risk-based, intelligence-driven measures to deter
attacks and reduce vulnerabilities to our transportation
systems. We have learned and continue to learn where and how we
can modify procedures without compromising security, and we are
transforming TSA as a result. Expediting screening for U.S.
military personnel is part of TSA's larger initiative to move
away from the one-size-fits-all construct that was introduced
after 9/11.
With more than 10,000 veterans making up nearly 23 percent
of our TSO workforce, TSA recognizes the trustworthiness of our
servicemen and women. We know that they pose little risk to
aviation security, and we are dedicated to doing everything we
can to meet the needs of U.S. military personnel when they
travel by air.
TSA has met the requirements of the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act. At airport
checkpoints Nation-wide, U.S. military personnel in uniform,
whether traveling on official orders or not, are offered
expedited screening, including the ability to leave shoes or
boots on, as well as other screening courtesies that
significantly reduce the likelihood that they will receive a
patdown or other additional screening procedures. When military
members do alarm, those alarms are resolved with modified, less
invasive procedures.
With regard to family members, they may obtain gate passes
to accompany departing troops or to meet their loved ones when
they come home. Additionally, in consultation with DOD, TSA now
offers TSA PreCheck benefits to active-duty servicemen and
women flying out of Reagan National and Seattle International
Airports as part of an initial proof of concept. Of note with
PreCheck, eligible servicemembers do not need to be in uniform
or on official travel to take advantage of this initiative.
This is currently a card-based system; however, TSA and the
DOD are considering transitioning to a list-based model before
implementation of this initiative. We believe this approach
will best enable eligible servicemembers to receive expedited
screening at all PreCheck airports system-wide.
In addition to expedited screening efforts, I would like to
take a moment to familiarize the subcommittee with other ways
TSA is assisting our U.S. military personnel. Since February
2005, TSA has partnered with DOD and the military services to
facilitate the screening of injured and wounded servicemembers.
Without sacrificing security, TSA provides high-quality service
to our injured military heroes as they travel through the
Nation's airports, including nearly 4,000 severely injured
servicemembers during this year alone. Information about this
initiative is posted on our public website.
Federal security directors and their staff also provide any
assistance that may be required when an honor guard detail
escorts a fallen servicemember at an airport, such as escorting
them through secured areas or cargo facilities, or facilitating
expedited access to these areas. In May 2011, TSA implemented
new procedures to reduce screening requirements for U.S.
veterans and their escorts traveling on Honor Flight Network
flights to Washington, DC to visit the war memorials that are
dedicated to honor their service.
TSA employees regularly go above and beyond their required
duties to honor and support the military. Some examples include
officers volunteering countless hours at their local USO to
assist servicemembers and their families. At another airport,
officers donated their time and materials and handcrafted
several Quilts of Valor that were donated to hospitalized
servicemembers.
While these and countless other actions by TSA officers do
not constitute official TSA initiatives, we are very proud of
our workforce that dedicates extra effort to recognizing the
service of our military personnel.
Finally, I want to thank Deputy Assistant Secretary
Rosenblum and our other partners in the DOD. I appreciate the
balance they have demonstrated through this collaborative
effort. It is clear that they share our desire to expedite the
travel experience for servicemen and women, while at the same
time recognize that no one benefits if we make a move in haste
that inadvertently compromises the freedom that our military
has fought so hard to protect, particularly over the past 10
years.
Chairman Rogers, the rest of the subcommittee, I thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today, and I look
forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McLaughlin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher McLaughlin
July 11, 2012
Good morning Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Jackson Lee, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the efforts of the Transportation
Security Administration (TSA) to implement the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act.
As has been shared with this subcommittee in the past, we are
taking a number of steps to employ risk-based, intelligence-driven
measures to deter and prevent terrorist attacks and to reduce
vulnerabilities to the Nation's transportation systems. We've learned
more about where and how we can modify procedures without compromising
security, and we are transforming TSA and how it accomplishes its
mission through risk-based security initiatives. Our efforts to
expedite screening for U.S. Armed Forces personnel are part of this
larger initiative to move away from the one-size-fits-all construct
that was introduced after 9/11.
the requirements of the military screening act
Signed into law on January 3, 2012, the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act calls for expedited
security screening of uniformed members of the U.S. Armed Forces who
present official orders for air travel. Specifically, the Act requires
TSA, in consultation with the Department of Defense (DoD), to develop
and implement a plan to provide expedited security screening services
for a member of the U.S. Armed Forces and, to the extent possible, any
accompanying family member, if the U.S. Armed Forces member, while in
uniform, presents documentation indicating official orders for air
transportation from a primary airport. In developing the plan, TSA is
required to consider leveraging existing security screening models used
to reduce passenger wait times; establish standard guidelines for
screening military uniform items, including combat boots; and
incorporate any new screening protocols into an existing trusted
passenger program, credential, or system that uses biometric technology
and other applicable technologies to verify the identity of individuals
who travel by air.
expedited screening available to u.s. armed forces
TSA recognizes that members of the U.S. Armed Forces, who are
trusted to protect the security and values of America with their lives,
pose a lower risk to aviation security. In fact, TSA is proud to count
many uniformed service members among our employees. Over 10,000
veterans--or approximately 23 percent of the Transportation Security
Officer (TSO) workforce--serve on TSA's front line securing our
Nation's transportation sector, and they take pride in both their past
and current service to our Nation. Our commitment to recruiting and
hiring veterans continues, and TSA is working collaboratively with DoD,
veterans groups, and other agencies towards that end. Similarly, TSA is
dedicated to doing everything it can to accommodate members of our U.S.
Armed Forces when they are traveling by air.
TSA has long provided expedited screening for members of our
military. At airport checkpoints Nation-wide, U.S. service personnel in
uniform with proper identification, whether traveling on official
orders or not, are not required to remove their shoes or boots unless
they alarm our technology. Other screening courtesies that we extend to
U.S. military personnel traveling in uniform reduce the likelihood that
they will receive a pat-down or other additional screening. In
addition, family members may obtain gate passes to accompany departing
troops or meet their loved ones when they come home. TSA also expedites
screening for Honor Flight veterans, and partners with the DoD to
expedite screening of wounded warriors.
Additionally, as part of our intelligence-driven, risk-based
approach to security, TSA now offers TSA PreCheck
TM

expedited screening benefits to military personnel (including active
duty, National Guard, the Reserve Components, and active and reserve
service members of the U.S. Coast Guard) at Ronald Reagan Washington
National Airport and Seattle-Tacoma International Airport as part of an
initial proof of concept. All U.S. Armed Forces service members who
possess a valid Common Access Card (CAC) are eligible. Eligible service
members may also use the TSA PreCheck
TM
lane by presenting
their valid CAC to the TSA Travel Document Checker (TDC) along with
their boarding pass. By scanning the CAC, the TSA TDC is able to verify
the traveler's status as a U.S. service member in good standing with
DoD. Upon verification, service members may enjoy expedited screening
benefits such as not being required to remove shoes, light outerwear/
jackets, or belts, or to remove 3-1-1 compliant bags or laptops from
carry-on bags. Eligible service members do not need to be in uniform or
on official travel to take advantage of TSA PreCheck
TM

benefits.
This initiative holds the potential to significantly enhance the
travel experience for members of the U.S. Armed Forces at all
participating airports. By expanding TSA PreCheck
TM
to
members of the U.S. Armed Forces, TSA is able to focus its resources on
higher-risk and unknown passengers. As always, TSA will continue to
incorporate random and unpredictable security measures throughout the
security process.
As we move forward, TSA and DoD intend to transition from a
military ID card-based model towards a list-based boarding pass
issuance model. With this approach, eligible service members will be
issued a unique Known Traveler Number by DoD for use when traveling,
consistent with other TSA PreCheck
TM
populations. Along with
name, date of birth, and gender, the Known Traveler Number will be used
when making an airline reservation to identify the service members as
TSA PreCheck
TM
eligible travelers. TSA and DoD believe this
approach will best enable eligible service members to receive expedited
screening at all TSA PreCheck
TM
airports. Although there are
a number of challenges with implementing a list-based model, TSA and
DoD are working closely to determine next steps as well as time lines
for screening members of the military through all TSA
PreCheck
TM
lanes.
additional initiatives to assist members of the armed forces
TSA employees regularly go above and beyond their required duties
to honor and support the military. We are proud that our workforce
dedicates extra effort to recognizing the service of military
personnel.
Since February 2005, TSA has partnered with DoD and the military
services to facilitate the screening of injured and wounded service
members through the Military Severely Injured Joint Support Operations
Center program. Without sacrificing security standards, TSA is able to
provide high-quality service to our injured military heroes as they
travel through the Nation's airports. Under the program, TSA has
assisted nearly 4,000 severely injured service members during the
current fiscal year, and we continue to promote awareness of the
program through military hospitals, DoD, the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, and other veterans' support and service
organizations.
TSA Federal Security Directors and their staff also work closely
with military and military-contracted personnel and airport operators
to provide assistance that may be required when an Honor Guard Detail
escorts a fallen service member at an airport, provides appropriate
honors, and participates in the transfer of the deceased service member
from the aircraft to the hearse, another aircraft, or other ground
transportation. Air carriers have been instructed to provide a Secure
Identification Display Area-badged escort to accompany the military or
civilian escort and Honor Guard Detail to the aircraft while the
service member's remains are unloaded. TSA provides an escort in
instances where an air carrier is unable to do so. When the escort or
Honor Guard Detail arrive plane-side without previously undergoing
checkpoint screening, TSA will make arrangements to screen the
individuals at an appropriate location, such as the jetbridge, cargo
facility, or secure area.
In addition, the Honor Flight Network transports U.S. veterans and
their escorts to Washington, DC, to visit the war memorials built and
dedicated to honor their service. With the assistance of U.S. aircraft
operators, the Honor Flight Network facilitates flights from around the
Nation that arrive at airports in the National Capital Region (BWI,
DCA, IAD). In May 2011, TSA implemented new procedures for passengers
on Honor Flight Network flights. These new procedures reduce, but do
not eliminate, screening requirements on Honor Flight Network flights.
TSA employees have devoted significant time and effort toward
assisting military personnel, and a few examples include the following:

TSA personnel at Mobile Regional Airport (MOB) and Dothan
Regional Airport in Alabama used their personal time to
accomplish a project suggested by members of the Employee
Advisory Council whereby they donated the materials for and
hand-crafted seven unique ``Quilts of Valor'' that were
presented to soldiers hospitalized at the Brooke Army Medical
Center.

On two separate occasions, a Lead Transportation Security
Officer (LTSO) at MOB discovered several service members
settling in to sleep in the airport lobby after their flight
was canceled. The LTSO and her family provided the soldiers
with food and lodging, as well as transportation to and from
the airport.

A TSA personnel member at Chicago O'Hare International
Airport has been a United Service Organizations (USO) volunteer
for the past 7 years, and was awarded the President Volunteer
Service Award in 2008 by former President George W. Bush for
volunteering 1,000 hours in 1 year at the USO.

TSA participated in the groundbreaking for a new USO
facility opening this Fall at Tampa International Airport
(TPA), which will be a welcome addition to the support provided
to the thousands of military personnel and their families who
travel through TPA monthly. These stories and dozens of others
are reflective of TSA's efforts to support the military both at
and outside of the checkpoint.
conclusion
TSA will continue its efforts to enhance the travel experience for
soldiers and their families throughout the United States. Chairman
Rogers, Ranking Member Jackson Lee, I thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today, and I look forward to answering your
questions.

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. McLaughlin. Our next witness is
Mr. Todd Rosenblum. Mr. Rosenblum currently serves as the
principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for Homeland
Defense and Americas' Security Affairs. Prior to his
appointment, Mr. Rosenblum was deputy under secretary of
intelligence for plans, policy, and performance management at
the Department of Homeland Security from February 2009 to May
2011. He has more than 20 years of political policy and
legislative experience in National security affairs.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Rosenblum for 5 minutes to
summarize his testimony.

STATEMENT OF TODD M. ROSENBLUM, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND AMERICAS'
SECURITY AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, other
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to address you today on the partnership between the
Department of Defense and the Transportation Security
Administration on the expedited processing of U.S. military
personnel through our Nation's airports. In order to maximize
the time for questions, my opening remarks will be brief, and I
respectfully ask that my full statement be made a part of the
record.
Mr. Rogers. It will.
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you. We are enormously grateful to the
members of the U.S. Armed Forces for what they do at home and
abroad for the Nation. Expedited screening is one small but
tangible way of recognizing and thanking U.S. military
personnel for their service and sacrifice to our Nation. We
deeply appreciate our strong and active partnership with TSA on
this matter, as we do the Members of this subcommittee. We
appreciate TSA's recognition that members of the U.S. Armed
Forces are entrusted to protect the security of this Nation
with their lives, and therefore are eligible for expedited
airport screening.
TSA is responsible for the screening of all passengers at
our Nation's airports, and we support its leadership in this
area. DOD and TSA have had a long history of working together
to establish measures to expedite screening for U.S. military
personnel. TSA has long expedited the screening process for
Honor Flight veterans, and partners with DOD to expedite
screening for Wounded Warriors and their families. Maximizing
the travel experience of our Wounded Warriors and military
families is well recognized and deeply appreciated by the
Department of Defense.
In November 2011, TSA and DOD began a pilot project to scan
the CAC card of U.S. military personnel traveling from Monterey
Peninsula Airport, California. Today, based on the results of
that pilot, TSA is further enhancing the screening experience
for our military by offering PreCheck, expedited screening
benefits to U.S. military personnel at Ronald Reagan Washington
National Airport and Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.
Expedited screening of U.S. military personnel at these
airports is in a proof-of-concept phase, and we look forward to
working with TSA in evaluating whether this program can be
broadened to include appropriate civilian employees and others
at the Department of Defense.
DOD is fully committed to continuing its long-standing
partnership with DHS, and TSA in particular, to strengthen
aviation security, while significantly enhancing the travel
experience whenever possible for our servicemembers. This is
part of DOD's broader partnership with DHS to strengthen
already unprecedented levels of personnel, technology, and
infrastructure committed to security around the country.
As we continue to work with TSA on the expedited screening
of DOD personnel, we want to ensure that TSA believes this
program appropriately balances risk mitigation with overall
aviation security. We support TSA's deliberate, careful
approach to managing risk. TSA has proven to be a terrific
partner in this endeavor, and I see no reason why we will not
succeed moving forward.
Chairman Rogers, other distinguished Members of the
subcommittee, I commend you for your leadership, continued
interest, and support to our Nation's aviation security and the
U.S. Armed Forces. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rosenblum follows:]
Prepared Statement of Todd M. Rosenblum
July 11, 2012
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Jackson Lee, distinguished Members
of the subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to address you today
on the partnership between the Department of Defense (DoD) and the
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS's) Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) to process U.S. military personnel through the
screening process more quickly.
We are enormously grateful to the members of the U.S. Armed Forces
for what they do at home and abroad for the Nation. Expediting
screening is a small, but tangible way of recognizing and thanking U.S.
military personnel for their service and sacrifice to our Nation.
Programs such as this also have a practical benefit: They
strengthen aviation security by separating out lower-risk travelers,
such as members of the U.S. Armed Forces, thereby allowing TSA to focus
its resources on those who present a higher risk. We appreciate TSA's
recognition that members of the U.S. Armed Forces are entrusted to
protect the security and values of U.S. citizens with their lives and,
as such, pose little comparative risk to aviation security.
Since its inception, TSA has worked in partnership with DoD to
establish measures to expedite screening for U.S. military personnel.
For example, U.S. military personnel in uniform with a military
identification card are not required to remove their boots or shoes
unless they set off an alarm. TSA expedites the screening process for
Honor Flight veterans, and partners with DoD to expedite screening for
wounded warriors and their families. The Honor Flight Network
organization transports veterans to Washington, DC, to visit their war
memorials.
In November 2011, TSA and DoD began a pilot project to expand TSA's
PreCheck
TM
initiative to include U.S. military personnel
traveling from Monterey Peninsula Airport, California. ``Active duty''
U.S. military personnel in good standing--whether in uniform or not--of
the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, and ``active
drilling'' members of the National Guard and Reserves departing on
domestic flights from Monterey Peninsula Airport were allowed to
present their valid ``common access card'' to the TSA Travel Document
Checker in the TSA PreCheck
TM
lane for expedited screening.
A ``common access card'' is a DoD-issued smart card that is used
for identification and is machine-readable. This card contains
information that can be verified through a central employment status
database and is in compliance with Homeland Security Presidential
Directive 12 (HSPD-12), ``Policies for a Common Identification Standard
for Federal Employees and Contractors'' (August 27, 2004), which
established a mandatory, U.S. Government-wide standard for secure and
reliable forms of identification issued by the Federal Government to
its employees and contractors. Pursuant to HSPD-12, prior to issuing a
``common access card,'' DoD verifies the identity of U.S. military
personnel and screens their records against such databases as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI's) National Criminal Information
Center (NCIC). By using databases such as the FBI's NCIC, DoD is able
to screen out applicants with criminal records, as well as known
terrorists. In turn, these verification and screening steps provide a
level of assurance to TSA that U.S. military personnel possessing a
``common access card'' do not pose an inherent threat to aviation
security.
Through an agreement with DoD, a TSA Travel Document Checker can
scan a U.S. military member's ``common access card'' using a special
card reader and verify in real-time that travelers are members of the
U.S. Armed Forces and in good standing with DoD. As there is no
information storage capability on the equipment used to verify U.S.
military personnel's status, once their ``common access card'' is
scanned and TSA determines whether the traveler is eligible for
expedited screening, their personal information is automatically
erased.
I want to thank Congress for keeping up the momentum on this
matter. Just 2 months after Congress passed the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act (Public Law 112-86), TSA
and DoD announced an initiative to expand TSA's PreCheck
TM

initiative at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport to include
``active duty'' and ``active drilling'' members of the U.S. Armed
Forces.
Eligible service members do not need to be in uniform to take
advantage of TSA PreCheck
TM
benefits, and family members
ages 12 and under can process through expedited screening as well, as
they already receive modified screening procedures at airports Nation-
wide.
Today, TSA also offers TSA PreCheck
TM
expedited
screening benefits to U.S. military personnel at Ronald Reagan
Washington National Airport and the Seattle-Tacoma International
Airport. We look forward to working with TSA on the expansion of this
program to other airports, as it becomes available.
DoD is fully committed to continuing its long-standing partnership
with DHS and TSA to strengthen aviation security while significantly
enhancing the travel experience whenever possible for our service
members. This is part of DoD's broader partnership with DHS to
strengthen already unprecedented levels of personnel, technology, and
infrastructure committed to security around the country.
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Jackson Lee, distinguished Members
of the subcommittee: I commend you for your leadership, continued
interest, and support to our Nation's aviation security and the U.S.
Armed Forces. I look forward to working with you in the future.

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, sir. Right on cue, we have time to
recognize the Ranking Member, my friend and colleague from
Texas, for any opening statement that she may have.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. To the
witnesses, again to acknowledge Mr. Barber for his presence
here today and certainly Members that we join in with, Mr.
Miller--Mr. Walberg, I apologize, I am looking. You are not Mr.
Miller.
Mr. Walberg. We all look the same.
Mr. Rogers. Everybody from Michigan looks the same.
Ms. Jackson Lee. See, that was a good one. The great State
of Michigan. Mr. Cravaack, of course, thank you for your
leadership on this. I am pleased to be able to join with my
colleagues in discussing an important issue that there should
be no divide on, and that is can we move quickly for the
expedited screening for our military servicemembers?
There is not one of us that have gone through America's
airports and not felt a sense of pride, not boastful pride, but
pride of respect as we watch men and women of the United States
military leave for their overseas posts or come home to warm
and welcoming families. It equally reminds us of those that
have gone and that were not able to come home.
I am pleased that TSA and the Department of Defense are
joining us to discuss how the Federal Government can continue
to make significant contributions to improve the lives of the
men and women who serve and protect the United States of
America. I have long championed intergovernmental
collaboration, and I am pleased that today we will receive
testimony about efforts underway to strengthen collaboration
between DOD and DHS to support our servicemen and women. While
it is important to pay tribute to those who serve in the
military, our actions must also honor their sacrifice.
Just as an aside, Mr. Chairman, just almost a year ago I
passed legislation that had 419 votes to 0 that would welcome
home--collaborate with our local communities to welcome home
our returning combat veterans. We still have the opportunity to
do that. We cannot waver on the front to ensure that our
actions speak louder than our words.
Today, I look forward to our dialogue regarding ways we can
support our heroes by providing small, but necessary
accommodations to our servicemembers and veterans as they pass
through our Nation's airports. It is also important to
recognize TSA for its contributions to assisting our veterans.
For example, Administrator Pistole worked with the Honor Flight
Network, which is a system established to enable our veterans
the opportunity to visit the Nation's capital to tour their
memorials, to ensure their screening was conducted in a
dignified manner. We also know that many of our TSO officers,
many of our supervisors, many of our heads of our various
airports under TSA are in fact returning veterans or those who
actively served just recently.
Further, TSA has initiated the Wounded Warrior Program,
which includes modified screening policies at the airport
checkpoint to ensure that military personnel and veterans who
are wounded when they answered their country's call to duty are
screened with the dignity and respect they deserve.
Finally, I would be remiss if I failed to mention that
veterans comprise about one-quarter of the TSA workforce, as I
indicated earlier. At our hearing yesterday, we heard from the
other side of the aisle regarding their desire to cut the
workforce by some 30 percent. According to Mr. McLaughlin's
testimony, TSA employs over 10,000 veterans. One of the
witnesses indicated that he was prepared to accept the
leadership of the men and women on the ground, including
Administrator Pistole, in the use of the manpower and woman
power that they have. We all commit to it being efficient and,
of course, effective. I would encourage my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle to be mindful that a cut of 30 percent
to the TSA workforce would result in 3,000 veterans who
answered the call to duty following 9/11 being back on the
streets looking for work.
I hope that TSA's implementation of these policies for the
military and veterans signals its willingness to move forward
toward the kind of commonsense screening practices that
Democratic Members of the committee have long called for. I
remain convinced that TSA can also institute screening
practices that ensure the respectful treatment of all
passengers--we have recently, of course, addressed the question
of seniors and children under 12--but all treatment of
passengers with disabilities without compromising security.
I commend Administrator Pistole and his administration for
these efforts to reexamine screening protocols. As such, I
would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Chairman, to just
mention 10 positive changes initiated by TSA at our checkpoints
that have been enhanced by Administrator Pistole and the
workforce of men and women committed to serving their country.
Screening modifications for children under the age of 12,
which ensure several non-intrusive steps are taken by TSOs
while screening children at the checkpoint.
No. 2, screening modifications for the elderly that allow
TSOs to respectfully screen the elderly, particularly those who
may rely on mobility devices such as wheelchairs and walkers.
No. 3, screening modifications for passengers with certain
medical conditions. This process allows passengers to
communicate a sensitive medical condition that should be
considered by a TSO during the screening process.
No. 4, the establishment and expansion of expedited
screening service known as PreCheck for passengers who
voluntarily undergo a background check administered by DHS like
our Chairman.
No. 6, TSA has also implemented a risk-based screening
initiative just known as the Known Crewmember Program, designed
to serve pilots, upon verification of employment, with an
expedited screening, and allowing TSOs to place greater
emphasis on the unknown threats at the checkpoints. We look
forward to flight crew having that ability.
No. 6, modified screening procedures for military members
traveling in uniform that honor our U.S. military personnel by
allowing them to undergo flexible screening. We are here today
to make sure that works.
No. 7, TSA's integrated use of PreCheck lanes by active
military personnel when they are not in uniform.
No. 8, TSA, in partnership with DOD, has instituted a
Wounded Warrior Program where a severely injured servicemember,
family member, or other representative can contact the Federal
Government and obtain assistance.
No. 9, TSA has reduced screening requirements for Honor
Flight Networks.
No. 10, TSA continues to work on developing and deploying
non-intrusive technology.
So as our veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan return home,
let's work together to ensure that they truly have a welcome
face, a welcome Nation, and a welcome respect for their service
as they travel through the Nation's airports.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentlelady. The Chairman now
recognizes himself for the first series of questions.
Mr. McLaughlin, right now active-duty servicemembers can
only use PreCheck at Reagan Airport and Seattle-Tacoma Airport.
When will we expect these screening services and this option to
be available at all PreCheck locations?
Mr. McLaughlin. Thank you, sir. So currently in the last
couple months we have been offering PreCheck for military
members at Reagan, and more recently at Seattle. Just a couple
weeks ago we opened a second concourse at Reagan National for
active-duty military on the north pier at that airport. We are
working with the DOD on what we think is the right solution,
including a list-based way of interpreting the ID of the
military man or woman. That is really what is driving our time
line. We expect to move forward with full implementation to all
PreCheck cities by the end of calendar year 2013, but we
certainly are moving as quickly as we can to speed that process
up wherever possible.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. Mr. Rosenblum, you know, one of the
concerns that was raised when we first talked about this was
the terrorist attack in Texas, where the major killed several
of our soldiers, and he was obviously active-duty military. My
understanding is that you all are taking some measures to make
sure that not just anybody in the military, but people who have
certain billets and have certain screening will be put into
this pre-screen option. Can you tell me more about how that
will work?
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can go into it in
a little bit of detail, but I am afraid part of the response
will have to come in another closed setting or we will get back
to you with it.
Mr. Rogers. That is completely fine.
Mr. Rosenblum. As just, sort-of, a basic on the approach,
is the relationship we have with TSA, is we are providing a
system by which TSA is able to positively identify that the
person who is coming to the airport is that person. There are
requirements by which one has this what we call the CAC card in
DOD. But there are also circumstances by which military
personnel, if they are engaged in behaviors of concern in a
general term, whether it is criminal, whether--it is for
whatever circumstance, that would not necessarily preclude them
from continuing to have their CAC card unless they are confined
to their barracks, et cetera. We would be reliant, we of course
defer to TSA, and I know that TSA has multiple layers to its
screening process. So our role in this is to be able to provide
information that confirms that the person who says who they are
at the airport is in fact that person. Then we rely on our
colleagues at TSA with its other means to scrutinize
individuals. Certainly military personnel, if there is
information to indicate that they either should be sent to
secondary for screening or should not be allowed on a plane,
that would be based on TSA's information.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Cravaack's bill requires
TSA to submit a report to Congress on its new screening
procedures for our military personnel. We haven't seen that
report yet. When do you expect that to come to this committee,
Mr. McLaughlin?
Mr. McLaughlin. Sir, I reviewed a draft of that report
actually on Monday of this week, and we expect to have that
final draft issued here within the next 30 days.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Mr. Rosenblum, have you got any feedback
from members of the military about how they feel about the
opportunity to participate in this PreCheck program, or do they
really know much about it yet?
Mr. Rosenblum. First, where we have received feedback, the
feedback is positive, and there truly is appreciation, both
sort of at the departmental level this collaboration, as well
as, Mr. Cravaack, for your leadership on this matter. I would
say, though, in speaking in broader terms, we are still in an
early phase in terms of marketing and awareness of the program.
I had the opportunity to visit the TSA officials at Reagan
National last week, and they were discussing with me the sort
of rate of flow and awareness of personnel, military personnel
at this point. There is clearly room for more awareness. That
is something that we have to work on at the Department of
Defense. We certainly expect that to occur over time. But there
is absolutely appreciation to the clear benefit that our
servicemen and women receive going through the PreCheck system.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Yesterday we had a hearing, we talked
about the PreCheck program, and categories of people who should
be added to it logically from a series of experts. One
suggestion made was that anybody who has got a top-secret
clearance, or some sort of high-level security clearance
certainly would be somebody that I would think would get into
that. I would think any general officer in the military would
be in that category.
Mr. McLaughlin, do you know of any efforts to try to reach
out to those kind of categories of people?
Mr. McLaughlin. Sir, we are working to grow populations
really across the board. Really of interest recently, we have
added Federal judges into our program and are looking at other
Federal partners as well to add in based on some of the
criteria that you have mentioned.
Mr. Rogers. Excellent.
With that, I yield to my friend and colleague, the Ranking
Member from Texas, for any questions she may have.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me take a moment of personal privilege
and acknowledge, as I begin to ask the questions, I wanted to
acknowledge her before, but just reinforces the service of our
men and women in the United States military, and just say thank
you to retired colonel in the Air Force Ann Testa, who serves
as our Federal Security Director for the George Bush
Intercontinental Airport in Houston, Texas, which happens to be
in my Congressional district. Colonel Testa did not know that I
would be saying this, but in particular, Mr. Chairman, Ann
Testa was in the Pentagon on 9/11 and saw the loss of many of
her fellow soldiers, Air Force personnel, and others, and was
injured during that time. We owe her a great debt of gratitude.
I know that she has some future plans. We are going to wish her
the very best for having left the service of our country in one
way, and began the service of her country in another way, and
having come through that horrific experience. Though she has
always told me she wants no accolades for that experience, for
there were those whose lives were lost on that day. I wanted to
make sure that she was in our record, and to thank her, among
many others.
Let me, Mr. McLaughlin, try to understand how you are
juxtaposing the existing procedures that TSA had for
individuals in the military on duty and not, and your work that
you are trying to do to meet the standards of this law that
uses the definition ``expedited''. You have a team studying it?
You have a task force? Are you meshing it in what you have?
Tell me what you are now doing.
Mr. McLaughlin. First of all, thank you for the recognition
for Ann Testa. I have had the personal opportunity to work
side-by-side with her on some projects, and she is an
incredible woman, incredible leader for TSA. With regard to our
evaluation of the law, certainly in the process we look very
closely at the tenets that were required and how we would
manage that across our system. The law requires us to implement
expedited screening in all priority airports across the country
based on a threshold of 10,000 passengers. For TSA, that
recommends about 362 airports. So we needed to find a way that
we could truly implement the law across the Nation. We looked
at our existing procedures, including the ability to leave
shoes and boots on and other courtesies that we extend that
greatly reduces the likelihood of a pat-down for servicemen and
women. We looked at our ability to facilitate family members
and the things that we are already doing with regard to escorts
through to meet returning servicemembers at their gate. We
considered those things and determined that with regard to
that, we were compliant with the law. Our intention has always
been to be compliant. But not only compliant, we want to
exceed, we want to do everything we can for the members of the
armed services.
So with PreCheck, to the extent we can, we are rolling that
system out across the country. We will be in 35 airports by the
end of the year. We are working closely with our partners in
the DOD to include members of the Armed Forces in each of those
airports. Truly, those airports represent the lion's share of
all commercial traffic out of the country in terms of volume of
passengers. So we think that we can be compliant by doing the
things that I mentioned previously, but we can exceed the
requirements by including active-duty servicemembers in every
PreCheck airport that we have.
Ms. Jackson Lee. What would it take, if you calculated 362
airports that are governed under the structure of this bill
that says 10,000 passengers, is it per day?
Mr. McLaughlin. Per year.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right, 10,000 passengers per year.
That is a small amount of passengers. I thought you were
talking about per day. So that is how you get 362. So then how
are you answering that question? There is a law. The
calculation suggests 362. How are you responding to that?
Mr. McLaughlin. So TSA believes that we are compliant with
the law based on the expedited processes that we have in place
for military members. We are trying to go beyond that by
providing PreCheck where we can. The law required us to use
existing Trusted Traveler programs where possible. For us, we
don't at this time anticipate rolling out PreCheck to those 362
airports just because it wouldn't be a break-even for us. We
wouldn't be able to provide the right level of service based on
volumes of people coming through. So we had to look at ways
outside of that Trusted Traveler program to be compliant with
the law. We couldn't depend on it. We wanted to utilize it to
the extent we could, but we couldn't depend on it exclusively
to be compliant with the law.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. So you think that you have
something in place at the 362 airports that would make you
compliant?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yes, ma'am. At every airport across the
country, active-duty servicemembers are allowed to leave their
shoes or boots on. Again, we apply a different set of--
different screening that I can't talk about in an open hearing,
but different procedures that we apply that does reduce their
exposure to pat-downs. Even in the off chance that an officer
does alarm, even in that instance we apply a modified
resolution that is less invasive than our traditional
resolution of an alarm.
Ms. Jackson Lee. If the Chairman would indulge me just for
a moment for Mr. Rosenblum, but Mr. McLaughlin, from your
reports back from your airports, have you found that you have
not offended the military, or you have offended them less, or
that that is working?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yes, ma'am. I mean my belief is that this
is working. We often hear anecdotes. In the business that I
work in, there are one-off anecdotes that we hear all too
frequently. But they are anecdotes. We screen between 1.7 and 2
million passengers every day of the year. With that volume of
people, we do receive accolades from the military. I reviewed a
number of praises from individuals that are thanking us for our
assistance to them and real recognition that TSA supports them.
The real strength that we have is that 23 percent of our
workforce that comes from the military. They have a true and
driving passion for the men and women that are serving our
country overseas today. It is not just their job, it is a true
passion for them.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Just quickly, Mr. Rosenblum, you indicated
that some aspects of the Chairman's question would have to be
classified. Are you in partnership with TSA on issues that
might pose a challenge with an individual wearing a uniform and
something untoward might occur? Are you in collaboration
because of the Cravaack legislation?
Mr. Rosenblum. We are in collaboration. We have been before
the legislation, obviously even more so now. What I would say
in terms of information about particular threats, there are--we
share that information. There are processes, there is
procedures. It is not only with our brethren at TSA, but it is
also with our colleagues at FBI.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I yield back at this time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cravaack [presiding]. Thank the gentlelady. The
Chairman will now recognize other Members of the subcommittee
for questions they may wish to ask the witnesses. In accordance
with our committee rules and practice, I recognize Members who
were present at the start of the hearing by seniority on the
subcommittee. Those coming in later will be recognized in order
of their arrival. I will recognize myself for the next 5
minutes.
First off, Mr. McLaughlin, thank you very much for the
initiatives that you have done for our Wounded Warriors, and
also for the Honor Flights. I have attended quite a few of
those Honor Flights, and it does make a difference, especially
for some of those that are in wheelchairs and trying to make
their way down the jetway. So I thank you very much for that.
I do have a question, sir, in regards to other than Seattle
and Washington Reagan, can you please tell me what the
difference would be from previous to the enactment of the bill
and to what it is today?
Mr. McLaughlin. As I have stated, we do believe that we
were compliant with the law before it was enacted. So to your
point, we have not taken other steps since the date that the
law was enacted, aside from the things that we are currently
doing. I will tell you that the work that we do is constantly
evolving, and we continually look at ways that we can further
refine our screening process.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. So what you are telling me is for a
majority of the airports throughout the United States you have
done nothing in regards to in accordance with the law the way
you interpreted it. Is that correct?
Mr. McLaughlin. I believe that we are compliant with the
law because of work that we were already doing.
Mr. Cravaack. Have we read the bill? The bill says right
here, it says in regards to the ``shall,'' that supposed to be
in compliance to showing military ID, in uniform, with orders.
Now, Mr. Rosenblum, you have asked--you said that you have been
trying to advertise the PreCheck program in DOD, is that
correct?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. Could we get copies for the record how you
have advertised it?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes. I will get back to you.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. I would appreciate that. Now, the bill
says here, to the extent possible for accompanying family
members if the member of the Armed Forces, while in uniform,
presents documentation indicating official orders for air
transportation departing from a primary airport as defined in
section 47102. Have you complied with that?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yes, sir, we believe that we have complied
with the requirements of the law. We spent a considerable
amount of time considering family members. Our whole premise
with risk-based security is to distinguish passengers based on
what we know about them. While intuitively you would believe
that spouses are inherently less risky because of their
association, we simply don't know enough about grown spouses
from a risk posture to make that determination. We have, I
would add, though----
Mr. Cravaack. I understand about spouses. I understand
about families.
Mr. McLaughlin. Okay.
Mr. Cravaack. But what I am talking about, the mission has
kind of creeped a little bit. We have not gone to exactly what
this says. Now, expedited screening, in the hearings that we
had, the intent of the bill was to have the servicemember be
able to exit the normal line, and I know we have discussed
this, but this was the intent in the hearings that we had, exit
the normal line so that person isn't--the servicemember
actually helps the rest of the passengers. Because chances are
in normal lines for screening they are going to alarm. Then
they have to go back through screening, take off their boots,
take off their blouse, take off their belts, and then pass
through screening again. Now, the bill specifically states
while in uniform, presents documentation indicating official
orders for air transportation departing from the primary
airport. That should be enough to suffice for identification.
Not any kind of special card or anything of that nature. So can
you tell me, Mr. Rosenblum, why are we requiring, was it, the
CAC card?
Mr. Rosenblum. Actually, sir, I will defer to my colleague
on the protocols. But the discussions and arrangements that we
have with TSA is to ensure that we are providing a positive
identification that the person who is saying they are a member
of the military is in fact that person and is a member of the
military.
Mr. Cravaack. I understand that. What does the bill say?
The bill. The signature right here is the President of the
United States. The terminology in here is called ``shall.''
According to this, while in uniform, presents documentation
indicating official orders for air transportation departing
from a primary airport. I don't see anything about a CAC card.
Mr. Rosenblum. Sir, what I can say to your point is that we
are working with the TSA in terms of the requirement. We are
the support entity in this case. As we have an arrangement
today, it is to ensure we are providing a positive
identification. The conclusion is it is through the biometric
card, the CAC card, that we do that.
Mr. Cravaack. Again, the bill states, the law signed by the
President of the United States, bottom signature, doesn't say
anything about a CAC card. It says presenting orders, ID. I can
get on any military base simply with an ID. How difficult--my
time has expired. How difficult is it, briefly, to forge a set
of orders?
Mr. Rosenblum. I will get back to you, you know, with an
answer on that question, sir. But I would say if you are
referring to paper orders, you know, my assumption is the
ability to forge a paper document is obviously far, far easier
to do than a biometric card.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. My time has expired. I will have to
yield at this time. I would like to recognize Mr. Barber for 5
minutes. I see Mr. Barber stepped out. We will go with--I will
yield to the Ranking Member.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. McLaughlin, the Risk-Based Security
Screening for Members of the Armed Forces Act, which was signed
into law on January 3 of this year, required TSA to develop and
implement a plan for providing expedited screening for a member
of the armed services if they were in uniform and presented
documentation indicating official orders for air
transportation. Under TSA's policies for screening members of
the armed services, do military members need to present
documentation indicating official orders for air transportation
to receive expedited screening? No. 2, does TSA provide for the
expedited screening of members of the armed services in
instances where they are not traveling for their duty? The
essence of this is: Are you doing more than, as much as, as you
believe meets the letter of the law?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yes, ma'am. So the answer is that we don't
require the orders. So in our belief in terms of interpreting
the law, we felt that we were going actually above the
requirements of the law by not requiring that of the
servicemember. In addition to that, many of our programs,
including the PreCheck program, allow access to the
servicemember whether or not they are on active orders, and in
fact whether or not they are in uniform. They can be in
civilian clothes and still participate in the program.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Cravaack. I yield to Mr. Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. McLaughlin,
approximately how many active-duty servicemembers have been
screened at the PreCheck checkpoint at Ronald Reagan?
Mr. McLaughlin. I can't say specific to Ronald Reagan. What
I can say is as of Monday morning, between Ronald Reagan and
Seattle we just exceeded the 30,000 mark as of Monday morning.
So because Reagan was open slightly earlier than Seattle, I
would ball-park that Reagan is probably responsible for 20,000
of the 30,000. But again, that is a ball-park number.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Thirty thousand.
Mr. McLaughlin. Thirty thousand between the two airports.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Did the travel document checker receive
additional training to learn how to use the card reader
technology that scans the common access card?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Besides the Department of Defense, did TSA
consult with any other agencies or outside groups when
developing and implementing the Risk-Based Security Screening
for Members of the Armed Forces Act?
Mr. McLaughlin. I will have to get back to you on that,
sir. I don't have any recollection of anyone outside DOD.
Mr. Walberg. Of any outside.
Mr. McLaughlin. We certainly collaborate with other
agencies on a number of different issues, but with regard to
military screening I think we have only spoken with DOD.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Rosenblum, are you satisfied with TSA's
efforts to provide a more seamless expedited screening process?
Why or why not?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes. Actually, we are very satisfied. We
view this as a win-win collaboration. It is both improving the
travel experience of our DOD family, and my understanding is it
also then allows the TSA screeners to focus in on higher-risk
populations for screening.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. McLaughlin, I understand that back in 2005
TSA was granted permission by the Department of Defense to
place TSA staff in the Military Severely Injured Joint Services
Operation Center Program. Could you describe TSA's role in
facilitating screening of injured and wounded military
personnel traveling through the airports?
Mr. McLaughlin. Yeah, this is something that I am very
proud of. The reason I am proud of it, is it truly was a grass-
roots effort on the part of TSA employees outside of the
headquarters. So this was on the TSA side a field-driven
initiative back in 2005 to partner with DOD. Currently, through
one of our major airports we facilitate the travel of wounded
and injured warriors throughout the country by receiving
incoming phone calls or inquiries via email about travel dates
and times of a Wounded Warrior. We will meet them at the curb,
and then we will expedite their process through the checkpoint
to provide them truly a seamless travel experience in the least
invasive way possible. It is a great news story for us across
the country.
Mr. Walberg. How many TSA staffers are located at the
center?
Mr. McLaughlin. I am sorry, so we did that in 2005. We
actually now have the staff that facilitates the program on
behalf of TSA is actually located at Reagan National Airport.
They are not physically located in the MSI JSOC any longer.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Mr. Rosenblum, on that subject, what
feedback have you received from severely injured servicemembers
and/or their families in relationship to the involvement of the
TSA, the service of the TSA at these centers?
Mr. Rosenblum. Again, I would say certainly at the
departmental level there is great appreciation. I have not had
the opportunity to be there at the time that this service was
provided. So in directly answering the question for me
personally, I have not received that direct feedback.
Mr. Walberg. But the feedback----
Mr. Rosenblum. The feedback from the departmental level, it
is absolutely positive, it is appreciated. It is obviously a
very, very difficult time for our Wounded Warriors and their
families. So it is a great service and benefit to them.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Walberg. I will yield to Mr.
Turner from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This weekend, 52
Wounded Warriors are coming to my community in the Rockaways to
be feted by some community groups. They will be coming from a
couple of locations. But they will be leaving mostly on Monday
and Tuesday from Kennedy and LaGuardia. I will probably be
talking to a number of these guys and gals on Saturday. What
can I tell them about what they might experience? What might we
be doing to facilitate it when they depart?
Mr. McLaughlin. First of all, I appreciate the heads-up.
Typically, we see these folks in smaller numbers. I would
encourage, under those circumstances, for them to reach out
directly through our website. There is a link to the email
address, and there is also an 800 phone number that goes direct
to TSA to set up the service in advance. With the large numbers
that you are talking about, we will work through the MSI JSOC
to set up something specific to accommodate such a large group
at once. We are happy to do that. So again through the
coordination, we will set up to understand their arrival times,
whether it is at LaGuardia or JFK. In fact if we can get
information from them sooner, from whatever their departing
airport is. Not 100 percent of TSA airports----
Mr. Turner. They are not necessarily leaving in a group.
Some of them are coming back----
Mr. McLaughlin. We can compile their information. We do
stuff similar like this with the Disabled American Vets winter
sports clinics in the Colorado area, and their summer clinics
in the California area as well. With large numbers, we can
formulate a spreadsheet and identify where they are traveling
out of and assist them. It is, again, something that we take
great pride in doing, and we think it is a great service to our
wounded and injured veterans.
Mr. Turner. All right. The central clearing place is what?
If I find it on the web?
Mr. McLaughlin. Just by going to www.tsa.gov. There is a
link for Wounded Warriors right on that website. It provides
both the 800 number and an email link.
Mr. Turner. Excellent. Thank you.
Mr. McLaughlin. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. I yield back.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Turner. The second round of
questioning will occur. I will just go ahead, and the Ranking
Member is back, I recognize myself for 5 minutes once again.
One of the things I want to say to the TSA, I don't have a
problem with TSA coming up with a way to extend expedited
screening to all members of the military. I think it is a great
goal. But this legislation was designed to handle a specific
situation where members of the military who are under orders to
serve, and most particularly those that are returning from the
battlefield, they should be accorded the highest honor and
should not be treated in a way that ultimately demeans their
service. It is not clear to me that TSA has given those
circumstances much thought. As the legislation specifies, I
would like to think at a minimum TSO supervisors should be
trained to intervene in such circumstances as we heard about in
a hearing just yesterday. But I point out again to the
President's signature on the legislation which I showed you
earlier as the Commander-in-Chief. Implementing this law is not
optional. From what I have been hearing, this law has not been
properly implemented. The reason why I say that is, Mr.
McLaughlin, you said there has been no difference in the
majority of the airports between pre-law and post-law. The goal
was when our warriors come home that they are treated with the
dignity that they deserve. They do not have to go through the
type of waiting in lines, going through screening, and then
have to go back through again and go through the routine.
Nothing has changed. If this wasn't a problem earlier,
gentlemen, I wouldn't have taken the length of time to craft
the law. But I would suggest to you that I am telling you that
the concept or the intent of the law is not being followed. Our
servicemembers deserve better. So I am willing to work with you
on ensuring that this is done, but I have to tell you that I
think you are in violation of the law. I will give you some
time to try to figure it out. But we took Iraq in less time.
You had 6 months, 180 days, to figure this out. We took Iraq in
less time.
So with that, I would like to entertain any questions that
the Ranking Member may have.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, Mr. Cravaack, I know that your
intentions were commendable and good and respected, and we
joined you in your sincerity and the importance of this
legislation. I don't doubt that Mr. McLaughlin and Mr.
Rosenblum and the DOD and the TSA does not have the same
vitality in their commitment. I think what we will need to do,
first of all, I would like to officially put on the record a
request, as I work with the Chairman of the subcommittee, that
we have as quickly as possible a classified briefing to be able
to discern some of the particulars that are occurring. I would
offer to say that the Wounded Warrior Program should now fall
under Mr. Cravaack's law. There should be even a more expedited
response to those individuals so that Wounded Warrior is in
place, but I think what Mr. Cravaack is saying is that we want
to add that enhancement. I believe that the good intentions are
here. If, Mr. McLaughlin, you will go back to your team and
have the interwovenness clarified, I think we will be where we
want to be. There is no one at TSA that I would attribute in
any way the desire to not operate under Cravaack's legislation,
of which we all joined, and the idea of giving dignity and
respect to our men and women who have either just returned, who
are traveling as Wounded Warriors, or in essence are our men
and women in the United States military in uniform or not. If
we had our wishes, we would also go back to our veterans. We
understand there is obviously concerns for some who are elderly
veterans. So we know we have concerns in the traveling public.
Just this past week, an elderly person with a cane who didn't
speak English and was blind on the airplane went into a fit,
83, somewhere around that age. What happened, the person got
frightened. It was not a veteran, was not a military person,
but responded because they were unescorted, they were
frightened. We know that just travel can be frightening. So if
you are an individual, and thank goodness for the sensitivity
of the airline and crew, this person wasn't ultimately
arrested. But they actually had to detour and land somewhere
else. We don't want any frustrations to come to soldiers and
others, soldiers in particular that this law depends upon or
focuses on. But I might be thinking that we want to deal with
elderly veterans. So we have many challenges in this industry,
in this responsibility of securing the homeland. I can only
accede to the fact that you are trying. In my questions, I need
to hear that from you. I need to ask Mr. Rosenblum, is DOD
taking this seriously? Let's overlook Wounded Warrior and
everything else. Let's say are we focusing on new law that is
in place that wants to add that extra dignity? So Mr.
McLaughlin, I can appreciate the need for special screening
procedures for certain populations. I think the general public
wants to know when we can all receive the type of expedited
screening provided by PreCheck pilot. I want to wrap that into
what you are doing for our soldiers, but also to talk about
moving forward in the general population. Do you envision a day
when TSA affords all persons the ability to keep their shoes on
and their laptops in their bags, including the flight crew
members which don't have PreCheck right now?
So my first question is: Show me the depth of sincerity of
complying with the law which this hearing is about. Then the
next is: When are we going to meet our obligations with all
traveling passengers in terms of a more efficient means of
going through the security checkpoint?
Mr. McLaughlin. Thank you. So from a sincerity perspective,
I can just tell you that both the DOD and TSA, the members of
both of our teams that are working hard on implementing things
like PreCheck and other procedures, are incredibly sincere
about what they and we are trying to achieve. We have been
sincere about this now for quite some time to roll out, as the
administrator says, the most effective security in the most
efficient way. We are working hard on that goal.
With regard to facilitating the travel experience for
people in general, over the past year, and as you pointed out
in your opening statement, we have done things for significant
portions of the population, for children under the age of 12,
for individuals over the age of 75. We are working with flight
crews. By the way, flight crew members today, with or without a
Known Crewmember, are entitled to certain exemptions that the
general traveling public is not entitled to. So we are making
those steps incrementally where we can.
Just last week, as was pointed out in the testimony
yesterday, but just last week I signed a new procedure in TSA
that does give supervisors, through the discretion of their
FSD, more latitude in unusual screening circumstances with
lower-risk individuals. I certainly envision a way to
incorporate moving forward U.S. Armed Forces into that group of
low-risk individuals where supervisors have more discretion.
So we are constantly evolving, and we are working hard,
really on a daily basis, to become a smarter, less of a one-
size-fits-all agency now that we have 10 years of experience
under our belt and some technology.
That being said, some of the things that you talk about, as
an example laptops in a bag, some of these really are
technology-driven. We don't have all the answers yet. But we
continue to work with industry to get the right technology
deployed so that we can reduce the burden on travelers.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Shoes on?
Mr. McLaughlin. We are working toward that. But as we know,
the shoes policy was driven by an active threat. We have no
reason to believe that that threat has diminished in any way.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The application of this to crew members as
you have the pilot program, the airline pilot expedited, why
have we not gone to crew members, who have the same security
checks as pilots?
Mr. McLaughlin. So we are working through that issue. The
administrator has been focused on the flight attendant
inclusion into Known Crewmember. We do continue to work that
issue. I believe that we will reach a decision in the not-too-
distant future.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Rosenblum--is it blum or bloom? I am
sorry.
Mr. Rosenblum. Rosenblum. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I apologize to you. Okay, thank you.
My question to you is--again, DOD falls in the level of it
is classified, we can't tell you what we are not doing or are
doing. So I think the question that I want to repeat again is
that DOD is taking the Cravaack legislation seriously?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes, ma'am, we are.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are familiar with it? Do you realize
that I think what we are asking is that though you may have
existing, if you will, privileges that you have gained through
collaboration with TSA, that we are now looking for enhanced
response. So the question comes again, while you are doing
that, are you ensuring the sufficient vetting that we don't
have a Captain Hasan circumstance?
Mr. Rosenblum. Ma'am, let me start by saying one of the
reasons I was selected for the job that I am in now is because
I spent 2 years at the Department of Homeland Security, and one
of the core requirements for what I do today is to work with
colleagues now from DOD for a perspective, understanding the
DHS perspective. That sort of core collaboration is something
that is real. It is something that is growing. Obviously, DHS
has only been in existence for, you know, for a relatively
brief period of time. So I will say first off, the sincerity,
the desire, the collaboration is all quite, quite good. You
know, there is areas at which DOD and DHS, you know, have
disagreement, as does anyone, but this partnership with TSA it
is robust, and it is active.
We have formally scheduled meetings to discuss both
implementation of the legislation and just the traveling
experience for DOD passengers in general. But in addition to
that, we also meet far more often, and we are in constant
dialogue.
Finally, if I may, and I have said this to Mr. McLaughlin
in a previous setting, that I think TSA has probably one of the
biggest challenges in appearing before, you know, the Congress
and the American people because I have been in the field of
National security for some time now. The intelligence is real.
It is specific. I know you receive it, but you know, my core
belief is that when TSA has a security requirement, it is based
on information. It is based on threat. I am obviously not here
as a spokesperson for TSA nor to advocate or speak to how it
goes about its business on a daily basis. But on the underlying
issue of the threat, and how DOD personnel, No. 1, how DOD
could be of assistance to TSA in allowing TSA to focus in on
the individuals of greatest concern, as I said earlier, it is a
win-win from a DOD standpoint. Also, and I do apologize for
having to, you know, say that some of the information that I
would be glad to--we would be glad to share with you, we would
prefer to discuss in a closed setting in terms of the specific
types of threat information, or how we share the threat
information both with TSA and our colleagues at FBI, but the
processes do exist, but unfortunately, we don't want to inform
our adversaries.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We understand that. We will do that in
classified. Let me close. There is a vote on, but let me just
say, I feel comfortable from this hearing that I have two
committed agencies respecting and understanding both the newly-
passed law, but also the responsibility to the heroes and
sheroes and other broad population of men and women who have
served, are serving, and continue to provide for our defense
and our democracy.
So I think this is an important hearing, Mr. Chairman, and
I believe that we have men and women who are working to make
sure that this legislation is implemented. I yield back.
Mr. Cravaack. The gentlelady yields back. The Chairman
recognizes Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one
clarification for me. What constitutes a servicemember being in
good or bad standing, Mr. Rosenblum? Then second, how is that
transmitted to TSA in such a way that there is up-to-date
information at the checkpoint?
Mr. Rosenblum. Thank you for the question. In this context
what constitutes being in good standing is if that military
person has their military ID, their CAC card, for the purposes
of how we work with TSA. If there is threat information about
that individual, we have relationships and partnerships with
TSA, with FBI, with State and local law enforcement by which we
have an obligation and a responsibility to report that
information.
TSA has many, many systems, it is my understanding, or ways
at which they make a determination about the threat of an
individual person, whether that person is appropriate for a
certain type of screening, whether they should be, you know,
allowed to board a plane, that is something that is a multi-
layered process that TSA runs.
Again, this program that we are discussing here today is if
you have a CAC card, that military ID, you have gone through a
level of background check. You have been in the military a
certain amount of time, and so there is a, what I believe very
much is a safe assumption that this is a low-risk, lower-risk
population. But in no case would we say it is a zero-risk
population.
Mr. Walberg. Okay, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Walberg.
Just for clarification, does every military member have a
CAC card at this time?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Cravaack. So everybody in the military now has a CAC
card?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yes.
Mr. Cravaack. They don't have the old ID anymore?
Mr. Rosenblum. No.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay, so everybody has the current
information then?
Mr. Rosenblum. That is correct.
Mr. Cravaack. It is still questionable in my mind that we
are following the extent and the intent of the law. Since I am
the maker of the law, I can tell you that we are not where we
need to be in my opinion. What I would like to do is to have
both of you confer, and if you would, please, give a report
back to us on how the problems that we are facing and brought
up today are going to be solved.
Again, the intent, I understand your intent. I understand
that there may be some issues, but sometime during the calendar
year 2013 is nowhere near where we need to be. So if you would,
please, by July 23, if we could get something from you, we
would appreciate it.
Seeing no further questions, I thank the witnesses for
their valuable testimony and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the committee may have some additional questions
for you, and we ask you to respond to those in writing. The
hearing for the record will be held open for 10 days.
This subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


