- UNLOCKING THE SAFETY ACT'S POTENTIAL TO PROMOTE TECHNOLOGY AND COMBAT TERRORISM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNLOCKING THE SAFETY ACT'S POTENTIAL TO PROMOTE TECHNOLOGY AND COMBAT
TERRORISM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY,
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,
AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-26

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-236 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Peter T. King, New York, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Daniel E. Lungren, California        Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Henry Cuellar, Texas
Gus M. Bilirakis, Florida            Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Paul C. Broun, Georgia               Laura Richardson, California
Candice S. Miller, Michigan          Danny K. Davis, Illinois
Tim Walberg, Michigan                Brian Higgins, New York
Chip Cravaack, Minnesota             Jackie Speier, California
Joe Walsh, Illinois                  Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         Hansen Clarke, Michigan
Ben Quayle, Arizona                  William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Scott Rigell, Virginia               Vacancy
Billy Long, Missouri                 Vacancy
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Mo Brooks, Alabama
Michael J. Russell, Staff Director/Chief Counsel
Kerry Ann Watkins, Senior Policy Director
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

Daniel E. Lungren, California, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Tim Walberg, Michigan, Vice Chair    Laura Richardson, California
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Billy Long, Missouri                 William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York (Ex              (Ex Officio)
Officio)
Coley C. O'Brien, Staff Director
Alan Carroll, Subcommittee Clerk
Chris Schepis, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Daniel E. Lungren, a Representative in Congress
From the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies...................................................     1
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security..............................................     3

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Paul Benda, Acting Deputy Under Secretary, Science and
Technology Directorate, Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Panel II

Mr. Marc A. Pearl, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Homeland Security and Defense Business Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
Mr. Brian E. Finch, Partner, Dickstein Shapiro, LLP:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    24
Mr. Scott Boylan, Vice President and General Counsel, Morpho
Detection, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    31
Mr. Craig A. Harvey, Chief Operations Officer and Executive Vice
President, NVision Solutions, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    34
Prepared Statement.............................................    35

UNLOCKING THE SAFETY ACT'S POTENTIAL TO PROMOTE TECHNOLOGY AND COMBAT
TERRORISM

----------

Thursday, May 26, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Security Technologies,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Daniel E. Lungren
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lungren, Marino, Clarke,
Richardson, and Richmond.
Mr. Lungren. With the permission of the Ranking Member of
the full committee, we are going to start this. We have votes
scheduled in about an hour and a half, so I would like to see
if we can get both panels done, because I understand we are
going to have a long series of votes.
So the Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies will come to order. The subcommittee is meeting
today to examine the Department of Homeland Security's
implementation of the Support Antiterrorism by Fostering
Effective Technology, or SAFETY Act. I will begin by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes or less.
I want to welcome our witnesses this morning and thank you
for your time and effort to assist our subcommittee's oversight
efforts. I consider the Support Antiterrorism by Fostering
Effective Technology Act, more commonly referred to as the
SAFETY Act, a vital Government program in the fight against
terrorism.
New companies who are developing and deploying
antiterrorism products and services are justifiably concerned
that these technologies could leave them and their customers
exposed to enormous civil liabilities. Legal precedents such as
those emanating from the 9/11 attacks as well as those holding
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey liable for the
1993 World Trade Center attacks make it clear that civil
litigation can intimidate the developers and users of security
technologies and services after a terrorist event.
So Congress acted decisively to address this concern by
passing the SAFETY Act as part of the Homeland Security Act of
2002. SAFETY Act is intended to encourage the development and
deployment of antiterrorism technologies by limiting the
liability of sellers of the technology for third-party claims
arising out of an act of terrorism where the technology has
been deployed to prevent, respond to, or recover from such an
act.
It is meant not only to protect technology providers, but
also businesses and facilities using them and to encourage
people to use them before the fact. After 8 years, 440
technologies have been SAFETY Act-approved.
Initially, in my judgment, the program suffered from poor
performance--that is, low number of applications, slow
processing times because of lack of awareness of the
protections and risk management benefits offered by the SAFETY
Act and a burdensome application process.
In 2006 the final rule was issued, and DHS made changes to
streamline the application and review processes, which
temporarily improved the SAFETY Act results. However, I see
some troubling signs the implementation is again stalled with
SAFETY Act certifications well below expectations.
I find these statistics concerning. The number and
percentage of SAFETY Act awards have decreased from 58 awards
out of 70 applications in fiscal year 2006 to 40 awards out of
121 applications in fiscal year 2010. That is an approval
rating going from 83 percent to 33 percent.
The number and percentage of SAFETY Act certifications
specifically has drastically plummeted from 31 certifications
over 70 applications in fiscal year 2006 to one certification
out of 117 applications in fiscal year 2010, although I
understand this percentage may improve slightly as DHS is still
reviewing some of the fiscal year 2010 applications.
Counter to expectations for fast processing times for
renewals, the average time it takes to process a renewal, I am
informed, is essentially equivalent to the time it takes to
process a new application--that is, both approximately 120
days.
The number of companies seeking SAFETY Act renewal for
previously SAFETY Act-approved technology appears to be
significantly below expectations--that is, less than half. Of
the companies seeking renewal, less than--have been successful
and been granted continued SAFETY Act award status.
The percent completeness of an application upon submission
has dropped from 59 percent in fiscal year 2006 to 24 percent
in fiscal year 2010, a 41 percent decrease. This translates, at
least it appears on the surface, into an arduous and lengthy
process with additional information being requested from
companies and a lack of completeness.
Unfortunately, anecdotal evidence from recent meetings with
numerous companies support these statistical trends. It has
been reported to our staff on several occasions that DHS is
applying inconsistent and sometimes what appeared to be
unreasonable application criteria, making it increasingly
difficult to achieve certification as well as SAFETY Act
approvals.
The application of inconsistent criteria in the evaluation
process would, of course, undermine the intent of the SAFETY
Act and could yield potentially anti-competitive outcomes. The
current complaint of all these meetings is widespread
frustration with the arduous ordeal of SAFETY Act approval.
I had hoped that the SAFETY Act would be a success story
for DHS, for the business community and for our homeland
security. As we struggle with tighter Federal budgets, we have
to be more creative in developing homeland security
technologies and encourage their deployment. Some recent
Congressional efforts to poach the S&T budget for revenue
create additional budget uncertainty.
So I am a strong believer in the SAFETY Act and its intent
and its importance to the business of homeland security. As
with every successful business program, the application process
should be as user-friendly as possible while upholding the
standards that we intend to be included.
The private sector has enormous research and development
capability, and tighter Federal budgets will force us to tap
these private sector resources even more. In order to do this,
I would believe SAFETY Act liability protection is critical,
and it provides DHS with a necessary tool to access large
private sector investments in the homeland security marketplace
for the protection of all Americans.
I hope this hearing will help us to discover why the SAFETY
Act hasn't been as effective as we would like. If there are
things we need to do on the legislative side, we would like to
be informed of that.
Last, in the spirit of being fair and balanced, I have
letters written to the committee recently from companies
regarding their positive experiences with the SAFETY Act
process. Without objection, these documents will be included in
the hearing record.
Now I would recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee, Mr. Thompson, for any statement he wishes to make.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you for holding this hearing today.
I also want to thank the witnesses of both panels for being
here also. I especially want to thank Mr. Craig Harvey from Bay
St. Louis, Mississippi, the Minority Member's witness who has
come to share his company's experience with us. I might add
this is his maiden voyage to come to Washington to serve as a
witness, and I assured him that you would be kind to him, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lungren. We will treat him gently.
Mr. Thompson. Okay. Thank you.
The Department of Homeland Security's Science and
Technology Directorate is responsible for implementing and
overseeing the SAFETY Act. We are going to hear testimony today
detailing the application process for companies interested in
having technologies designated as qualified antiterrorism
technologies under the SAFETY Act.
For this important program, the Government provides
immunity from liability to any product or service approved
under the SAFETY Act. Congress allowed this kind of liability
protection to encourage innovation in the development of
products and technologies that would help protect us from the
terrorist threat.
I should mention that unlike the patent, trademark, or
other license provided by the Government, the Government does
not charge a penny to thoroughly review each product for SAFETY
Act approval. Mr. Chairman, I am wondering whether our current
fiscal situation the Congress should consider requesting a
small fee, perhaps, for this valuable service.
But after we consider the fee question, we should focus on
the number of businesses that have used this program, the
outreach that the Department has done to attract small,
minority, and disadvantaged businesses, and the effectiveness
of the SAFETY Act approval process.
As we all know, small businesses create most of the jobs in
America. In this downturn of the economy, a SAFETY Act
designation can improve a company's bottom line and help small,
savvy companies create jobs. Having read the Department's
statistics, I have some hope that the SAFETY Act is living up
to its mission that products and technologies enter the
process, are quickly reviewed and provided designations and
certification in a timely manner.
I hope the testimony reveals that small, disadvantaged, and
minority-owned companies can access the SAFETY Act process
without the help of $400-an-hour consultants. Now, companies
must be able to navigate the process with assurance that their
information is being rigorously reviewed, their proprietary
information carefully guarded, and their applications are
handled expeditiously.
It is disturbing to me that the latest proposed fiscal year
2012 budget level of $398 million for Science and Technology
Directorate as introduced in the House appropriations mark
would eliminate two-thirds of the research and development
funding for the Department. I have serious concerns about these
reductions in funding and how they will affect the free SAFETY
Act service.
I look forward to the testimony, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much.
I would just say for the record that any other Member of
the committee would be able to submit opening statement for the
record.
Now we are pleased to have the distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today.
Our first witness is Mr. Paul Benda, acting deputy under
secretary for science and technology at the Department of
Homeland Security. Prior to joining the Department, Mr. Benda
served in several positions at the Department of Defense as an
officer in the United States Air Force; program manager of
Defense Advance Research Projects Agency; as the director of
the Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives
program; and finally as the director of the Project Integration
Office.
The Chair recognizes Deputy Under Secretary Benda, and we
thank you for your service to our country.

STATEMENT OF PAUL BENDA, ACTING DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY, SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Benda. Thank you, Chairman Lungren. Thank you full
committee Member, Ranking Member Thompson.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today about
the SAFETY Act program and appreciate your time. I want you to
know that we have used the SAFETY Act as a powerful
incentivization for the development and deployment of anti-
terrorism technologies, and the Department of Homeland Security
Science and Technology Directorate takes extremely seriously
our job to evaluate and review these applications.
The mission of the SAFETY Act sometimes gets lost in the
rhetoric. That mission is to spur the deployment of anti-
terrorism technologies to protect Americans from terrorist
attacks. It is our job, it is incumbent upon us, to ensure that
when those technologies do receive SAFETY Act awards, that they
are effective.
The majority of criteria stated in the SAFETY Act focus on
the effectiveness of those technologies. It is inherently a
technical review, and it is important that it be a technical
review, because it is important that those technologies work as
expected when they are deployed. If they don't work, and
something happens, someone could die. That is a responsibility
that we take very seriously.
I want to talk a little bit about where we have been, where
we are, and where we are going. The program has matured, as you
stated, Mr. Chairman. In the beginning we were a little slow.
We were trying to find our footing. But right now, if you
compare our numbers to the early years of 2004 to now, we are
processing nearly twice as many applications twice as fast.
We are also focused on making sure our program is
accessible to all businesses, not just large businesses, not
multinationals. So there is analysis of how many businesses of
what types of businesses receive SAFETY Act awards or submit
applications. It turns out by a margin of 2:1 small businesses
versus large businesses apply for the SAFETY Act. We think that
is important.
Small businesses like NVision are the engines of innovation
of this country, and we need to support them. So we have done
everything we can to ensure that the process is not onerous. We
have a pre-application process that allows small businesses to
file an expedited application with us. We review that quickly,
and then we bring them in for a conference and explain how they
can go through the process. The majority of our applicants take
advantage of this, and small businesses like NVision are able
to navigate the process without any outside help.
What we found was a little surprising. Over 70 percent of
applications are done without any outside help at all. What is
even more surprising is that those who don't receive outside
help are actually processed 20 percent faster. So when we talk
about requiring SAFETY Act experts to file an application, that
is simply not true. Those that do it on their own with our help
can actually do it faster.
Now, I will say that those who use outside help are
probably more complex. We have a series of complex applications
such as services, and those take a longer time to review. But
clearly, the process works for small businesses.
We have heard about the diminished interest, and I think if
you look at the unique number of applications that are filed,
you could see a trend of that going downward, but I think it is
much more important to focus on the awards that are actually
granted.
The difference between fiscal year 2010 awards and fiscal
year 2009 is likely to be minimal. It will probably be at maybe
2 percent less than what we currently do. In fiscal year 2011
the numbers we showed you have gone up dramatically since we
provided that information on April 13, because as we have
generally seen, we see the vast majority of applications to the
SAFETY Act in the last quarter.
What is even more important, though, is that the quality of
applications has gone up. In 2009, 19 percent of applications
were deemed complete. In 2010, 24 percent were complete. So we
have worked hard to try, as we said, with this pre-application
process, to work with these companies to make them better.
In 2011, as of today, 44 percent of our applications are
complete. Generally, when the initial application is considered
complete, 90 percent of those receive award. So the process is
improving.
Furthermore, we talk about renewals. In 2009 we only had
four renewals that were submitted, which is admittedly a low
number. In 2010 that number jumped by 600 percent to 24. In
2011, two-thirds the way through the fiscal year, we are now at
33, and we expect to have even more.
We are on track, if you include unique new applications and
renewals, to have the most awards granted by SAFETY Act in its
inception. So the thought that this process is going down or
decreasing simply doesn't hold true by the facts, when you look
at the updated numbers that we have sent in.
Now, where are we going? The SAFETY Act has strong support
from the Department, strong support from Dr. O'Toole. She
actually requested a Secretary-level policy review on how we
can better use the SAFETY Act, how we can better incentivize
the adoption of these antiterrorism technologies, and we are
actively engaged in that.
One of the areas where we have coalesced is the use of
block designations. Block designations leverage existing DHS
programs or other standard programs from other Government
entities and allow for an expedited review. In fact, block
designation applications are generally processed 25 percent
faster, and we have identified additional process improvements
that should allow us to process them 50 percent faster. We just
posted another block designation in partnership with the
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office GRaDER Program yesterday.
So we are continuing our outreach. We recognize the
importance of this program. Under Secretary O'Toole is actively
engaged, and we are working very hard to maintain the
accessibility of this program, maintain a rigorous process that
is transparent, that is consistent, that is not overly
burdensome, but still maintains our ability as the No. 1
criterion of the SAFETY Act that it has demonstrated
substantial utility and effectiveness. It is extremely
important that we do those reviews, because if the technology
fails, Americans can die.
I look forward to your questions, and I will be happy to
take any that you have. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Benda follows:]
Prepared Statement of Paul Benda
May 26, 2011
the support anti-terrorism by fostering effective technologies (safety)
act of 2002
Good afternoon, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am honored to appear
before you today on behalf of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Science and Technology Directorate (S&T). The Support Antiterrorism by
Fostering Effective Technologies (SAFETY) Act of 2002, enacted by
Congress as part of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, has had a
prominent role in improving the security of the United States. The
SAFETY Act provides incentives for the development and deployment of
effective anti-terrorism technologies through systems of risk and
litigation management. The purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
threat of liability does not deter potential manufacturers or sellers
and users of anti-terrorism technologies from developing and
commercializing technologies that could save lives. The Act creates
certain liability limitations for claims arising out of, relating to,
or resulting from an act of terrorism where ``qualified anti-terrorism
technologies'' have been deployed. My testimony will discuss program
performance, the application review process and how S&T is using this
important tool to incentivize the development and widespread, high-
impact deployment of effective anti-terrorism technologies and services
throughout the United States.
strong interest, steadfast support
The SAFETY Act Program continues to be very popular with the
private sector and the Department has continued its steadfast support
for the Program. Since the first applications were received in 2004,
more than 440 ``qualified anti-terrorism technologies'' under the
SAFETY Act have been approved. These technologies have been widely
deployed to protect commercial facilities, critical infrastructure,
transportation hubs, ports, borders, sports venues, and commercial
aviation. Examples representing the broad scope of SAFETY Act
protections that have been approved during Under Secretary O'Toole's
tenure include:
1. A technology that provides cybersecurity situational awareness
and network security monitoring.
2. A technology undergoing testing and evaluation designed to
provide cybersecurity protection for the smart grid.
3. Technologies designed to harden bridges and tunnels in New York
City.
4. An integrated system technology undergoing testing and
evaluation designed to provide situational awareness for the
Port of Long Beach, California.
5. A modular, rapidly deployable floating security barrier system
designed to protect targets from high-speed small boats.
6. Anti-terrorism physical security services deployed to detect,
deter, and respond to a variety of threats at commercial
facilities and adjacent critical infrastructure in the New York
Metropolitan area and in New Jersey.
7. A process for the production of an ammonium nitrate fertilizer
treated to render it less detonable than standard fertilizer.
8. On-site production system for chlorine at water treatment plants
(eliminating transport risk of bulk chlorine).
9. Threatening object- and explosive-detection systems deployed in
the Nation's airports.
10. A web-based software tool that integrates a first responder
decision support system with geospatial information technology.
11. An acoustic detection system to detect and rapidly triangulate
gunshots and explosive event sounds.
12. Explosive containment vessels, allowing for the safe
containment, transport, and disposal of explosive devices (used
in response to Times Square bombing attempt in May 2010).
These SAFETY Act Designations and Certifications have increased the
Nation's anti-terrorism readiness as well as our domestic industrial
capability in the homeland security sector.
safety act progress

As shown in Figure 1, applications have doubled since fiscal year
2006, while average application processing times have been reduced by
more than 30 percent. This trend has continued into fiscal year 2011,
where we are expecting 200 to 250 applications with a processing time
currently averaging 113 days. As shown below in Figure 2, the majority
of program applicants are from smaller businesses. For the purpose of
Figure 2, we have grouped businesses with annual revenues under $50
million as small business. So far in fiscal year 2011, small business
applicants comprise two-thirds of the applicant pool, with average
annual revenues for this group at less than $11 million.

Figure 3 is a flow diagram of the review process used to evaluate
SAFETY Act applications. Due to the significance of a SAFETY Act
Designation or Certification, considerable thought and effort were
devoted to developing a review process that is well-defined,
repeatable, and applicable for evaluating both product- and service-
based technologies against the SAFETY Act statutory and regulatory
criteria.
Applications are filed electronically via the SAFETY Act website at
www.safetyact.gov. Before an applicant submits a full application, they
may choose to submit a pre-application, which is an abbreviated
application, primarily containing narrative information. This summary
process is designed primarily for first-time applicants or for those
with a unique offering so they can receive prompt feedback and guidance
on the scope of information they should submit in order to maximize the
chance of success. Within 21 days of application receipt, the Office of
SAFETY Act Implementation (OSAI) transmits a letter to the applicant's
SAFETY Act account on the website and offers to hold a teleconference
with the applicant to discuss their technology and prospective
application for Designation, or Designation and Certification.\1\ OSAI
technical and economic reviewers participate in the calls; the length
and level of detail discussed during the calls is determined by
applicant need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For a Designation, liability is capped at the amount of
liability insurance that DHS requires the technology seller to obtain
and maintain. A Certification has a rebuttable presumption that the
Government contractor defense applies. The presumption may be overcome
only by clear and convincing evidence showing that the seller acted
fraudulently or with willful misconduct in submitting information to
DHS in its SAFETY Act application.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Applications filed for Designation or Designation and Certification
are evaluated as follows:

Submission--Completeness Phase
During the completeness phase, a submission undergoes a brief
review to determine if the information submitted by the applicant is
sufficient to conduct a review of a proposed Qualified Anti-Terrorism
Technology (QATT) with respect to the statutory and regulatory
criteria. The goal of this phase is to determine whether it appears
that there is sufficient information in the application to receive an
informed evaluation from the expert reviewers who conduct the full
technical and economic review. Review personnel who are employees of
the Institute for Defense Analyses \2\ (IDA) and who have significant
SAFETY Act Program experience perform this completeness review. On or
about day 30, if the application appears to have sufficient material to
permit a full review, a completeness letter is sent to the applicant.
The completeness letter asks the applicant to confirm the technology
description drafted by OSAI, and OSAI's summary of the insurance the
applicant holds. Completeness letters often have a short list of
questions for the applicant, which they should be capable of answering
relatively quickly (normally the applicant is given 21 days to provide
this information).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ IDA, a Federally Funded Research and Development Center,
provides technical and expert assistance to the Office of SAFETY Act
Implementation. IDA is contracted for these services under an Inter-
Agency Agreement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If an application appears to not have sufficient material to permit
a full review, the applicant receives an incompleteness letter with a
listing and discussion of the items that are needed to complete an
application. Reasons an application could be determined to be
incomplete include: (1) The applicant does not provide enough
information to develop a definition of the technology, which is an
essential element of any SAFETY Act Designation or Certification; (2)
the applicant does not answer significant questions on the application
form; (3) the materials submitted support only part of a technology's
capabilities (e.g., for an integrated system, information is provided
on the video sensor, but no information on the chemical and
radiological sensors); (4) the applicant makes a material claim
concerning the capability of the technology that is not substantiated
by the evidence provided; and/or (5) documents submitted are incomplete
or internally inconsistent (training records submitted are inconsistent
with stated training policy, test report stating that a significant
part of the testing was not conducted, performance report that
indicates a significant failure rate).\3\ Completeness/incompleteness
letters are carefully reviewed and signed by the Director of OSAI prior
to release to the applicant. An incompleteness letter is posted to the
applicant's on-line application account as soon as the letter is
finalized. Normally, this occurs near the 30-day point, but could be
much earlier, if there are significant deficiencies in the application
that are readily apparent to reviewers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The SAFETY Act Program offers a wide variety of opportunities
for applicants to learn what level of information/data they should
submit in an application. Opportunities and resources include the pre-
application process, teleconference, or in-person meeting with senior
review and program staff, and the SAFETY Act help desk, a resource that
is reachable by phone or email.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We believe this approach is preferable to proceeding on with a full
review, in spite of identified deficiencies in the application, where
the likely end result would likely be a denial letter. Receiving an
incompleteness letter could result in the applicant receiving a
favorable decision on its application earlier than if it had to wait to
receive a denial letter at or near the 120-day point to learn what is
required to prepare a successful application. It also conserves
Government resources. The S&T Directorate frequently uses independent
Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to conduct the technical and economic
reviews following the completeness phase. Having these experts file
reports which state that insufficient information was submitted for
them to render an opinion concerning the efficacy of the technology is
not a prudent use of scarce program resources.
Full Technical and Economic Review
If sufficient information for analysis exists, the application
enters the economic and technical review phase. The application and
supporting documentation is reviewed by economic and technical SMEs to
the OSAI. Concurrently, the IDA staff evaluators conduct independent
research on the technology of interest (including discussions with
points of contact with Federal, State, local, and private sector
technology users). Following the SMEs review, summary findings,
independent research, insurance and economic information are assessed
in relation to the statutory and regulatory criteria by internal,
independent experts. Following a thorough internal peer review and
quality assurance process, a completed analysis is prepared by IDA for
review by the Director of OSAI. The Director, based on these
independent findings and his/her own knowledge, on or about day 95
following application submission, provides a written report containing
a recommendation concerning the appropriate level of SAFETY Act
protection and a proposed liability insurance requirement, and selected
application materials to the Office of the Under Secretary, Science &
Technology, Department of Homeland Security.
Office of the Under Secretary, S&T Review
During this final phase, the application is first reviewed by the
S&T Testing and Evaluation Support executive. Areas of review include
evidence of technical efficacy, application of relevant standards, a
review of any testing and evaluation performed, and, drawing on
extensive background and contacts in the testing and evaluation field,
whether there are stakeholders or experts in the interagency who should
be consulted. Second, the application moves to the DHS Office of the
General Counsel (OGC), which evaluates the sufficiency of the review
process (i.e. whether the record adequately reflects adherence to the
policies, procedures, and criteria set forth in the SAFETY Act statute
and the Department's implementing regulations), the determination of
the recommended insurance liability cap, the sufficiency and
appropriateness of the description of the covered technology in the
Exhibit A Technology Description document, and the content of the
proposed SAFETY Act award letters (including the date of first sale of
the technology, the correct listing of all named sellers and their
States of incorporation and any specific terms and conditions
pertaining to the particular award). Third, the application is reviewed
by the Director of the Research and Development Partnerships (RDP)
Group, who has direct supervisory authority and responsibility over the
OSAI. Lastly, the application moves to the S&T Executive Secretariat,
where the award documents undergo a brief administrative review, before
moving to the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary, who is the Under
Secretary's designee for signing SAFETY Act awards. Those applications
that present significant policy issues are referred by the Deputy Under
Secretary to the Under Secretary for final decision.
Each application's progress is tracked by a spreadsheet, updated
weekly, that contains completion of milestones and current status of
the review.
safety act as incentivizer
The SAFETY Act was designed to incentivize the development and
wide-spread deployment of effective anti-terrorism technologies. In
implementing this powerful tool, the Department has used a two-prong
approach: (1) Incentivize private sector entities to build effective
antiterrorism capabilities that they determine to be appropriate using
their requirements, analyses, and considerable judgment, and (2)
increase the accessibility, reach, and impact of Government homeland
security initiatives. Most of the Designations and Certifications to
date reflect the judgments of private sector providers and purchasers
of anti-terrorism technologies and services delivered through the free
market.
Support for Government initiatives is provided principally through
two processes: (1) A procurement Pre-Qualification Designation Notice,
which provides advance notice that private sector entities selected to
perform under a listed Government procurement will likely qualify for
SAFETY Act protections related to their performance, and (2) Block
Designations or Block Certifications, which provide notice that private
sector entities who provide, whether to private sector or public
purchasers, certain technologies or services which meet defined
performance standards or technical characteristics are likely to be
approved for SAFETY Act protections for those products or services.
As an example, a very popular procurement Pre-Qualification
Designation (recently converted to a Block Designation) is for the
Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) Certified Cargo
Screening Program. This Program involves private sector-owned and -
operated secure facilities established in accordance with TSA
directives for the screening and securing of cargo to be transported on
commercial aircraft. We have issued more than 40 Designations under
this Program; many participants are small companies who do not have the
revenue to purchase large amounts of terrorism liability insurance.
Other procurement Pre-Qualification Designation Notices are listed on
the SAFETY Act website. Despite this and other noteworthy successes,
the Department has recognized the challenges in applying the SAFETY Act
with respect to Federal procurements. An effort initiated to better
inform the Federal acquisition community of the SAFETY Act and how it
can be incorporated effectively is nearing completion. The Federal
Acquisition Institute (FAI), in collaboration with the Department, is
developing a multimedia, on-line training course that will help
acquisition personnel properly apply the SAFETY Act to an acquisition.
FAI and DHS anticipate launching the SAFETY Act and Federal Acquisition
course by summer.
We are also seeking to use Block Designations and Block
Certifications more often as they are powerful tools to incentivize
deployment of anti-terrorism technologies and offer an expedited review
time line. S&T recognizes that the SAFETY Act application process
requires a significant investment by the applicant who would like us to
process their applications more quickly. While we consistently meet the
application processing time lines set forth in the SAFETY Act Final
Rule, we are looking at expanding our use of Block Designations, which
are processed 25 percent faster than standard applications. Our goal is
to streamline our Block review process and speed processing time lines
to be 30 to 50 percent faster than standard applications and provide an
expedited review path for appropriate technologies.
An example of a recently approved Block Designation and Block
Certification is for standards development organizations who wish to
seek SAFETY Act coverage for National standards that have been formally
adopted by DHS as DHS National Standards. Recently, as a result of an
S&T policy review, the opportunity to receive SAFETY Act coverage for a
broader range of anti-terrorism standards has been approved and
announced on the SAFETY Act website. The intent of this initiative is
to provide incentives for increased use and more widespread
implementation of anti-terrorism standards, by significantly expanding
the pool of standards eligible for SAFETY Act coverage. This initiative
has strong industry interest.
S&T has also partnered with the DHS Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office (DNDO) to create a new Block Designation to incentivize the
deployment of nuclear detection technologies. The DNDO Graduated
Radiological/Nuclear Detector Evaluation and Reporting (GRaDER)
Program, which evaluates commercial off-the-shelf Radiological/Nuclear
detection equipment against National standards, has developed a
mechanism for manufacturers to independently verify the performance of
their technologies. The Block Designation will apply to technologies
having undergone testing in accordance with the GRaDER program that
have fully met the American National Standard Institute N42 standard or
applicable published Government standards.
The SAFETY Act is also involved as an integral part of other DHS
programs and projects. In S&T, the SAFETY Act will help incentivize
private sector involvement in our newest APEX projects, which are
projects that have been endorsed by both a DHS component head and the
Under Secretary of Science and Technology through a signed charter. The
goals of the APEX projects are to transition high-impact technology-
based capabilities directly into components operational programs. Our
most recently signed APEX project with the U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) is to leverage Customs-Trade Partnership Against
Terrorism (C-TPAT) Tier III shipper's approved security plans and
operations with an Electronic Chain of Custody (ECoc) lock that S&T
developed to create a ``Secure Transit Corridor'' with supply chain
routes originating from Mexico and Canada to allow expedited security
screening at CBP-selected pilot ports of entry. If this pilot is
successful, we hope to incentivize adoption of this model by private
industry by creating a Block Designation for commercial shippers who
agree to deploy the ECoCs and follow the stringent security standards
required of C-TPAT Tier III shippers. This effort will improve overall
supply chain security while at the same time expedite the free flow of
trade and reduce liability insurance costs of participating shippers.
We are also actively engaged in several other initiatives--
concerning cybersecurity, infrastructure protection, stadium security,
transportation security, and private sector resilience--that will use
the SAFETY Act to strengthen and enhance the security of the Nation. As
you can see, this is a dynamic program that is continually evolving to
meet the needs of the Government in true partnership with the private
and public sectors.
conclusion
In closing, I would like to thank you for the invitation to appear
before you today and your continuing support of the SAFETY Act. I look
forward to answering your questions and to working with you on
maintaining the vitality of this very important program.

Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much, Mr. Benda. We will start
the round of questioning by yielding myself 5 minutes.
The numbers you cited here seem to be somewhat inconsistent
with the numbers I have been given before. The numbers I had
was that the number of new SAFETY Act applications was 142 in
fiscal year 2009, but only 28 at the halfway mark in fiscal
year 2011. Did you say you updated numbers and that is not an
accurate reflection of this year, fiscal year?
Mr. Benda. That is correct, sir. I believe you received
your numbers on April 13, and what we generally find is we
receive the majority of applications the last quarter. We do
have updated numbers that we are happy to provide you.
Mr. Lungren. Do you believe that you will be somewhere in
the neighborhood of where you were in 2009, like 142?
Mr. Benda. Well, sir, I don't believe that the number of
applications is a good metric. I believe the number of awards--
--
Mr. Lungren. Yes, I understand that. But my question is the
number of applications, because that would be an indication of
confidence in the program by those who wish to participate in
the program. So I am just asking you whether you see whether
you are trending upward in number of applications to get back
to where we were in 2009.
Mr. Benda. No, sir. We will not see that same number.
Mr. Lungren. Is the reason because the universe of those
that can be assisted by the SAFETY program and who would assist
us by the SAFETY program is reaching its ultimate? Or is it
because the usefulness of the program somehow is not apparent
to those on the outside? Or is it some other reason?
Mr. Benda. Well, it is a hard question for me to answer,
sir. I am unsure. I think that those who know about it have
probably filed. I think the number you are referring to is
unique applications.
When I think the expansion, the next level for us in our
view is the block designation, sir. We think that is a less
onerous process. We think the number of applications we will
receive under that with what we are doing with DHS National
standards, what we are doing with DNDO's GRaDER Program, where
we hope to go with CBP's C-TPAT Program, we hope to see those
number of applications significantly improve over the coming
years.
Mr. Lungren. Do you have an observation about whether or
not the SAFETY Act is appropriate for certain sectors, but not
other sectors? Has there been an analysis done for outreach in
different sectors where you believe it is appropriate for
SAFETY Act application?
Mr. Benda. We have left the aperture wide open, sir. We are
interested in incentivizing the deployment of antiterrorism
technologies. Any sector that is open and supports that
mission, we will support.
Mr. Lungren. So do you need to do more outreach? Do you
need to make any changes legislatively? Are there any other
changes, efforts, emphasis that the Department needs so that we
can ensure to a greater extent that the possibility of those
who would benefit from this is expanded?
Mr. Benda. We are attempting to do the best outreach we
can. We have actually posted on our website a notice for
personnel or for companies that are submitting for procurement
that they can have their procurement officer contact us to see
if SAFETY Act protections apply. We have worked with the
Federal Acquisition Institute to develop an on-line training
course for Federal acquisition officers on how the SAFETY Act
can work.
But unfortunately, with the 22 percent budget cut that the
Science and Technology Directorate took in fiscal year 2011 and
the potential 65 percent budget cut we are facing in 2012, it
is unlikely that we would have the resources available to do
any additional outreach than those already planned.
Mr. Lungren. Well, you have got the line drawn.
Mr. Benda. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lungren. Well, let me ask you this. Why did the Under
Secretary delegate her responsibility to review and render
decisions regarding the SAFETY Act to you? How does she, if she
does, remain involved if, as you say in your prepared
testimony, she considers this to be an important area of her
jurisdiction?
Mr. Benda. Well, sir, one of the reasons she delegated that
responsibility down is that we are interested in expediting the
review process as quickly as possible. Under Secretary O'Toole
wanted someone that had the time available to do a good review
of these applications. Simply, if you look at her inbox on a
daily basis, the SAFETY Act applications were piling up, and
she recognized for them to get a timely review, it would be
helpful to delegate that down.
Now, she and I have, I would say, not necessarily daily
discussions, but certainly multiple times a week, about SAFETY
Act applications. She also ensured that any application that
has significant policy implications are brought to her for
discussion prior to signing.
Mr. Lungren. You are using the impact of budget
restrictions. Given the fact we are going to have tough budget
times, where are you looking for efficiencies in your program?
Mr. Benda. The block designations, sir. We really think
that this is a great way to expand the program. That will be
more efficient for the U.S. Government, as well as for those
people that are applying.
Mr. Lungren. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Ranking Member of the full committee is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Benda, how do you report your approvals? Is it based on
company size, employees, amount of business, or how do you do
it?
Mr. Benda. We report our approvals as requested by the
committee, sir. The table that you received was surprisingly
specific in how the numbers should be put out, even. So we are
happy to report them in any way you like. We can do it by
company size. We can do it by total number of pools. We can do
it by unique applications. We can do it by renewals. We have
all that data available.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. I think I would appreciate you
providing that information. For the sake of questions this
morning, can you tell us where you find the majority of SAFETY
Act approvals coming, based on the size?
Mr. Benda. I do. Most come from small businesses, sir.
Mr. Thompson. So small businesses are able to navigate
SAFETY Act requirements. Do you see a need to have professional
help to fill out the application, or if they would just call
you and say, ``Look, I have a question. What does this mean?''
Is the process onerous that you have to go through significant
expense to fill out an application?
Mr. Benda. I know I wouldn't characterize the process as
onerous, sir.
I had a surprising conversation at one of Mr. Pearl's
events when I talked with a large company that was explaining
to me or asking me why their application fees have gone up so
much. I told them we don't charge a fee. They said, ``Well, our
counsel, our outside counsel, used to charge $30,000 for a
SAFETY Act application, and now they charge $60,000.'' I said,
``Well, I don't even know why you are using outside counsel.''
We are focused specifically on the technology
effectiveness. If you look at the final rule in the criteria,
it is mostly due to effectiveness. We have in place a robust
pre-application process where companies can submit a shorter
version of what they are looking for. I think NVision went
through this process.
We convene a conference call with them to discuss the
application, the issues. Then we work with them hand-in-hand so
that they can get the SAFETY Act designation that is due to
them. It is important for us to give them that.
Mr. Thompson. So the fees that companies pay are because
they have gone and hired somebody to make their application on
their behalf.
Mr. Benda. Yes, sir, at best.
Mr. Thompson. As well there is no at this point--the
Department itself does not charge any fees for processing the
SAFETY Act application.
Mr. Benda. No, sir. It is important to note that, as I
said, 70 percent do not use outside counsel, and those are
actually processed faster.
Mr. Thompson. Last question, is every SAFETY Act
application treated individually for review rather than just
some rubber-stamp process? What I am trying to get, so there is
no assembly line-type process. It is an individual internal
review by your Department.
Mr. Benda. Yes, sir. It is very important that we do not do
a presumption of effectiveness. These technologies protect the
American public from terrorists. We can't presume they are
effective. We have to look at the data. We have to look at the
body of scientific evaluation that is called out in the
criteria. If these technologies fail, people die.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lungren. The gentleman yields back.
Now, in accordance with the rules of the subcommittee, I
recognize other Members according to their appearance here, so
Mr. Richmond of Louisiana is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Richmond. I am going to yield back and wait for the
next panel, if that is all right.
Mr. Lungren. That is fine----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lungren. Since I have been advised we will probably
have votes at 11:30 and it may last until 2:30 on the floor. So
we would like to get our panel here and not have them sit for 4
hours waiting to come back.
Ms. Richardson, the gentlelady from California, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Richardson. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be
brief. I only had, I think, two questions.
Sir, you noted that since 2004 you guys have had over 400
applications, I believe, that were certified.
Mr. Benda. We had 400 awards made. Some were designations.
Some were certifications.
Ms. Richardson. Out of what number? I didn't find that in
the testimony.
Mr. Benda. I don't have that total number in front of me. I
believe it is close to 700-something.
Ms. Richardson. So you would say your percentage is a
little more than 50 percent. Would that be accurate?
Mr. Benda. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Richardson. Okay. Is that 50 percent total since 2004,
or what would it be in the subsequent years? Do you have any
idea?
Mr. Benda. The percentage of applications, based on fiscal
year 2011 numbers, ma'am, that are receiving designation or
approval, seems to be going up.
Ms. Richardson. Yes, but that doesn't give us really any
specifics. Would you mind supplying to the committee for 2004,
2005, 2006, 2007 and each year how many applied and how many
were in fact approved?
Mr. Benda. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Richardson. You have that. Okay.
Mr. Benda. I do.
Ms. Richardson. All right. That is my only question.
Mr. Lungren. The gentlelady has yielded back.
We thank you for appearing before us. I thank you for your
service to our country, and I hope things are as good as you
presented them to be. Maybe we will make inquiries of the
second panel to see their observations, but the updated numbers
are encouraging.
But I want to tell you that we will continue on this
subcommittee to look very closely at this program, because, as
you have suggested, this is an important program and one that
we think is worthy of continuation and, even in difficult
budget times, one that we want to make sure it succeeds. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Benda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Please feel free to ask
me for a button.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lungren. I love the SAFETY Act. Yes, sure.
Mr. Benda. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lungren. All right. We will ask the second panel to
come forward. It consists of Mr. Marc Pearl, Mr. Brian Finch,
Mr. Scott Boylan, and Mr. Craig Harvey.
Mr. Marc Pearl is the president and CEO of the Homeland
Security and Defense Business Council. He has held numerous
positions in the private sector relating to technology and
cybersecurity policy issues, previously served as a chief of
staff and counsel of our former colleague, Dan Glickman of
Kansas. I think I came to Congress with Dan, but that was just
a couple of years ago.
Mr. Brian Finch leads the homeland security practice and is
a partner in the law firm of Dickstein and Shapiro. Mr. Finch
has developed significant private sector experience in
assisting companies to obtain protections under the SAFETY Act.
He is an adjunct professor at the George Washington University
Law School, where he teaches homeland security law and policy,
and is a senior advisor to the Homeland Security and Defense
Business Council.
Mr. Scott Boylan is the vice president of government
relations and general counsel at Morford Detection, Inc., a
company specializing in explosives, narcotics, and chemical
detection systems. Dr. Boylan previously served at the
Department of Treasury, the Department of Justice, and most
recently, the Department of Homeland Security, where he was
senior advisor to the secretary.
Mr. Craig Harvey worked at the U.S. Geological Survey for
nearly 15 years as a field specialist and National instructor
and most recently helped found NVision Solutions, a geospatial
technology integration company, where he serves as chief
operations officer and executive vice president.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here. We appreciate your
time and your expertise. We would tell you that your written
submissions will be made a part of the record and that we would
ask you to summarize your testimony for 5 minutes apiece. Then
we will ask questions.
I do acknowledge the attendance of Ms. Clarke, our Ranking
Member of the subcommittee.
So if you would start in the order in which I introduced
you.
Mr. Pearl, first, you are recognized to testify.

STATEMENT OF MARC A. PEARL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, HOMELAND SECURITY AND DEFENSE BUSINESS COUNCIL

Mr. Pearl. Thank you, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member
Clarke, Ranking Member Thompson and Members of the
subcommittee. I thank you for giving the Homeland Security and
Defense Business Council an opportunity to appear before you
today.
As the Chairman said, I am Marc Pearl. I serve as the
president and CEO of the council, a not-for-profit, nonpartisan
organization of the leading companies that deliver homeland
security solutions to the marketplace.
The council's main mission is to ensure that the
perspective, innovation, expertise, and capabilities of the
private sector are fully utilized in our Nation's security.
Only when there is substantive engagement between the
Government and industry can we successfully deliver efficient,
effective, and fiscally responsible, high-quality homeland
security solutions to our citizens.
The intent of Congress when it enacted the SAFETY Act in
2002 was to focus on the need to be proactive rather than
reactive after 9/11 and nurture an environment that put R&D
into an anticipatory posture. You gave industry solution
providers a valuable legal tool to encourage the innovation,
implementation, and deployment of technologies that help make
our Nation safer and more secure.
The focus of my testimony is to provide the subcommittee
with a perspective on how we can work together to: (1) Improve
the process, (2) achieve the priorities of the Act, and (3) to
ensure greater public support for the SAFETY Act. I appreciate
your putting our full written testimony into the record.
First, with regard to a more effective process, the SAFETY
Act has seen many peaks and valleys with respect to the amount
of effort by companies who apply for certification to obtain
its protection. Initially, the arduous and sometimes burdensome
process deterred many applicants.
Many of our members are also concerned that the bases for
technological evaluations of technologies of the SAFETY Act
have not been consistent or as transparent as they could be.
DHS should be encouraged to refrain from applying inconsistent
criteria in their technical evaluation.
DHS, as we heard by Deputy Under Secretary Benda, has
worked to revise and streamline its review process and has set
into place more formal and reliable review mechanisms. But more
effort is necessary to further streamline and make consistent
the certification process.
The SAFETY Act review process must, of course, continue to
be rigorous and thorough and conclusive in order that should a
product or service be challenged, there is a strong review
record in place. It is critical to ensure that the review
process establishes solid presumption of reliability, inspires
confidence that the approved product or service truly has a
utility against terrorism, and encourages customers to utilize
and deploy approved technologies.
DHS, however, must understand that the Act it is
responsible for administrating is fundamentally a legal, not a
scientific engineering or technical merit, program. The
certification process does not require detailed review of
systems, but a determination with reasonable certainty that a
product, technology, or service is useful and effective against
terrorism. Congress never intended to have the SAFETY Act
certified solution be the most useful or the most effective
effect tool against terrorism. We cannot let the perfect be the
enemy of the good.
With regard to, second, the priorities, the SAFETY Act is
meant to provide, as you said yourself in your opening remarks,
an incentive to the private sector to continue to research and
utilize anti-terrorism technologies. The act should serve to
encourage industry to continue to innovate, but DHS must be
more actively involved in promoting its benefits and show that
it is a priority program.
For example, the Department could improve efforts to
educate Federal contracting officials regarding the act and its
related changes to the Federal Acquisition Regulations. The
SAFETY Act could also be better aligned with the Federal
acquisition process as a whole, including the eliminating of
redundancies in and expediting technical evaluations of its
applications relating to products and services that are
procured not only by DHS, but other Federal Government
entities.
We also believe that DHS should work more closely with
third parties, such as the risk management industry, to better
explain the values of the provisions. These could have an
enormously positive effect on the underwriting process.
Third, with regard to garnering greater public support, the
focus of the attentions regarding successful implementation of
the Act should not be on how it limits liability, but rather
how it encourages greater and more widespread deployment of
technologies that could deter terrorism and protect our
citizens.
DHS can ensure that a greater number of beneficiaries will
recognize the benefits of the Act and industry can better
understand what to expect from a successful application by
better promoting it within Government and to the business
community.
The rest of my remarks are part of the written record, but
I want to say in conclusion that the SAFETY Act is a vital tool
that can help us become a safer and more secure Nation by
encouraging the successful implementation and deployment of
technologies.
We thank you for this opportunity. We pledge to work with
the subcommittee and the Department to achieve an environment
where an improved and robust SAFETY Act is fully embraced and
marketed in an atmosphere ensuring a sound, fair, and
responsible certification process.
[The statement of Mr. Pearl follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marc A. Pearl
May 26, 2011
introduction
Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke and Members of the
committee, thank you for giving the Homeland Security & Defense
Business Council an opportunity to appear before you today. I am Marc
Pearl, president and CEO of the Council, a not-for-profit, non-partisan
organization of the leading companies that deliver homeland security
solutions to the marketplace. The Council works to ensure that the
perspective, innovation, expertise, and capabilities of the private
sector are fully utilized in our Nation's security, as well as
recognized and integrated with the public sector. Council members
employ more than 3 million Americans in all 50 States. We are honored
and proud to work alongside civilian, defense, and intelligence agency
leaders in support of their strategic initiatives through our
individual and collective expertise in technology, facility and
networks design and construction, human capital, financial management,
technology integration, and program management. Only when there is
substantive engagement between the Government and the private sector
can we successfully deliver effective, efficient, and fiscally
responsible high-quality solutions to our citizens.
At the outset, we want to express our appreciation to the
subcommittee and the Members of the entire Homeland Security Committee
for your leadership on the full range of critical issues associated
with improving the effectiveness of the laws and programs that would
serve to make our Nation safer and more secure. A major part of that
effort is the recognition that only when Government and industry are in
direct communication and cooperation can we truly create a ``culture of
readiness and of preparedness.''
Congress must continue to take the responsibility to encourage
constant, open, and reliable communication between industry and
Government to achieve its mission. Additionally, we look to Congress to
provide the oversight and support necessary to ensure that we
collectively as a Nation maintain our continued vigilance and
preparedness, and are fully utilizing all the tools at our disposal.
Needs shift, priorities are altered, and threats continue to
evolve. Over the past decade we have--all too often--found ourselves in
a reactive posture, responding to the crisis du jour. We also must
focus on the need to be proactive and nurture an environment that puts
our research and development into an anticipatory posture.
That was the intent of Congress when it enacted the Support Anti-
Terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies (SAFETY) Act. Congress
gave industry solutions providers a valuable legal tool to further
encourage the innovation, implementation, and deployment of
technologies that would serve to make our Nation safer and more secure.
The holding of this hearing today--the first specifically on this
topic in 5 years--is allowing the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
and industry to join with you in giving voice to an important program
that helps to give our Nation the ability to provide effective
deterrent measures against those who would seek to destroy or kill
innocent citizens.
The focus of the Council's testimony today is to provide the
subcommittee with industry's collective perspective on the SAFETY Act
and how we can work together to: (1) Improve the Process; (2) Achieve
its Priorities; and (3) Ensure Greater Public Support.
a more effective process
Throughout its brief history, the SAFETY Act has seen many peaks
and valleys with respect to the amount of effort required to obtain the
protections it provides to companies that have gone through the
application process. Initially--as could be expected from any new
administrative review process--the ability to obtain SAFETY Act
protections was a lengthy and complicated process. Applications
languished for months on end, and the level of detail expected by DHS
was exceptionally difficult to supply. This led many companies to back
away from the SAFETY Act process because the route to these protections
was too arduous for the ultimate benefits.
DHS has since worked to revise and streamline its review process
and set in place more formal and reliable review mechanisms. The
Science & Technology (S&T) Directorate--tasked with implementing the
SAFETY Act--has put forth new procedures indicating recognition that
the application process is a collaborative one with the Office of
SAFETY Act Implementation. As a result, they are reporting that
approval has been granted to a larger number of applicants, including
some innovative anti-terror services like commercial shopping center
security guards and professional security certification programs. DHS
has indicated a desire to continue on the path of managing a reliable
and thorough review process while showing greater sensitivity to the
potential burden to applicants. We are desirous of seeing as
streamlined a certification process as is feasible and reasonable, and
the implementation of the Act in a full and complete fashion.
We are also concerned that the bases for technical evaluations of
technologies for SAFETY Act purposes have not been as consistent or
transparent as they could or should be. DHS should be encouraged to
refrain from applying inconsistent criteria in their technical
evaluations.
Having said this, however, the SAFETY Act review process must be
rigorous, thorough, and conclusive, in order that, should the
utilization or performance of a product or service be challenged, there
is a strong review record in place. A comprehensive documentation
process will alleviate any review concerns and reinforces the Council's
support for the underlying intent and foundation of the Federal law--to
help ensure the widespread deployment of anti-terrorism products and
services. It is critical to have a review process that establishes a
strong presumption of reliability, inspires confidence that the
approved product or service truly has a utility against terrorism, and
encourages customers to utilize and deploy approved technologies.
Industry recognizes that the SAFETY Act--in some ways--takes S&T
out of its ``comfort zone'' of engineering and scientific research. But
DHS must understand and recognize that the SAFETY Act it is charged
with administering is fundamentally a legal, not a scientific,
engineering or technical merit program. The certification process does
not require a detailed review of systems, but a determination with
reasonable certainty that a product, technology, or service is useful
and effective against terrorism. Congress never intended to have a
SAFETY Act-certified solution be the most useful or most effective tool
against terrorism. We cannot let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
more effective priorities
The SAFETY Act was meant to provide an incentive to the private
sector to continue to research, develop, deploy, and utilize anti-
terror technologies to best protect our Nation, its citizens, and
critical assets. If utilized fully, the SAFETY Act encourages industry
to continue to innovate. Has it been marketed as successfully as it
could within Government and to the business community at large?
Unfortunately, there has been a negative trend of reductions in the
total number of SAFETY Act applications and approvals in recent months.
SAFETY Act-certified technologies are suggested as part of the
Federal acquisition process, but DHS could further improve efforts to
educate Federal-contracting officials regarding the Act and its related
changes to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). Implementation of
the Act could also be better aligned with the Federal acquisition
process, including eliminating redundancies in and expediting technical
evaluation of SAFETY Act applications relating to products and services
procured by DHS and other Federal Government entities.
The Department should also vigorously publicize the value of the
SAFETY Act to the business community at large, and continue to work
with solutions providers in streamlining the application process. It
should also work more closely with third parties--such as the risk
management industry--to better explain the value of the provisions. As
a result, this could have a subsequent positive effect on the
underwriting process.
By making the SAFETY Act a higher priority of the administration,
and better promoting it within Government and to the business
community, a greater number of beneficiaries will recognize the
benefits of the Act and industry can better understands what to expect
from a successful application.
greater public support
The Council and its members are committed to increasing the
understanding and further deployment of SAFETY Act-approved
technologies, and encouraging a strong and responsible application
process that gives confidence in the products and services granted
SAFETY Act protections.
The focus of attention regarding successful implementation of the
SAFETY Act should not be on its limiting liability, but rather on how
it encourages greater and more widespread deployment of technologies
that could deter terrorism and protect our citizens. Everyone loses if
certified technologies are not more fully deployed and the benefits of
the Act are not better publicized. Our Nation would be left with fewer
safeguards, and companies that do develop or deploy such technologies
would be open to limitless litigation.
Congress' role--as you are doing through this hearing today--is to
encourage constant, open, and reliable communication between industry
and Government. Additionally, Congress must continue to provide the
oversight and support necessary to ensure we collectively as a Nation
concerned about continued vigilance and preparedness are fully
utilizing all the tools at our disposal.
Lastly and briefly, transportation security; border security; and
the protection of people, facilities, goods, and networks, all have an
international component that requires cooperation and communication
among all our country's friends and allies. Promoting the benefits of
the SAFETY Act--its incentives to develop, implement, and deploy the
best of breed tools and solutions to fight terrorism--no matter where
they are developed, manufactured, or deployed would be enormously
helpful in our fight to protect our own homeland. The Act provides
protections for the manufacturers and providers of certified
technologies and services for cases under the jurisdiction of the U.S.
court system, but no such protections exist outside U.S. borders. Is it
foolish to ask our strategic partners for enhanced international
cooperation on third-party liability protections for terrorist attacks?
Shouldn't this issue be put on the agenda when Government officials
meet with their Legislative and Executive branch counterparts--
particularly now that we all recognize that terrorism is a global
threat and homeland security a global mission?
conclusion
``Success'' against those who would seek to destroy our way of
life, wreak havoc on our economy, and kill innocent citizens will
ultimately depend on our ability to fully implement and deploy
technologies and tools that fully deter and prevent a devastating
catastrophe.
To achieve greater and active participation by everyone is not just
the responsibility of Congress to enact the necessary laws, the
administration to develop real, tangible, and ``embraceable''
regulations and programs to carry them out, industry to develop and
help deploy the solutions, or the greater citizenry to take on its
share of the responsibility to be vigilant. It is a combination of all
of the above. The SAFETY Act is but one vital tool that helps us become
a safer and more secure Nation.
On behalf of the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council, I
once again express our appreciation for the opportunity to provide our
comments on the important issues before the subcommittee. The Council
and its members pledge to provide this committee and the Department
with the appropriate support, expertise, and input needed to achieve
mission success.
We are prepared to work with the subcommittee and DHS to mutually
achieve an environment where an improved and robust SAFETY Act is fully
embraced and marketed the Department in an atmosphere ensuring a sound,
fair, and responsible certification process.

Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much, Mr. Pearl.
Mr. Finch.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN E. FINCH, PARTNER, DICKSTEIN SHAPIRO, LLP

Mr. Finch. Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke,
distinguished Members of the committee, it is an honor to
appear before you today to discuss the current implementation
of the SAFETY Act by the DHS Science and Technology
Directorate.
Post-9/11, Congress deliberately chose to offer the
liability protections of the SAFETY Act to ensure a healthy
anti-terrorism marketplace. Not 3 hours ago, I was reminded of
those by the former Speaker of the House, Dennis Hastert.
Since it was enacted, the SAFETY Act has been, relatively
speaking, one of DHS' most successful programs. Without it,
numerous critical products and services would not be in the
marketplace. The SAFETY Act is not an absolute success,
however. While 400-plus products and services have received the
designation or certification, that number should be in the
thousands.
The good news is that not much needs to be done to turn the
SAFETY Act into a true success. The statutory and regulatory
language governing the SAFETY Act arms DHS with broad authority
to rapidly and effectively process applications and implement
them in a transparent, consistent, and accountable manner that
will unleash its potential.
I must state that this hearing is absolutely essential,
because if S&T gets only one thing right, it has to be the
SAFETY Act. Without a successful SAFETY Act program, S&T will
not be moving forward completely in its mission to help deploy
effective technologies into the marketplace.
SAFETY Act is more critical than ever, because companies
can now easily be held liable for damages, if they fail to take
reasonable steps when it is shown that they knew or should have
been aware they faced possible terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, ``reasonable'' can mean anything, including even
the most stringent security measures.
All of this came from the decision in New York holding
victims two-thirds liable for the death and destruction caused
by terrorists, leaving the other third to others, including the
terrorists themselves. Also include that when litigation
happens following a terrorist attack, security providers will
be the ones to have their pockets turned inside out.
Terrorists are not going to honor damages awards stemming
out of a civil lawsuit--plus, of course, right now there is
only one group with a proven record of tracking down
terrorists, and I feel confident in saying that the Navy SEALs
are unavailable to act as process servers.
Given the realistic possibility of ruinous litigation
following a terrorist attack, the question then becomes: How
best can the SAFETY Act be implemented? Let us remember that
DHS itself stated, ``The purpose of the Act is to ensure that
the threat of liability does not deter potential manufacturers
or sellers of antiterrorism technologies from developing,
deploying, and commercializing technologies from saving
lives.''
DHS must heed its own words. It can do so by first working
to try and have each application approved. At times there is a
sense that applications are presumptively denied, unless there
is an overwhelming case for approval. Right or wrong, that has
been a powerful disincentive for current and potential
applicants.
Second, the Department should accept all sorts of data
demonstrating effectiveness, not just the kind that is
generated when a product has been through the wringer of a
Federal procurement.
Third, DHS should manage the SAFETY Act with relatively few
boundaries in what can be approved. Applications for products
or services that could protect sports facilities, hospitality
chains, iconic structures, technology support outside the
United States, or otherwise would protect against terrorism,
should all be eligible for approval.
Some simple process changes would go far in creating a
customer-friendly SAFETY Act. First, DHS should increase
transparency. Even the most experienced applicants face a
guessing game at times as to what is required of them to
navigate the SAFETY Act process. That is terribly frustrating
and gives companies serious pause as to whether they want to
participate. DHS should be clear about what information it
wants and should work with applicants to develop it.
Second, the SAFETY Act needs consistency. Companies have
complained about similar applications being subjected to
different standards of review, and that has to stop. Also, the
renewal phase of the SAFETY Act has turned into something akin
to a de novo review. That is difficult to understand,
especially in circumstances where the applicant has done
nothing wrong in the intervening years.
Accountability is a third factor. It must be clear to all
who actually sets the metrics for a SAFETY Act application and
that there is a mechanism in place to ensure that they are
being followed. Such accountability will reduce instances of
unconstrained fact-finding and will allow parties to know who
they need to work with in order to get on the same page.
Another point is that certification under the SAFETY Act
has become far less common. Whatever the reason, it is
sufficient to say that this trend should be reversed
immediately.
One last note is that--and this perception might exist
among some--that once a SAFETY Act award has been issued, it is
irrevocable. Simply put, we all should remember that Federal
courts will play a strong adjudicatory role when the time comes
for litigation.
Acknowledging the limited budgets facing our Government,
now more than ever DHS must use the SAFETY Act to incentivize
the private sector. Doing so will help promote some of the
highest priority areas for DHS, including matters this
committee has jurisdiction over, such as C-TPAT and
cybersecurity. We must all work together to create a
transparent, consistent SAFETY Act imbued with accountability.
I thank the committee for the opportunity to testify and
look forward to taking your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Finch follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brian E. Finch
May 26, 2011
i. introduction
Chairman Lungren, Vice Chairman Walberg, Ranking Member Clarke, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, it is an honor to appear
before you to discuss the current implementation of the Support Anti-
Terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies (``SAFETY'') Act by the
Science and Technology Directorate of the Department of Homeland
Security (``DHS''). I will also discuss how the SAFETY Act can be
utilized so that its full potential is reached both by DHS and the
private sector.
Since the SAFETY Act was enacted nearly 9 years ago, it has
become--relatively speaking--one of the most successful programs
managed by DHS. Without the liability protections offered by the SAFETY
Act, numerous critical products and services would not be in the
marketplace, defending American citizens and property. Moreover, the
intrinsic value of the SAFETY Act and its liability protections is
easily demonstrated by the numerous customers of anti-terrorism
products and services that strongly encourage--or even require--that
the anti-terror tools they purchase must have SAFETY Act protections.
One cannot step into an airport, public building, stadium, or
commercial shopping centers without likely encountering a SAFETY Act-
Designated or -Certified product or service.
Still, objectively speaking, much remains to be done in order to
make the SAFETY Act an absolute success. While several hundred products
and services have received a Designation or Certification, that number
in reality should be in the thousands. For a variety of reasons I will
detail, too many products and services that remain on the sidelines of
the SAFETY Act process. Through my remarks today I will detail why the
SAFETY Act is so critical to the security of the Nation, as well as
offer some suggestions on ways the implementation of the SAFETY Act can
be improved so that it will be viewed as an unqualified success.
I will also state up front that not much needs to be done to turn
the SAFETY Act into a true success. The statutory and regulatory
language governing the SAFETY Act is robust and well-developed. It arms
DHS with the broad authority to rapidly and effectively process
applications, and sets up a framework to inspire confidence in that
review. Key then to fully unlocking the SAFETY Act is to make certain
that the original intent of the SAFETY Act is honored and the program
is implemented in a way that is transparent, consistent, and ensures
accountability for DHS in its management of the program.
I would also be remiss if I did not mention that the SAFETY Act is
perhaps the most critical program administered by the Science &
Technology Directorate of DHS. If the Science & Technology Directorate
is truly going to encourage the deployment of technologies to combat
terrorism, it must continue to expend the resources necessary to make
the SAFETY Act a priority. This hearing is absolutely essential then,
because if the Science and Technology Directorate gets only one thing
right, it has to be the SAFETY Act. Without a successful SAFETY Act
program in its portfolio, it will have lost a large amount of
credibility with the private sector and will have failed in executing
one of its core missions as defined by the Homeland Security Act of
2002.
ii.why the safety act is still a critical incentive for the deployment
of anti-terrorism technologies
The motivation for the SAFETY Act being included in the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 could not be clearer. At that time the country was
still reeling from the devastating attacks of September 11, 2001.
Buildings had to be rebuilt, wounds had to be healed, and the Nation
was struggling to determine how best to prepare to defend against or
respond to future terrorist attacks. Even when DHS was stood up, it was
still going to have limited authority and resources to develop and
deliver security solutions. Ultimately then, the Nation was going to
have to depend on solutions developed and deployed by the private
sector to protect itself from terrorist threats.
The private sector was well aware of the demands placed on it, and
its representatives were eager to help provide the tools needed to stop
another terrorist attack. Given the size and scope of the destruction
caused in the September 11 attacks, however, companies were forced to
reflect on the significant liability that could follow a terrorist
attack. Such concerns reached the point that makers of anti-terrorism
technologies began to seriously consider whether they could deploy
existing or possible solutions. After all, a few thousand dollars
earned on a risk assessment paled in comparison to the untold millions
of dollars in costs that could arise from a court finding that their
work was inadequate, and thus are responsible for the damages suffered
in a terrorist attack.
The risk mitigation options available to anti-terror solution
providers were few and generally inadequate: Insurance--especially
immediately after September 11, was sparsely available and uncertain in
its coverage, indemnification from customers was also rarely available,
and only served to shift risk, and Government bailouts in the event of
another act of terrorism were considered highly unlikely. In light of
this list of undesirable alternatives, Congress was faced with the
stark choice of either allowing the anti-terror solution market to sink
to an unacceptably small size or to take proactive measures to mitigate
liability. Congress, in its wisdom, chose to offer liability
protections in the form of the SAFETY Act. In other terms in the battle
between preserving opportunities for massive litigation or pushing out
solutions that would prevent terrorists from attacking, Congress chose
the latter by creating the SAFETY Act.
One would have hoped the intervening years would have served to
lessen concerns about crushing liability from terrorist events.
Unfortunately, the legal landscape for providers of anti-terror
solutions has become even more fraught with danger. Perhaps the most
troubling development was the decision related to the liability of the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey arising from the 1993 attack
on the World Trade Center. In 2008, a New York appellate court upheld
the liability of the Port Authority for injuries and deaths resulting
from that attack. That decision set a dangerous precedent that gave
pause to companies throughout the United States.
Specifically, the New York courts created a whole new standard of
liability under which it would be difficult--if not impossible--for
defendants to avoid liability after a terrorist attack. The court found
that if defendants knew or should have been aware that they were under
threat from a terrorist attack, they must then take ``reasonable''
steps to mitigate the potential for a terrorist event.
Under the ``knew or should have been aware'' standard, facility
owners now face the unenviable task of deciding whether they are ``on
notice'' of the possibility of terrorist events taking place at their
property. This presents endless opportunities for plaintiffs to
establish that a defendant should have been aware of terrorist threats.
Even something as seemingly innocent as the provision of extra anti-
terrorism funding for the geographic region the defendant resides in
could satisfy this notice requirement.
Once notice has been established, a defendant then must undertake
``reasonable'' steps to mitigate a potential terrorist attack. While a
seemingly common-sense requirement on its face, the devil here is in
the details. The Court made it clear that ``reasonable'' mitigation
steps could be ones that were more burdensome than anything the
defendant had previously considered, and could go all the way up to
situations where a defendant had to enact even the most stringent
security recommendations provided to it. The end result of this
decision is that now potential terrorist targets have no assurance that
any measure they offer or seek to implement will be considered
``reasonable,'' and thus the door to liability is far too open for
anyone's comfort. And, let's not forget that all this stemmed from a
decision where it was held that the Port Authority was held two-thirds
liable for the death and destruction caused by terrorists, leaving the
one-third to others--including the terrorists themselves.
Liability concerns do not end there, however. Far from it.
Additional events have shown that when it comes time for litigation
following a terrorist attack, security providers will inevitably be the
ones to have their pockets turned inside out. Consider this reasonable
proposition for a moment: Why not seek recovery from the terrorists?
After all, they were the ones who committed these terrible events. The
simple answer is that holding a terrorist accountable in a civil
lawsuit has a very low probability of success. Suits have been filed
against terrorists and their sponsors, and inevitably fail because--to
no one's great surprise--the terrorists chose not to respond to the
complaints. The litigation did not even proceed to answering
fundamental process questions: As of right now there is only one group
with a proven record of tracking down terrorists, and I feel confident
in noting that U.S. Navy Seals are not available to serve civil action
complaints.
Even in the rare cases where litigation proceeds without the
presence of defendants, recovery is still essentially impossible.
Successful litigation against state sponsors of terrorism, where
billions of dollars have been awarded to plaintiffs, still remains an
abstract process with little chance for realistic recovery. Even the
presiding judges admit that such victories are symbolic as the sponsors
are usually estranged from the United States, deny responsibility for
the attack anyway, and once again chose not to respond to the lawsuit.
Finally, there are these simple facts: Civil litigation following
terrorist attacks will happen, it will be lengthy, and it will be
extraordinarily expensive. A survey was conducted a few years back of
persons who were eligible to participate in the 9/11 victims
compensation fund or actually did so. Out of that survey came some
salient points, including:

Many people who took payments from the fund stated that if
they could do it again, they would have elected to not waive
their rights and instead would have sued. Several stated that
they felt ``dirty'' after taking the money;

Families who chose to sue various companies whose products
were involved in the 9/11 attacks viewed the Compensation Fund
as ``hush money.'' Some participants went so far as to say that
``People were being paid off not to go to court''; and

Those same people viewed litigation as a way to get
accountability. Some noted that ``What I'm looking for is
justice . . . someone held accountable . . . there are people
who did not do their job.''
Not in that survey, but well-known is that the defendants have been
forced to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to defend themselves
from claims that most would agree will likely be denied at the end of
the day.
Thus, the totality of that situation then is as follows: The civil
liability environment for providers of anti-terrorism products and
services is far more toxic than ever; dangerous standards of care are
being established; and expensive and protracted litigation following a
terrorist attack--against the people who tried to stop the attack, mind
you--is now a virtual certainty. Therefore the need for the effective
and efficient implementation of the SAFETY Act is greater than ever.
iii. improvements in the safety act application and decision-making
process
A. The original intent of the SAFETY Act should be followed
Given the realistic possibility of ruinous litigation following a
terrorist attack, the question then becomes how best can the SAFETY Act
(which represents the only realistic solution to that threat) be
implemented to mitigate such events? As is clear from the statute and
its implementing regulations, the purpose of the SAFETY Act is to
preempt such litigation following a thorough, meaningful, but not
unduly burdensome review of how the given technology works and is to be
deployed. The Department itself stated in the Preamble to the Final
Rule that ``[t]he purpose of the Act is to ensure that the threat of
liability does not deter potential manufacturers or sellers anti-
terrorism technologies from developing, deploying, and commercializing
technologies from saving lives.'' 71 Fed. Reg. 33,147, 33,148 (June 8,
2006). The Department even took an unassailable position on its view of
the intended purpose of the SAFETY Act, stating that:

``Congress was clear, both in the text of the SAFETY Act and in the
Act's legislative history, that the SAFETY Act can and should be a
critical tool in expanding the creation, proliferation, and use of
anti-terrorism technologies.''

71 Fed. Reg. at 33,147.
If the SAFETY Act is to succeed, the Department needs to fully
commit to implementing the Act in a manner consistent with its own
interpretation of its intent. This would include ensuring that all
technologies, whether novel or commonplace can obtain SAFETY Act
protections so long as it can be shown that they have some type of
utility in deterring, defending against, responding to, or mitigating
acts of terrorism.
This requires a commitment from DHS in several areas. First, the
Department should work to try and have each application approved. This
would require the Department adopting a policy of presuming that each
application it receives merits approval. While this might sound like an
obvious policy, at times there has been a sense that applications are
presumptively denied unless an applicant can build a strong case for
approval. Right or wrong that perception has existed, and it has acted
as a disincentive for potential and current applicants as well as for
current applicants. DHS should understand that the Act as written
favors approvals, and that Congressional intent in this area has not
changed at all. Obviously there will be applications that simply will
not merit SAFETY Act protections, but there should also not be a
perception that obtaining SAFETY Act protections for proven
technologies will involve a long and arduous review process.
Second, the Department should actively encourage applications of
all sorts, not just those for technologies that have been through some
form of Federal vetting or procurement process. At times there has been
a sense that an application only has a fair chance of success if it has
been thoroughly vetted or deployed by the Federal Government. In part,
that sense has stemmed from the concern that often times the Department
will essentially rely only on very specific efficacy data collected
from customers. Typically that data does not exist for commercial
deployments, and so applicants are left scrambling to assemble it, or
have a difficult time collecting it from their Government customers.
DHS needs to work collaboratively with applicants to help them
determine what information is needed, and also appreciate what can
realistically be collected. This would include DHS gaining a realistic
sense of how data is kept by businesses, and taking the position that
the absence of information that would normally be collected during a
procurement is not a barrier to SAFETY Act protections.
Third, DHS should recall that Congress put in its hands a powerful
liability management tool with the intent of the Department approving a
large variety of applications. Too often applicants have walked away
with the impression that the SAFETY Act process is reserved for
products with a proven track record. Companies that deploy security-
related services in particular have felt that the process is too
oriented towards products, and companies that deploy technologies to
risky areas--especially overseas--have expressed concern that DHS has a
greater hesitancy to approve such precedent-setting applications.
The attitude should be the exact opposite. DHS should manage the
SAFETY Act with relatively few boundaries on what can be approved. By
way of example, applications for products or services that protect
sports facilities or hospitality chains, provide compliance with
security regulations, protect Americans and other innocent persons
outside U.S. borders, or otherwise protect against terrorism in some
way shape or form should all be eligible for approval. This attitude
would be far more reflective of the intent of the SAFETY Act, which is
to ensure the widespread deployment of anti-terrorism technologies.
B. Greater focus should be placed on transparency, consistency, and
accountability
From a process-oriented perspective, DHS has gone through periods
where the application process was smooth, predictable, and resulted in
a ``customer-friendly'' experience. At other times, some would say that
the Department has moved away from such an experience. I am certain
that Members of this committee and others have heard complaints to that
effect.
In order to combat such concerns--whether real or otherwise--I
would propose some simple solutions that will go far in creating a
smooth and robust SAFETY Act application process. The key theme for
these suggestions is to have an application process where applicants
know that they will be working with DHS in a collaborative manner
toward the common goal of getting the application approved.
First, DHS should aim to significantly increase transparency
related to the SAFETY Act application process. Too often applicants
face a guessing game as to what is required of them in order to
successfully navigate the SAFETY Act application process. Even if a
company is familiar with the application process, each time a new
application is submitted they potentially face a path with many twists
and turns. This leads to great frustration among applicants as they
have undoubtedly invested significant time and effort in their
application, yet they are simply told in return that there are numerous
pieces of missing information to be presented before DHS will even
review the application.
A key note for the committee to remember is that often takes two or
three tries before DHS accepts an application for formal review. As the
committee is surely aware, DHS will not conduct a substantive review of
an application unless it finds that it is ``administratively
complete.'' Apparent, the threshold for an application being complete
is that there is enough information provided so that the Department
believes it can complete its full review and render a decision within
the next 90 days.
While this may not seem like a significant obstacle, it truly is a
painstaking and time-consuming process. Companies will put together
application packets consisting of nearly 100 pages of text, backed up
by dozens of supplemental exhibits and references from numerous
customers. Far too often, despite all that work, the application is
deemed ``incomplete,'' and the applicant most go back and start the
application process over again. This is terribly frustrating to
applicants, and I can tell you from personal experience that it gives
companies serious pause as to whether they would like to resubmit an
application.
Even after an application is found to be complete, companies are
still regularly asked for large amounts of information. While it is
natural for DHS to request follow-up information related to the
application, these requests are often lengthy, and explore areas not
always relevant to the application's subject matter.
With that in mind, the health of the SAFETY Act would benefit from
much greater transparency on the part of DHS. The SAFETY Act should not
be administered like a closed-book exam, with little to no guidance as
to what information the teachers are seeking. Instead, the application
process should be administered in a way that encourages an active
dialogue between applicant and reviewer, where each party understands
exactly what the other is looking for and they work together to develop
acceptable answers. Moreover, if there is a change in the expectations
of DHS, that should be made clear to the applicant as quickly as
possible. Too often standards shift as an application proceeds through
review, making an already stressful situation even more difficult.
Fundamental to all this, however, is DHS maintaining clear lines of
communications with applicants about expectations. Building such a
partnership will go a long way to improving the health of the Act.
A second needed area of progress for the SAFETY Act relates to
consistency. One of the most frustrating elements for SAFETY Act
applicants is the apparent disparate treatment various applicants
receive. Concerns have been expressed over the years that the success
of an application depends as much on when the application was submitted
as it does on the substance included. Companies in particular have
expressed frustration that similarly-situated companies have received
SAFETY Act protections while they have struggled to eke out even the
smallest of protections through the approval process.
Such concerns are more than academic. Acceptance of the SAFETY Act
among customers has reached the point where holding SAFETY Act
credentials is critical to earning or keeping security-related
business. Because of such competitive concerns, it is vital that
applicants know that they will not unnecessarily be subjected to a
higher standard of review than other applicants. Closer scrutiny for
similarly-themed applications should occur in situations where it is
clearly merited, such as where it is obvious that the applicant has
repeatedly had material performance issues. Even then DHS should only
look to see if the applicant has demonstrated its ability to be useful
and effective against terrorist acts, and should not look to create
some sort of higher threshold of proof for their application.
The renewal phase of the SAFETY Act process also lacks consistency.
As a reminder, SAFETY Act protections must be renewed periodically,
typically every 5 years. The renewal process was created to ensure that
technologies continue to be effective and useful against terrorism. At
times, unfortunately, the process has turned into something akin to a
de novo review, requiring applicants to essentially start from scratch
with respect to proving the merits of their application. I have seen
levels of protection fall from Certification to Designation, or even
SAFETY Act protections being rescinded. Such changes in protection are
difficult to understand, particularly when the applicant has done
nothing that could be considered as negatively impacting the usefulness
or effectiveness of their technology. It only seems appropriate then
that renewal applications as well should not be subjected to constantly
shifting review standards.
One other critical point to emphasize with respect to the
implementation of the SAFETY Act is that there should be a degree of
accountability with respect to the approval process. By this, I mean
that it should obvious to an applicant who is establishing the criteria
for approving an application, and that these criteria are the ones
being utilized in the actual review.
Many times it is unclear to an applicant who is actually making
decisions as to the standards being utilized or metrics that must be
met before an application will be approved. While it is well-known that
the Office of SAFETY Act Implementation is charged with conducting a
substantive review of an application, it is not clear who is
establishing the metrics used to determine whether the application will
be approved. Similarly it is unclear whether there is a mechanism in
place that will ensure that those metrics are being followed, or if
they are deviated from that there is a compelling reason for doing so.
Establishing a level of accountability in the SAFETY Act process,
particularly one that is visible to the applicant community, is
therefore critical. Applicants need to understand who ultimately is
making decisions about applications, and have a level of assurance that
decisions are not being made simply based on administrative records
developed through unconstrained fact-finding. Just as importantly,
everyone--including Congress--would benefit from knowing who ultimately
is setting the requirements for approval. By knowing who is in charge
of that process, there can be one central point of contact for
determining whether that person has set metrics that are reasonable and
consistent with the original intent of the SAFETY Act. And this will
also work to the benefit of DHS, as it will allow both the private
sector and Congress both to know who they need to interface with in
order to make sure that all parties are on the same page with respect
to how the Act should be implemented.
One last point with respect to the implementation of the SAFETY Act
is that the end goal of any review should be the Certification of the
technology. As time has passed, Certifications under the SAFETY Act
have become less common. Whatever the reason, it is sufficient to say
that this trend should be reversed immediately. Awarding Certifications
is an important signal that the technology is useful and effective.
Certification awards also signal that the Department fully believes in
the purpose of the SAFETY Act, namely that the threat of liability
should be eliminated. While there are certainly cases where a
Designation is merited, the Department should be working with
applicants to find ways to move an approval to the level of
Certification.
iii. conclusion
The threat from terrorism has not gone anyway nor, sadly, is it
likely to go away any time soon. Given that ever-present threat, it is
absolutely vital that DHS take every step possible to help ensure the
safety of American lives, infrastructure, and treasure. Acknowledging
the limited budgets facing our Government, now more than ever DHS must
do what it can to incentivize the private sector to develop and fully
deploy anti-terror solutions. At this time, the best way it can do so
is by unleashing the fantastic potential contained within the SAFETY
Act. In terms of the most effective way to immediately transition
technologies into the hands of the private sector and ensure that they
are used, the SAFETY Act is the greatest resource DHS has at its
disposal.
Using that resource will help promote some of the highest-priority
areas for DHS, including matters this committee has jurisdiction over
such as Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards and cybersecurity,
where DHS should be making active links to expedite SAFETY Act
protections. Most of all, I would urge DHS, this committee, and the
private sector to come together so that a revitalized program can
emerge, one that is transparent, consistent, and imbued with
accountability. There are so many solutions that should be wearing a
badge of SAFETY Act approval but do not as of yet. That can only happen
if DHS fully supports the SAFETY Act and embraces the original intent
of Congress, specifically that this is a program intended to fully
support the deployment of useful and effective technologies.
I thank the committee for the opportunity to testify and will be
happy to take any questions at this time.

Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much.
Mr. Boylan.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT BOYLAN, VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL,
MORPHO DETECTION, INC.

Mr. Boylan. Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, thank
you for inviting me and having me speak here.
My company, Morpho Detection, is one of the leading
providers to the Department of Homeland Security of explosive
detection technology. We are a pioneer in explosive detection
technology, and we are also a pioneer in the SAFETY Act. SAFETY
Act is extremely important to our business, because when you
think about what our business is, it is very risky.
What we do every day, almost every hour of every day in the
United States, is we scan bags for explosives that get onto
commercial aircraft, commercial aircraft that we all in this
room probably fly at one time or another. The risk of error is
quite large.
My company, when it was acquired from GE by Safran, one of
the pre-conditions to that transaction was transfer of the
SAFETY Act certifications. Closing would not occur without that
happening. I have to say one of the success stories, I think,
we were one of the first companies to do that, and the folks
sitting behind me here from the SAFETY Act were very, very
helpful in achieving that and getting our closing done. So that
is positive.
Most of my technologies, our company's technologies, are
certified by the Transportation Security Laboratory. At one
time it was a part of TSA. It is now part of Science and
Technology.
The process of that certification can take over a year. It
involves testing. It involves providing multimillion-dollar
pieces of equipment for free to the Government. At the end of
the process, we have a certification. What that certification
does for us is allow us to sell into the homeland security
market.
I have had the situation with SAFETY Act certification
where I have had certified technology that I hadn't had SAFETY
Act certified. I have had the renewal of our CTX baggage
screening technology take quite a long time and put us in a
difficult position as to whether we could deploy new equipment,
because we hadn't got the recertification of the explosive
detection equipment that we were contracted to at the time to
sell to the Department of Homeland Security.
So our scanning devices actually seemed to have a higher
standard for SAFETY Act certification. I have been informed
that SAFETY Act certification is now a predicate--excuse me,
TSL certification is a predicate to SAFETY Act certification.
That is nowhere in the Act. I would expect that SAFETY Act
certification would actually be less onerous than the testing
and certification that our equipment undergoes.
Second, the testing involves operational and reliability
determinations for the equipment. The TSL does this, but
recently for new products that we have developed, and one of
which is deployed and has been deployed for over a year in San
Jose airport, we have only gotten designation, not
certification.
We have certification for that equipment from the
Transportation Security Laboratory, but we have designation
from the SAFETY Act. That does not make any sense to me.
I think it is possibly a misunderstanding of how the
certification process is done by the TSL on the part of the
SAFETY Act and the Science and Technology office that reviews
these applications, because they keep telling me that there is
not enough data on reliability--by the way, that is never
mentioned in the Act, reliability--whereas that is tested and
evaluated by the very same Science and Technology department
that the SAFETY Act office is a part of.
So my suggestion is if I have certification from one part
of the Science and Technology Directorate, why can't SAFETY Act
certification flow relatively easily from that? That is just
designation.
Like I said, the coverage that is provided to us from the
SAFETY Act is extremely important to our business. It is a very
risky business, and the caps on the liability--we don't have
immunity from liability, we have caps. We are still responsible
for multi-millions of dollars that we can get from insurance
coverage.
But without that, without that insurance, there are
questions as to what direction our business will go and where
we will invest. I think, like previous witnesses have said,
this is easily fixed. I think there are just a few key
directional points that the SAFETY Act office can be directed
to, and we can have a much better process. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Boylan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott Boylan
May 26, 2011
Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, and Members of the
committee: Thank you for the opportunity to testify and for holding
these hearings today on the Department of Homeland Security's
implementation of the Support Anti-terrorism by Fostering Effective
Technologies Act of 2002 (the ``SAFETY Act''). My name is Scott Boylan,
and I am vice president and general counsel at Morpho Detection Inc.
(``MDI''), a subsidiary of the Safran Group. MDI has more than 560
U.S.-based employees and factories in California and Massachusetts. We
are a leading supplier of explosives and narcotics detection technology
globally and support Government, military, transportation, first
responder, critical infrastructure, and other high-risk organizations.
We integrate computed tomography (CT), Raman Spectroscopy, trace
(ITMS
TM
technology), X-Ray and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD)
technologies into solutions that deliver detection results quickly with
a high degree of accuracy, while ensuring efficient security
operations.
MDI and our predecessor companies have a rich legacy in homeland
security. After the Lockerbie tragedy, we were the first company to
develop and deploy computed tomography-based explosives detection
systems in partnership with the Federal Aviation Administration. Today,
our technology is used throughout the United States to protect American
citizens and infrastructure from terrorist attacks. The Transportation
Security Administration relies upon MDI's technology to screen over a
million bags each day for explosives. The State Department uses our
technology to protect embassies and consulates around the world. The
Department of the Interior protects National treasures, such as the
Statue of Liberty, using our equipment. The Department of Defense
protects military facilities and personnel with MDI equipment as a key
part of their threat detection arsenal. We are proud of our work in
developing innovative technologies to protect people and infrastructure
around the world.
MDI's core mission is to develop and provide anti-terrorism
technologies. The protections that the SAFETY Act affords are integral
to our business plan and investment decisions. We were one of the first
companies to apply for SAFETY Act coverage and value our on-going
partnership with the Department of Homeland Security. Today, I would
like to discuss the value of SAFETY Act protections in encouraging
development of new and innovative anti-terrorism products, discuss
recent trends in SAFETY Act operations, and provide recommendations as
we approach the 10-year anniversary of passage of the SAFETY Act.
value of the safety act
The SAFETY Act legislation and implementing regulations provide
incentives for the development and deployment of anti-terrorism
technologies by creating a system of ``risk'' and ``litigation
management.'' The purpose of the Act is to ensure that the threat of
liability does not deter potential manufacturers or sellers of
antiterrorism technologies from developing, deploying, and
commercializing technologies that could save lives and protect the
American people. As such, the SAFETY Act is a critical tool in
expanding the creation, proliferation, and use of anti-terrorism
technologies.
In light of the potential liability MDI faces in developing and
deploying anti-terrorism technology, MDI highly values the risk
management and litigation management provisions of the SAFETY Act. We
are not alone in this view. Investment decisions involve an evaluation
of risk--SAFETY Act protections limit and define risk allowing
investors to have confidence in their decisions. The transfer of SAFETY
Act coverage, for example, was a pre-condition to closing when our
company was sold by GE to Safran in 2009. This only serves to
illustrate how important this coverage is to investment decisions.
recent trends in implementation
The Department of Homeland Security's implementation of the SAFETY
Act must be assessed with a view to the purpose of the legislation. To
encourage technological innovation and to facilitate the fielding of
technologies that support our Nation's homeland security efforts,
Congress established a set of liability protections for technology
providers so companies could develop and provide anti-terrorism
technologies without the threat of crippling lawsuits. Congress
deserves credit for recognizing the need for the SAFETY Act, and the
legislation's risk management, and liability protection provisions are
at least as important today as when the Act was originally promulgated.
In fact, there is increased awareness of the importance of technology
in tackling our staggering homeland security mission, including
defending our land and sea borders; protecting key resources and
critical infrastructure--including cyber resources; preventing
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (``CBRN'') attacks; and
improving preparedness and emergency response capabilities.
Unfortunately, DHS' recent SAFETY Act implementation efforts have
raised serious concern about the Department's commitment to the program
as well as questions as to whether the Department is administering the
program in a manner consistent with Congressional intent and the Act's
statutory and regulatory mandates.
MDI's recent experience and communications with the Science &
Technology Directorate concerning certain MDI SAFETY Act applications
illustrate that the SAFETY Act application process is neither
consistent nor ``user-friendly.'' Moreover, the manner in which the
SAFETY Act is being implemented today is discouraging applicants from
continuing to support the program--at the expense of the laudable
objectives of the SAFETY Act. There is growing concern, not only at MDI
but also among colleagues across industry who are engaged in developing
and providing homeland security technologies, that efforts to implement
the SAFETY Act have been compromised by an apparent lack of
understanding or commitment to the goals that led to the promulgation
of the SAFETY Act. For instance, there is particular concern regarding
the sharp decline in the number of technologies receiving SAFETY Act
coverage generally, and SAFETY Act Certification in particular. It is
also clear that the SAFETY Act application process has become more
protracted and burdensome.
Our experience with the administration of the SAFETY Act by the
Science & Technology Directorate over the past year has been
particularly frustrating. Renewal of SAFETY Act Certification for our
key product line of explosive detection technology for checked luggage
was delayed beyond the regulatory required time limits.\1\ New product
models in the same product line were only given SAFETY Act Designation,
not Certification, for ``lack of operational test data'' in spite of
the fact that all of these products had been extensively tested and
their performance certified by the Transportation Security Laboratory
(``TSL'') \2\ before being purchased and deployed by TSA. One of these
new models had been operationally deployed and had scanned millions of
bags that had been loaded upon commercial aircraft. The delay in
Certification renewal forced us to consider whether we would deploy
more machines without SAFETY Act coverage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ MDI's SAFETY Act Certification renewal application filed in
October 2010 was finally approved on February 17, 2011.
\2\ The TSL is also part of the DHS Science & Technology
Directorate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other MDI technology that has been SAFETY Act Certified for years
was recently denied Certification renewal along with a new model
developed for the critical infrastructure protection market. This
technology is mature and is used every day to detect and deter threats
at very sensitive facilities where Federal regulations require that
explosive detection technology be deployed. It provides some of the
best explosive detection capability available--but it has been denied
SAFETY Act coverage. This scenario has injected an element of
arbitrariness that we have not previously experienced.
While the SAFETY Act and its implementing regulations set forth
criteria to be considered in evaluating whether a technology should
receive SAFETY Act Designation, the Under Secretary for Science &
Technology is directed to exercise discretion in evaluating these
factors and ``to give greater weight to some factors over others.''
Further, the SAFETY Act regulations state in particular that ``the
Under Secretary is not required to reject an application that fails to
meet one or more of the criteria'' and that the ``Under Secretary may
conclude, after considering all of the relevant criteria and any other
relevant factors, that a particular Technology merits Designation as a
Qualified Anti-Terrorism Technology even if one or more particular
criteria are not satisfied.'' Recent decisions on SAFETY Act
applications suggest a misunderstanding of the evaluation process to be
performed in determining whether to issue a SAFETY Act Designation for
a particular technology as well as the relative weighing of the factors
to be considered. The fact that DHS has denied SAFETY Act renewals
based upon a purported lack of operational and testing data is clearly
contrary to the Act's intent to encourage the development and
deployment of new anti-terrorism technologies.
MDI is in the business of providing technologies that protect the
American people. To date, MDI has looked to the SAFETY Act to provide
important liability coverage for its anti-terrorism technologies.
Should the SAFETY Act's risk management and litigation management
provisions not be afforded to MDI's technologies, the company would be
compelled to reevaluate whether and to what extent it should continue
to deploy the technology that today is on the front lines of our
homeland security efforts. The decision not to renew existing SAFETY
Act approvals certainly does not incent MDI to provide anti-terrorism
technologies and seems incongruous with the fact that SAFETY Act
coverage is now being denied for the very technology that was integral
to the TSA's effort to protect the traveling public and continues to
deter terrorism in other contexts.
recommendations
SAFETY Act protection is critical to ensuring that technology tools
are available today for homeland security and even more critical to
driving the next generation of anti-terrorism technologies. In the
current economic climate, companies are forced to make difficult
investment decisions. Homeland security sales can be unpredictable from
year-to-year and are typically event-driven. Some smaller companies
with innovative ideas may not have the backing or resources to weather
this volatile marketplace and may face significant barriers to entry.
This, in addition to uncertainty about potential liability, could force
some companies to make a difficult decision--to exit homeland security
technology development. With an ever-more-sophisticated adversary, our
homeland security frontline deserves the best technology available and
continued investment in the tools they need to deter, detect, and
thwart the next attack. Strong implementation and execution of the
SAFETY Act is an important aspect in supporting security technology
innovation.
We have a few recommendations for the committee's consideration:

Streamline SAFETY Act Certification by recognizing formal
test certification by the DHS TSL or by other DHS component
agencies. DHS has invested in establishing test certification
processes throughout the Department. In addition, the
Department of Defense has a well-established test and
evaluation process that should also be recognized by DHS in
SAFETY Act Certification. The SAFETY Act office should
recognize successful completion of one of these DHS or DoD
certification processes and expedite approval of applications
for these companies. Implementation of this recommendation
would eliminate duplicative processes and reduce Government
costs associated with the SAFETY Act Certification processes.

Provide greater transparency in the SAFETY Act review
process. The SAFETY Act office should provide processing time
metrics on its website (www.safetyact.gov) and should be
required to notify the committee in the event that processing
times exceed those defined in the SAFETY Act Final Rule.

Provide administrative remedies for denial of SAFETY Act
Certification. This measure would provide redress for companies
who have been denied certification.

The intent of Congress in establishing the SAFETY Act--to
enable and encourage U.S. companies to develop and provide
vital anti-terrorism technologies to help prevent or respond to
terrorist attacks without the threat of enterprise crippling
potential liability--is clear, and the importance of the SAFETY
Act in facilitating industry's support of our Nation's overall
homeland security mission has only grown. The Department of
Homeland Security must recommit to vigorous implementation of
the SAFETY Act, and the Department's leadership must prioritize
efforts to reverse the negative trend of reductions in the
total number of SAFETY Act applications and approvals.
Implementation of the SAFETY Act should be better aligned with
the Federal acquisition process, including eliminating
redundancies in and expediting technical evaluation of SAFETY
Act applications relating to products and services procured by
DHS and other Federal Government entities.
Thank you for your attention to these issues. I am happy to answer
any questions you might have.

Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Now we would ask Mr. Harvey to give us his 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CRAIG A. HARVEY, CHIEF OPERATIONS OFFICER AND
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, NVISION SOLUTIONS, INC.

Mr. Harvey. Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke,
Ranking Member Thompson from my home State, Members of the
committee, thank you for asking me to testify today on the
SAFETY Act. It has been very important to me personally and to
our business.
My name is Craig Harvey. I am the chief operating officer
for NVision Solutions. We were founded in 2002 and are a
growing, award-winning, minority woman-owned and economically
disadvantaged company headquartered on the Mississippi Gulf
course. NVision is a geospatial company technology,
specializing in emergency management services and products for
industry and Government.
With over $1 million in small-business contracts and grants
from NASA, NVision built a high-tech crisis management
information system called the Real-Time Emergency Acts and
Coordination Tool, or REACT.
In 2007 the Center for Asymmetric Warfare at the U.S. Naval
postgraduate school invited NVision to participate in a 3-year
series of Federal, State, and local multi-agency homeland
security exercises along Puget Sound. During this activity,
NVision worked with the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
who used REACT to monitor these exercises. During that time
they began to understand the enormous risk to a small business
that emergency management and terrorism products represent.
In 2009, at the recommendation of a partner company, we
began to investigate the SAFETY Act as a pathway to Nation-wide
deployment. Our goals were to have the Government review our
software within the context of the National response plan,
mitigate litigation risk, and bolster product credibility.
Our process began the SAFETYact.gov website, which provided
us with step-by-step application instructions. We did
participate in the pre-application process. A DHS specialist
spent 45 minutes with us, describing the application process,
discussing our product, and answering all of our questions.
Among the important pre-application facts learned was that
existing customers like NASA and St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana,
were critical as real-world performance references and examples
of customers potentially benefiting from the SAFETY Act.
The REACT application was started in 2009, including
everything from company financial statements to product
documentation, technical descriptions, and marketing strategy.
The technical application we felt was comparable to an
applicant patent application. It was 30 pages long. Our entire
application totaled hundreds of pages and took 6 months to
complete, minding that we started from scratch.
We submitted the application in early 2010 and began the
minimum mandated 4-month review. During that time we exchanged
17 e-mails and at least a dozen phone calls with DHS, providing
additional information. Through the entire process, we dealt
with the same individuals. We felt like our application process
was moving forward.
We received a notice of our SAFETY Act designation in July
2010. DHS informed us we had 30 days to cover a $1 million
insurance liability before we were officially protected to the
indemnification clause. This was the only requirement during
the whole process that represented a problem for us. We had
significant difficulty locating an insurance broker or agent
that understood the SAFETY Act and when you said
``counterterrorism,'' they were backing up faster than an I-
don't-know-what.
Ultimately, armed with the help and encouragement from DHS
folks, we finally found a broker that would provide affordable
insurance and finalize the SAFETY Act designation. To our
knowledge, we are still the only organization in Mississippi
with a SAFETY Act-designated product.
While the SAFETY Act application took nearly a year and
hundreds of pages of documentation, it wasn't bureaucratic. We
feel strongly that thoroughness of the process gives a SAFETY
Act designation meaning and provides tangible benefits to
Government users, citizens, and protects individuals and
countries, and at the end, the taxpayers themselves.
We believe the SAFETY Act provides a tremendous National
security benefit on incentives to risk mitigation for industry
to develop homeland security solutions. The process gives DHS
early insight into product development and the opportunity for
constructive dialogues with potential suppliers.
The SAFETY Act also provides a conduit to Government to
identify solutions well before the crisis strikes, instead of
attempting to deploy poorly understood technologies in the
midst of a chaotic event.
By leveling the playing field and capping financial
exposure, the SAFETY Act encourages innovation. Without the
SAFETY Act, our desire to bring REACT to market may have never
been realized.
We would like to thank the Members of the subcommittee for
a chance to tell my company's story. I would be happy to answer
any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Harvey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Craig A. Harvey
NVision Solutions Inc. was founded in 2002 and is a growing, award-
winning, minority, woman-owned, small business headquartered on the
Mississippi Gulf Coast. NVision is a geospatial technology company
specializing in emergency management services and products for industry
and government.
With over 1 million dollars in small business contracts and grants
from NASA, NVision built a high-tech crisis management information
system called the Real-Time Emergency Action Coordination Tool or
REACT. In 2007, The Center for Asymmetric Warfare at the U.S. Naval
Post-Graduate School invited NVision to participate in a 3-year series
of Federal, State, and local multi-agency homeland-security exercises
along the Puget Sound. During this 3-year activity, NVision worked with
the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory who used REACT to monitor and
report on first-response training involving hundreds and sometimes
thousands of participants. The positive attention garnered by REACT
highlighted the product's potential. At the same time we began to
understand the enormous risk to a small business realm of homeland
security.
In 2009, at the recommendation of a partner company, we began
investigating the SAFETY Act as a pathway to Nation-wide deployment.
Our goals were to have the Government review our software within the
context of the National Response Plan, mitigate litigation risk, and
bolster product credibility.
Our process began at The SafetyAct.gov website which provided clear
step-by-step application instructions. In the pre-application process,
a DHS specialist spent 45 minutes with us describing the application
process, discussing our product, and answering all our questions. Among
the important pre-application facts learned was that existing customers
like NASA and St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana, were critical as real-
world performance references and examples of customers potentially
benefiting from SAFETY Act protection.
The REACT application we started in 2009 included everything from
company financial statements to product documentation, technical
descriptions, and marketing strategy. The technical application,
comparable to a patent application, was 30 pages long. Our entire
application totaled hundreds of pages and took us 6 months to complete.
We submitted the application in early 2010 and began the minimum
mandated 4-month review. During that time we exchanged 17 e-mails and
at least a dozen phone calls with DHS providing additional information.
Through the entire process we dealt with the same individuals and
always felt the application process was moving forward.
We received notice of our SAFETY Act Designation on July 27, 2010.
DHS informed us we had 30 days to cover a $1 million insurance
liability before we were officially protected by the Act's
indemnification clause. This requirement is the only part of the
process presenting us with difficulty. We found insurers unfamiliar
with the SAFETY Act and unwilling to cover ``acts of terrorism''.
Despite the fixed liability we were unable find affordable insurance.
Ultimately, armed with help and encouragement from DHS, we finally
located a broker willing to provide affordable insurance and finalized
our SAFETY Act designation. To our knowledge, we are the first
organization in the State of Mississippi to have a SAFETY Act-
designated product.
While the SAFETY Act application process took nearly a year and
hundreds of pages of documentation, it was never ``bureaucratic''. We
feel strongly that the thoroughness of the process gives the SAFETY Act
designation meaning and provides tangible benefits to the Government
users, the citizens it protects, and the individuals and companies that
develop innovative products.
We believe the SAFETY Act provides a tremendous National security
benefit and provides incentives, through risk mitigation, for industry
to develop homeland security solutions. The process gives DHS early
insight into product development and the opportunity for constructive
dialogues with potential suppliers. The SAFETY Act also provides a
conduit for the Government to identify solutions well before a crisis
strikes instead of attempting to deploy poorly understood technologies
in the midst of chaotic events.
By leveling the playing field and capping financial exposure The
SAFETY Act encourages innovation. Without the SAFETY Act, our desire to
bring REACT to market may have never been realized.

Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much.
I thank all the panelists for their testimony. I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
The purpose, as I see it, of the SAFETY Act is to improve
the opportunity for companies to be proactive, as suggested by
Mr. Pearl. In some ways that means making these kind of
products successful to the bottom line of your company. It
seems to me if somehow in the process of implementing the
SAFETY Act, it becomes a burden--that is, it provides a
disincentive for you to be involved in the system--then we have
defeated ourselves.
So, Mr. Harvey, I would like to ask you this. If you were
to be told that when your possibility for renewal comes up, you
would have to go through exactly the same thing and spend
exactly the same amount of time before renewal of the
application for which you had been previously approved, would
you think that would be an incentive for you? Would you think
that would be--does that make sense to you?
Mr. Harvey. Given the risk involved, we would comply.
Mr. Lungren. I know you would comply, but does that seem to
make sense to you if, in fact, you went through this process to
prove the efficaciousnes of your program, and then when it
comes around for renewal, instead of giving you--I will put it
this way in non-legal terms--the benefit of the doubt, because
you have already been approved, you basically have to go
through the same thing all over again?
Mr. Harvey. I think starting completely over would be
somewhat of a waste of time. I think the Act itself for
redesignation should be what happened since the last time we
saw your technology.
Mr. Lungren. Mr. Pearl, what is your experience in terms of
renewal? Am I wrong in what I had been told by some companies
that that appears to be a do-it-over-again type of process
rather than give you the benefit of the doubt, based on the
fact that you have already been approved the first time?
Mr. Pearl. Well, Mr. Chairman, not only is it a do-it-over-
again process, it is that the level of non-renewals is so high
over the last 4 or 5 years that it has become a disincentive,
and companies are just basically going back to, well, what has
changed with regard to the criteria, so that in essence it not
only sends a message to companies that have gone through a
process and are not renewed, but whether or not any new
technologies that they have developed subsequent to that--why
would they go through the process again when the chances of
renewal are not going to----
Mr. Lungren. Let me ask you this: In terms of the
marketplace, if you are a company that has, say, SAFETY Act
certification, and you are having trouble getting renewal, what
does that do with your ability to present yourself to
purchasers?
Mr. Pearl. Well, I would rather take it for the macro
level.
Mr. Lungren. Okay.
Mr. Pearl. The macro level is, as I think Mr. Finch talked
about, is that there is no question that having a couple
hundred in essence, and there is a major designation that the
public doesn't realize that there is, which is that there is a
difference between a SAFETY Act-certified and a SAFETY Act-
designated.
You can't, in essence, present yourself into the
marketplace, for example, as having been a designated--as
having been a certified SAFETY Act. You cannot present yourself
in the marketplace at this point in time to have gone through
the designation process, for example.
So, in essence, the number of technologies that you just
know anecdotally over the last 10 years in our country that
have--the IT and the services that exist out there are
significantly greater than 400. Therefore, that shows in and of
itself that this potentially very successful program is
probably the most under-reported and under-utilized program, so
that it is not about the renewal process just existing, it is
about whether or not companies even know out there that they
can and should take advantage of this important Act.
Mr. Lungren. Mr. Boylan, I am somewhat concerned about your
suggesting that the left hand doesn't know what the right hand
is doing. I am sure that in your contact with the Department--
you have mentioned it--what kind of response have you been
given?
Are they so far apart geographically that they can't talk
to one another? Does the one side not recognize the worth of
the other? Are the goals or the specific purposes of the two
operations so disparate that there is no way to have
commonality?
Mr. Boylan. The TSL is in Atlantic City, and the SAFETY Act
office is here. But it has gotten better, because I have been a
squeaky wheel, I must admit, on this, because I have no choice.
I have to have SAFETY Act certification for my technologies, or
I can't deploy it. So it has gotten better.
I just got designation for a new product last week, and I
have worked to put the TSL and the SAFETY Act people in contact
with each other. But I think they are talking to each other.
But there is still a disconnect, from my view, on the
operational reliability focus that the SAFETY Act office has at
this point in time. That is an element of the TSL. You know, I
told you it is over a year process. That is definitely a part
of the process, and I think they get confused with some of the
procurement processes that then occur thereafter.
Mr. Lungren. Has anybody cited to you legislative language,
statutory language that prohibits them from working in concert?
Mr. Boylan. No.
Mr. Lungren. Okay.
My time has expired.
I recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, Ms.
Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank you all for your testimony here this
morning.
My first question goes to Mr. Pearl. I wanted to just sort
of reach a little bit deeper beneath the surface of your
testimony today, where you spoke about the inconsistencies in
the certification application process. Could you just sort of
identify, maybe, the top three inconsistencies that you have
been able to identify?
Mr. Pearl. Well, as I just alluded to, Congresswoman, the
No. 1 is the inconsistency goes to the refusal to renew SAFETY
Act already-designated applications, so that if you have gone
through the process, the dramatic drop in the number of
applications that are successful suggests that the Department
has possibly changed its ways of administering the program.
That sends out a message of inconsistency.
When you had the competitiveness issues arise, that if I
had the same technology, for example, that another company had,
and yet I could not receive the designation, but that company
has, that sends a message of inconsistency as well.
I am encouraged by what the deputy under secretary
mentioned with respect to the block approach, but we have not
seen that, in essence, out in the marketplace yet. That has not
been translated. So if I was going to focus on any one
particular issue of inconsistency and the lack of transparency,
it would be on the issue of the renewal issue.
Ms. Clarke. Then you also spoke about the distinction
between the being certified versus designated. Could you go a
little bit deeper into that as well?
Mr. Pearl. Well, I mean, I think that you even hear it in
the testimony today when with the numbers that come out of S&T
are the number of, in essence, successful applicants. The vast
majority of those--and you can correct me, and Brian may know
even more--the vast majority of those are simply designated,
not certified.
When you are a designated and not certified, and as part of
our original testimony, many of our companies were very
concerned that they couldn't sell that into the marketplace,
that in point of fact, when you are certified you can, but when
you are designated, and you have gone through the same
application process, you cannot use the SAFETY Act seal. You
cannot let the market know.
It may in fact be, as our other witnesses might attest to,
it is going to be incredibly more difficult to get insurance
coverage, because the insurance industry doesn't understand the
difference.
Ms. Clarke. The distinction between the two.
Mr. Finch, would you sort of add your insight into that
particular, because that seems to be the crux, or one of the
major issues here is the distinction between certification
versus designation and, you know, what you have found?
Mr. Finch. Absolutely. I mean, the numbers and the
experiences of this panel would attest to the number of
certifications has decreased over time. It decreased
significantly. I believe the number was one for----
Ms. Clarke. Is it that there is a higher block for the----
Mr. Finch. Actually----
Ms. Clarke. Okay.
Mr. Finch [continuing]. When you go through the application
process, I mean, functionally the way it works is that you have
to have proper processes, procedures, quality control measures,
and demonstrable effectiveness in order to be designated.
Then when you go to certification, there appears to be
additional data detailing reliability and additional layers of
effectiveness, et cetera. When you go through the application
process, I can tell you, having prepared any number of them,
the certification questions, you simply say, ``See previous
responses in designation section,'' because you lay all that
out already.
So what we seem to be encountering is that there needs to
be more evidence of effectiveness, more evidence of reliability
stretched out over a period of years. That has been
frustrating.
As Mr. Pearl is alluding to, then you get into situations
where companies were certified 2005, 2006, et cetera, and they
come back, and they are not getting certification upon renewal.
The response is, ``Well, we want to see more specific types of
reliability. We want to see more specific types of
effectiveness.''
I don't have a problem with the Office of SAFETY Act
limitation asking for more specific information. What I do have
a problem with them is, and what I do have a challenge
understanding is, how did it get to the point where years of
deployment successfully certified with demonstrable data spread
out over 6, 9, 12 months in a particular forum, that is not
acceptable for certification?
In the absence of anything being glaringly wrong, I am
having trouble understanding why something would drop from
certification to designation and why, generally speaking,
certification isn't the default at the end of the day.
Ms. Clarke. Okay.
Mr. Harvey, would you tell us a little bit more about your
company? I understand it is located near a large research and
applied technology center, the Stennis Space Center in
Mississippi. How has the physical location helped you
collaborate with other technology companies, and what benefit
has that been to your company?
Mr. Harvey. Yes, ma'am. Our company started in an incubator
at NASA Stennis Space Center. We started down this path on the
technology side in 2003, and we have worked--our product itself
has products that are rolled up from four or five different
small technological companies that are also co-located in and
around Stennis Space Center.
Having ready access, then, to the NASA scientists and the
requirements specifically for NASA requiring emergency
management and crisis management provided us all of the
requirements that we needed to build our product to. It was
built largely funded through the SBIR program or the dual-use
broad area announcements, so.
Ms. Clarke. Could you just sort of give us some insights
into how you worked with Boeing on the development of your
product?
Mr. Harvey. Yes, ma'am. Boeing technically was a
collaborator. There was no funds or technology that changed
hands. We were working on the civil side of our application,
and they were building a handheld unit. They introduced us to
the California group and as well as the Puget Sound and the
Pacific Northwest Laboratory.
It was Boeing and their reluctance to accept risk that
pointed us as ``you really need to consider the SAFETY Act.''
We really hadn't heard about it until that point. So if, you
know, granted we are on a coast, and we are on the south coast
of the United States, but where the Federal center, and it
seems to me with the amount of technology development, there
should be placards or signs or something advertising, you know,
the SAFETY Act and its benefits.
I would think that, you know, it is something that the SBA
should help with. I mean, they have got offices in every major,
you know, city in the country. I don't think it is very well
advertised, to be honest with you.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lungren. I think we have time to ask a few more
questions before we have votes.
Mr. Harvey, it is great to hear that while you are very
much geographically connected with the Ranking Member of the
full committee, that you did have to work with a California
company. We appreciate that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lungren. I have a question, and I will start with you,
Mr. Harvey, but I would like others to make an observation on
this.
You said that the application process took over a year, or
about a year, required hundreds of pages of documentation. You
said both in your spoken testimony and your written testimony
that it was never bureaucratic, yet you also went on to say
that the technical application was comparable to a patent
application.
Some would say those are incongruous statements you made. I
am trying to figure out whether you believed that the process
was so rigorous because it is necessary that it means something
or that it is just the nature of things that, when we go
through these things we have gotten into, you don't call it
bureaucratic paperwork requirements.
So I am trying to figure out whether you are saying we
understand they had to be that thorough and therefore it would
have to take a year and all this paperwork and all this amount
or it wasn't. Can you give me some guidance on what you are
trying to tell me?
Mr. Harvey. Yes, Mr. Chairman. If you want me to complain
about the Government, I can find lots of topics.
Mr. Lungren. Oh, no, no, what I am trying to do is ask for
an assessment, because I want this thing to work. Everybody
loves it. I mean, the representative of the Department comes
here and gives me a button that says, ``I love the SAFETY
Act.'' Well, if you use a yellow button like this, it means you
want it to work. You folks want it to work.
Yet I hear that we only had 400-and-some-odd people that
are--companies that are taking advantage of it, when it
literally should be thousands, if we really believe it. So I am
trying to figure out what I can do to make it work even better
so we can all love it together. So give us your best shot.
Mr. Harvey. Mr. Chairman, I believe it works. What I really
believe is the reason it took us a little longer than average
was because we didn't have a lot of technical documentation at
hand. We are a very small company, and when we started this, we
had 20-something people, so we didn't have a lot of the
technical writing done. So we had to go back, when I say we
started from scratch, documenting our product, really.
I think it is a very onerous process, but it is not
bureaucratic. It is time-consuming, but it is a level of detail
that I personally believe has to be there to have any
credibility whatsoever. I say that both from a technologist and
a taxpayer perspective. If we didn't have that level of detail,
it wouldn't have the credibility that it has.
Mr. Lungren. The real attraction, of course, is the
protection, in a sense, from civil liability. I spent a number
of years as a lawyer in the courtroom. I understand the
importance of the litigation system, but I also understand the
abuses of the litigation system. I want this to be rigorous. I
want this to be thorough. I want it to mean something. But I
also want to make it workable.
So, Mr. Pearl, how do we hit the sweet spot? How do we make
sure that it is fair but at the same time not bureaucratic? How
do we make sure that it is timely but not take too much time?
How do we make sure that there is an incentive that hasn't
dissolved into disincentive?
Mr. Pearl. Well, I think that part of it is that the entity
that is administering the program, it is a scientific component
part of the Department. It is an important one, and one that is
very valuable, the science and technology.
The connection point to that and the legal community is a
little tenuous in terms of how do lawyers talk to engineers in
terms of making things right? I think that one of the problems
is, as I think, you know, Mr. Boylan pointed out, is that in
point of fact if you are going through a heavy, rigorous
process like the Transportation Security Lab, and they are not
talking with the S&T, then in point of fact you are missing the
whole point of what Congress intended.
If, in fact, Federal contracting procurement officials have
to be educated by the company as to the value of the SAFETY
Act, you are not achieving what Congress intended in the first
place.
So the encouragement of exactly the greater reporting of
this process will, I think, raise--you know, the high tide will
raise all ships and that in point of fact people will, if they
choose to go to, you know, Mr. Finch for the purposes of
getting legal advice on the application, or they choose to do
it on their own, we need to have an encouraging process and a
platform on which these companies can take off and develop the
kind of designation that they are looking for.
Mr. Lungren. Ms. Clarke, do you have some questions?
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pearl, I would like to sort of investigate with you
some ways in which you think the S&T can encourage the
successful deployment of these technologies. You talked about
the need for there to be that of encouragement. Certainly, the
rigors and the challenges of connecting all the dots are where
we are stuck right now.
But, you know, where do you see those bridges built, and
where do you see the capacity of the agency to really use this
type of encouragement? Is it through collaboration or MOU with
SBA? What would you say?
Mr. Pearl. Well, I think the first--there are two levels.
One is the internal component part of Federal officials,
whether it be at SBA, whether it be at other directorates at
the Department, whether it be at, you know, at DOD or at
Energy, anybody who is actually looking at the issues of, in
essence, anti-terrorism technologies and services should be
well aware of what is going on. That is not a budget issue.
That is internal communication issue.
Three years ago the council--and I would ask the staff to
possibly include that as part of the written record--put
together an executive brief on how we could encourage greater
embracement of the SAFETY Act. Part of that was greater
communication to the community in the private industry.
We are standing ready to want to do this. We think it is in
all of our interests to, in essence, promote this as an under-
reported program, and we want to work with the Department. If
the budget doesn't exist, then we will in the community--in the
private sector are willing to do our fair share in terms of
promoting this.
That is part of our outreach, and we have been in
discussions with S&T about just those very things in light of
the realities of today, which is there isn't a lot of money, as
Mr. Benda said, to in essence do more on that. But the private
sector, because it wants it to be successful, is prepared to
step in and take on its role and responsibility.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
Mr. Lungren. Mr. Pearl, do we have a copy of that report
you are talking about?
Mr. Pearl. I sent it electronically, and if you can include
it in the----
Mr. Lungren. Okay. Without objection, we will include that
as part of the record.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Pearl. Thank you.
Mr. Lungren. All right. I just want to thank all of you for
your testimony. It has been very, very helpful.
I still have some questions that I am going to work out. I
mean, if renewal is so important, why aren't more companies
attempting to get renewal? That would either tell me that
either the companies don't find certification to be that
important or somehow there is a stumbling block to get
recertification, and it would work against the intent of the
program.
We are going to try and work with the Department and work
with you and others to make sure this works. This subcommittee
wants it to work effectively, and so we are going to exercise
vigorous oversight over this program.
I am going to request that we have quarterly briefings for
our subcommittee by the Department on this issue, because I
just happen to think--this is a bipartisan thing. There is no
partisanship involved here. My comments were directed towards
DHS both under Republicans than Democrats.
I know it is a maturation process, but maturation,
hopefully, results in not only better understanding, but ease
of application. I think everybody seems to agree we need to get
the word out to more people so that they would see the
importance of it.
I guess we ought to make sure that the Federal procurement
officers are aware of this and that that may be one of the best
outreach programs we have got. But I don't want it to be
another sense of bureaucracy, that a procurement officer
mentions it to a potential supplier and all of a sudden they
go, ``Oh, my god, I can't get it'' or ``I have heard the horror
stories'' or ``once I get it, do I keep it'' and all those
sorts of things.
So thank you. Your testimony has been very, very helpful.
We are committed to making sure this works. You have helped us
greatly on this. You have also been very helpful--every one of
you stayed within seconds of the 5 minutes we asked you to
begin with, which I must tell you is very, very rare here.
So I thank you for your valuable testimony, and the Members
who were in attendance for their questions. The Members of the
committee may have some additional questions that they would
submit to you in writing, and we would ask you to respond in
writing, if possible. The hearing record will be held open for
10 days, and this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:22 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


