- ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE: A FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE THREAT TO AMERICAN JOBS AND HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE: A FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE THREAT TO AMERICAN JOBS AND
HOMELAND SECURITY
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COUNTERTERRORISM
AND INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-101

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
79-843PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2013
______________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Peter T. King, New York, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Daniel E. Lungren, California        Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Henry Cuellar, Texas
Gus M. Bilirakis, Florida            Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Paul C. Broun, Georgia               Laura Richardson, California
Candice S. Miller, Michigan          Danny K. Davis, Illinois
Tim Walberg, Michigan                Brian Higgins, New York
Chip Cravaack, Minnesota             Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Joe Walsh, Illinois                  Hansen Clarke, Michigan
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Ben Quayle, Arizona                  Kathleen C. Hochul, New York
Scott Rigell, Virginia               Janice Hahn, California
Billy Long, Missouri                 Ron Barber, Arizona
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Robert L. Turner, New York
Michael J. Russell, Staff Director/Chief Counsel
Kerry Ann Watkins, Senior Policy Director
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COUNTERTERRORISM AND INTELLIGENCE

Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania, Chairman
Paul C. Broun, Georgia, Vice Chair   Brian Higgins, New York
Chip Cravaack, Minnesota             Loretta Sanchez, California
Joe Walsh, Illinois                  Kathleen C. Hochul, New York
Ben Quayle, Arizona                  Janice Hahn, California
Scott Rigell, Virginia               Ron Barber, Arizona
Billy Long, Missouri                 Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York (Ex              (Ex Officio)
Officio)
Kevin Gundersen, Staff Director
Zachary Harris, Subcommittee Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Subcommittee Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Billy Long, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Missouri:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Brian Higgins, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism and Intelligence..............................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Stuart Graham, Chief Economist, U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, U.S. Department of Commerce:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Mr. John P. Woods, Assistant Director, Homeland Security
Investigations, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    14
Mr. C. Frank Figliuzzi, Assistant Director, Counterintelligence
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of
Justice:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Mr. Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues,
Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21

ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE: A FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE THREAT TO AMERICAN JOBS AND
HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

Thursday, June 28, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Intelligence,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Billy Long
presiding.
Present: Representatives Long, Higgins, and Hochul.
Mr. Long. The Committee on Homeland Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism and Intelligence will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony
regarding economic espionage and its threat to American jobs
and homeland security. As most of you know, Chairman Meehan is
not at today's hearing. Unfortunately, an issue arose that he
had to attend, and I will be chairing today's hearing.
I recognize myself for an opening statement. The National
unemployment rate currently stands at 8.2 percent, and our
Nation faces economic headwinds. Over the last 2 years, we have
examined many threats to the U.S. homeland. However, today's
hearing provides an opportunity, a unique opportunity, for
Members on the subcommittee to examine an issue that affects
both National security and American competitiveness and job
security.
This is an issue that touches small and medium-sized
businesses in Congressional districts all across America.
Foreign economic and industrial espionage against the United
States represents a significant and growing threat to the
Nation's prosperity, American jobs, and National security. The
primary strengths of the private sector in the United States
are its tangible assets, including research and development,
intellectual property, sophisticated business processes, and
enforceable contracts.
Unfortunately, those assets are being stolen by foreign
intelligence services, corporations with close ties to foreign
governments, and non-state actors. According to the U.S. Army
General Keith Alexander, director of the National Security
Agency and commander of U.S. Cyber Command, the United States
currently finds itself the victim of the greatest transfer of
wealth in history.
Just this week, the director of the British's international
security agency, MI5, told a London audience that it is
investigating cyber attacks against more than a dozen
companies, and added that one major London business has
suffered more than $1.2 billion in losses from an attack. He
called the extent of the espionage activity astonishing, with
industrial-scale process, involving many thousands of people
lying behind both state-sponsored cyber espionage and organized
crime.
This spring, FBI erected billboards at nine cities around
the country to highlight the $13 billion in losses suffered by
U.S. companies as a result of economic espionage in 2012 alone.
While that number is staggering, my fear is that the $13
billion represents only the tip of the iceberg. Of even greater
concern is finding out what lies beneath the surface.
Due to a number of factors, which will be discussed today,
the true size of this threat could be massively undervalued
because this activity often goes unreported to law enforcement.
Economic espionage can take many forms, including visits to a
company's website to gather open-source information, and
employees downloading proprietary information on a thumb drive
at the behest of a foreign rival. Or intrusions launched by
foreign intelligence service or other actors against the
company's network of a private company, Federal agency, or
individual.
Unlike 20 years ago, business activity conducted over the
internet provides opportunities for bad actors to infiltrate
and steal vital data from the U.S. companies. Cyberspace also
provides relatively small-scale actors an environment and
opportunity to become big players in economic espionage.
In addition, under-resourced governments or corporations
often build relationships with hackers to steal sensitive
economic or technological information just as national states
have done for decades. In many ways, the threat posed by the
economic espionage is similar to the threat posed by al-Qaeda
and its affiliate networks, less centralized and more diffuse.
And making it, often, more difficult to combat.
Making this an even more complex problem, many bad actors
often remain anonymous, and determining attribution of attacks
is difficult for law enforcement in the intelligence community.
Many actors route operations through computers in third
countries, or physically operate from third-party countries to
obscure the origins of a activity.
Some foreign intelligence services and non-state actors
have reportedly used independent hackers at times to augment
their capabilities and act as proxies for intrusions in order
to provide plausible deniability. Both China and Russia view
economic espionage as an essential tool in statecraft to
achieve stated National security and economic prosperity aims.
It is critical Members of Congress and U.S. businesses
understand that point; China and Russia have official
government policies of stealing U.S. assets for economic gain.
They target sensitive U.S. technology and economic data,
private-sector companies, academic and research institutions,
and U.S. citizens on a daily basis.
According to the National Counterintelligence Executive,
China and Russia will remain aggressive collectors of sensitive
U.S. economic information and technology. Both countries will
certainly continue to deploy significant resources and a wide
variety of tactics to acquire this information, motivated by
the desire to achieve economic, strategic, and military parity
with the United States.
Unfortunately, many private-sector victims of economic
espionage are unaware of the crime until years after the loss
of their information. In addition, many companies that are
victims of espionage choose not to report the event to the FBI
because it would negatively affect the company's reputation and
endanger its relationship with investors, bankers, suppliers,
customers, and shareholders.
In many cases, it is difficult for companies to assign an
economic value to stolen information, thereby decreasing their
incentive to share information with law enforcement. A few
examples I would like to point out that illustrate the
challenge faced by the private sector. The AMSC Corporation, a
Massachusetts-based maker of computer systems that run wind
turbines, was victimized by its largest customer, China's C-
Nobel Corporation.
C-Nobel illegally obtained access to AMSC's proprietary
source code through an AMSC employee who was paid to aid in the
theft. C-Nobel, which accounted for two-thirds of AMSC's annual
revenue of $315 million took AMSC's source code, began
producing its own computers, and severed its relationship with
AMSC.
When this news was made public, AMSC's share price fell 40
percent in a single day. Over the course of 5 months it plunged
84 percent. One U.S. metals company lost technology to China's
hackers that cost $1 billion and 20 years to develop. An
employee of the Valspar Corporation unlawfully downloaded
proprietary paint formulas valued at $20 million which he
intended to take to a new job in China, according to press
reports.
This theft represented about one-eighth of Valspar's
reported profits for 2009, the year the employee was arrested.
Today's witness--let us see--to get to a better understanding
of the problem, today we will hear from a panel of Government
witnesses from the FBI, Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
and the Department of Commerce about the nature and severity of
the threat and its cost to the U.S. economy.
We will also learn what the U.S. Government is doing to
combat the threat, including its work with small and medium-
sized businesses to prevent the loss of trade secrets and
intellectual property. I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses on this important topic.
[The statement of Hon. Long follows:]
Statement of Hon. Billy Long
June 28, 2012
national security and job security
The National unemployment rate currently stands at 8.2% and our
Nation faces tough economic headwinds. Over the last 2 years, we have
examined many threats to the U.S. homeland.
However, today's hearing provides a unique opportunity for Members
of the subcommittee to examine an issue that affects both National
security and American competitiveness and job security. This is an
issue that touches small and medium-sized businesses in Congressional
districts all across America.
economic espionage threat
Foreign economic and industrial espionage against the United States
represents a significant and growing threat to the Nation's prosperity,
American jobs, and National security. The primary strengths of the
private sector in the United States are its tangible assets, including
research and development (R&D), intellectual property, sophisticated
business processes, and enforceable contracts.
Unfortunately, those assets are being stolen by foreign
intelligence services, corporations with close ties to foreign
governments, and non-state actors. According to U.S. Army General Keith
Alexander, Director of the National Security Agency and Commander of
U.S. Cyber Command, the U.S. currently finds itself the victim of ``the
greatest transfer of wealth in history.''
Just this week, the Director General of Britain's internal security
agency, MI5 told a London audience that it is investigating cyber
attacks against more than a dozen companies and added that one major
London business had suffered more than $1.2 billion dollars in losses
from an attack. He called the extent of the espionage activity
``astonishing--with industrial-scale processes involving many thousands
of people lying behind both state-sponsored cyber-espionage and
organized crime.''
This spring FBI erected billboards in nine cities around the
country to highlight the $13 billion dollars in losses suffered by U.S.
companies as a result of economic espionage in 2012 alone. While that
number is staggering, my fear is that the $13 billion represents only
the tip of the iceberg. Of even greater concern is finding out what
lies beneath the surface. Due to a number of factors, which will be
discussed today, the true size of this threat could be massively under-
valued because this activity often goes unreported to law enforcement.
evolving threat environment & cyber threat
Economic espionage can take many forms including, visits to a
company's website to gather open-source information; an employee's
downloading of proprietary information onto a thumb drive at the behest
of a foreign rival; or intrusions launched by a foreign intelligence
service or other actors against the computer networks of a private
company, Federal agency, or an individual.
Unlike 20 years ago, business activity conducted over the internet
provides opportunities for bad actors to infiltrate and steal vital
data from U.S. companies. Cyberspace also provides relatively small-
scale actors an environment and opportunity to become big players in
economic espionage.
In addition, under-resourced governments or corporations often
build relationships with hackers to steal sensitive economic or
technological information, just as national states have done for
decades.
In many ways, the threat posed by economic espionage is similar to
the threat posed by al-Qaeda and its affiliate networks: Less
centralized and more diffuse, often making if more difficult to combat.
anonymity and attribution
Making this an even more complex problem, many bad actors often
remain anonymous and determining attribution of attacks is difficult
for law enforcement and the intelligence community.
Many actors route operations through computers in third countries
or physically operate from third-party countries to obscure the origin
of their activity. Some foreign intelligence services and non-state
actors have reportedly used independent hackers at times to augment
their capabilities and act as proxies for intrusions in order to
provide plausible deniability.
china and russia
Both China and Russia view economic espionage as an essential tool
in statecraft to achieve stated National security and economic
prosperity aims. It is critical Members of Congress and U.S. businesses
understand that point: China and Russia have official government
policies of stealing U.S. assets for their economic gain.
They target sensitive U.S. technology and economic data, private-
sector companies, academic and research institutions, and U.S. citizens
on a daily basis. According to the National Counterintelligence
Executive, China and Russia will remain aggressive collectors of
sensitive U.S. economic information and technology. Both countries will
certainly continue to deploy significant resources and a wide array of
tactics to acquire this information, motivated by the desire to achieve
economic, strategic, and military parity with the United States.
private-sector challenges
Unfortunately, many private-sector victims of economic espionage
are unaware of the crime until years after the loss of their
information. In addition, many companies that are victims of espionage
choose not to report the event to the FBI because it would negatively
affect the company's reputation and endanger its relationships with
investors, bankers, suppliers, customers, and shareholders.
In many cases, it is difficult for companies to assign an economic
value to stolen information, thereby decreasing their incentive to
share information with law enforcement.
examples of espionage
A few examples I'd like to point out that illustrate the challenge
faced by the private sector:

The AMSC Corporation, a Massachusetts-based maker of
computer systems that run wind turbines, was victimized by its
largest customer, China's Sinovel Corporation. Sinovel
illegally obtained access to AMSC's proprietary source code
through an AMSC employee, who was paid to aid in the theft.
Sinovel, which accounted for two-thirds of AMSC's annual
revenue of $315 million, took AMSC's source code, began
producing its own computers and severed its relationship with
AMSC. When this news was made public AMSC's share price fell
40% in a single day and over the course of 5 months plunged
84%.

One U.S. metallurgical company lost technology to China's
hackers that cost $1 billion and 20 years to develop.

An employee of the Valspar Corporation unlawfully downloaded
proprietary paint formulas valued at $20 million, which he
intended to take to a new job in China, according to press
reports. This theft represented about one-eighth of Valspar's
reported profits in 2009, the year the employee was arrested.
today's witnesses
To get a better understanding of this problem, today we will hear
from a panel of Government witnesses from the FBI, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE), and the Department of Commerce about the
nature and severity of the threat and its costs to the U.S. economy. We
will also learn what the U.S. Government is doing to combat the threat,
including its work with small and medium-sized businesses to prevent
the loss of trade secrets and intellectual property.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses on this important
topic.

Mr. Long. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Higgins, for any statement he may
have.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like to
thank you for holding this important hearing.
Tom Friedman, in his book The World is Flat, discusses
today's global web-enabled world that allows everybody to plug
in and play, sharing knowledge, work irrespective of time,
distance, geography and, increasingly, language. This paradigm
makes the United States a target for economic espionage, where
other nations work covertly to obtain sensitive technology and
economic information to undermine our status as a global
economic leader.
Economic espionage is not a new concept. It has posed a
threat to the United States' National security for decades. But
now it has become an issue for American businesses, as well.
According to the FBI, the United States' companies suffered
more than $13 billion in economic losses in fiscal year 2012
alone.
This is an appalling figure. What is more astonishing is
that we cannot value the true long-term cost of theft in
transfer of intellectual property. But we know it is
significant. Economic espionage, through cyber attacks
committed by foreign intelligence services and other criminal
enterprises is so pervasive that in a recent poll 90 percent--
90 percent--of companies admitted their networks had been
breached in the past 12 months; while the other 10 percent
could not say with certainty that they had not been penetrated.
According to the former White House cybersecurity advisor,
Richard Clarke, every major company in the United States has
already been penetrated by China. The Chinese have been linked
to a wide range of economic espionage in recent years,
including the theft of blueprints for the next-generation
stealth fighter from a defense contractor.
Last month, in a report issued by the Pentagon, officials
stated that China would continue to be an aggressive and
capable collector of sensitive U.S. technological information.
Additionally, in its report to Congress, the Office of National
Counterintelligence Executive judged that the most active and
persistent perpetrator of economic espionage is China.
China is not the only country focused on the United States.
Russia is also identified as aggressive in their pursuit of
U.S. trade secrets. Further, just about 2 months ago this
subcommittee also heard from witnesses that stated that our
critical infrastructure was vulnerable to attack from Iran.
Given the wealth of trade secrets in America, I am sure it
would be possible for it to be vulnerable to espionage from
other countries aside from those who have been mentioned.
Knowing these facts, the administration is right to take
steps to address economic espionage, and I am looking forward
to learning more from the testimony today. I hope that they can
give us as much insight as they can in an open setting.
Although the administration has issued these stern warnings of
the threat of economic espionage in reports and through
advertisements, Congress has not responded adequately.
Key legislation that would have helped protect our most
sensitive industries and critical infrastructure from cyber
intrusions were not even allowed to be considered by the House.
We were disappointed by the Majority's philosophy with respect
to these issues, and we are hoping that this testimony will
help pave the way for greater transparency and more decisive
action.
Right now, our cybersecurity legislation is lacking with
respect to critical infrastructure. But it seems as if right
now is--the Government and companies will deal with resources
that are currently available. I look forward to learning how
the agencies are dealing with this issue, and if they are
cooperating with each other to prevent the devastation of
economic espionage.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Ranking Member Higgins.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record. We are pleased to
have a distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
important topic.
Dr. Stuart Graham is the chief economist at the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office, where he manages a team of economists
researching the impact of intellectual property on the economy.
Dr. Graham's research focuses on the economics of the patent
system, intellectual property transactions, and relationships
of intellectual property to entrepreneurship, and to
commercialization of new technologies.
Dr. Graham has testified about the patent system before the
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, and has served as a scientific
expert to the European patent office, the European trademark
office, Industry Canada, and the Organization of Economic
Cooperation and Development. He is currently serving as the
chief economist while on leave from his academic post at
Georgia Tech. Welcome.
Mr. John Woods currently serves as the assistant director
of the National Security Investigations Division, which is part
of the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland
Security's Investigations. Mr. Woods has served in this
position since April 2009, overseeing 450 people and managing a
$160 million operational budget.
Mr. Woods has 26 years of experience in law enforcement,
the majority of that time developing and managing programs for
the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service and HSI.
Previously, Mr. Woods served as a deputy assistant director of
the National Security Investigations Division, the unit chief
of ICE's counterterrorism unit, and the assistant special agent
in charge of the Miami SAC office.
During this career with INS, he served as a section chief
for the Miami district office, and has also served as a
supervisory agent in Washington, DC and New York City. Mr.
Woods began his Federal law enforcement career in New York City
as an INS agent back in 1987. Welcome, Mr. Woods.
Mr. Frank Figliuzzi is the assistant director of the FBI's
counterintelligence division. Mr. Figliuzzi has been the
division's deputy assistant director since November 2010. He
was appointed as an FBI special agent in August 1987 and
assigned to the Atlanta division, working on terrorism and
foreign counterintelligence investigations
He was promoted to the National Security Division at the
FBI's headquarters in Washington, DC, with the responsibility
of oversight of economic espionage matters. Prior to his
appointment as deputy assistant director, Mr. Figliuzzi served
as the FBI's chief inspector, the chief unit of the Office of
Professional Responsibility, at FBI headquarters, and
supervisory senior resident agent for the FBI's San Francisco
division. Welcome, Mr. Figliuzzi.
Mr. Greg Wilshusen is the director of information security
issues at the Government Accountability Office, GAO, where he
leads information, security-related studies, and audits of the
Federal Government. He has over 28 years of auditing, financial
management, and information systems experience.
Prior to joining GAO in 1997, Mr. Wilshusen held a variety
of public and private-sector positions. He was a senior systems
analyst at the Department of Education. He also served as the
controller for the North Carolina Department of Environment,
Health, and Natural Resources, and held several auditing
positions at Irving Burton Institutes, Incorporated and the
United States Army Audit Agency. Welcome, Mr. Wilshusen. Just
hope I am saying that right.
The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Graham to testify.

STATEMENT OF STUART GRAHAM, CHIEF ECONOMIST, U.S. PATENT AND
TRADEMARK OFFICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Graham. Chairman Long, Ranking Member Higgins, and
Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for giving me the
opportunity today to testify on the importance of intellectual
property protections to the American economy.
I am currently serving in the United States Patent and
Trademark Office, or under Secretary David Kappos, as the first
chief economist in the agency's history. While serving, I am on
leave from my academic position at Georgia Tech's Sheller
College of Business.
My testimony today will focus primarily on the potential
impact of economic espionage on one of this country's most
important resources; the valuable, intangible assets held by
American innovators and safeguarded by intellectual property
protections both here and abroad. In a real sense, we cannot
appreciate the scope of the potential espionage problem unless
we recognize how important IP protections are to U.S.
businesses and industries.
Mr. Chairman, on April 11, 2012 the Department of Commerce
released a report titled Intellectual Property in the U.S.
Economy: Industries in Focus. This report details how U.S.
companies in our most competitive industries are using patents,
copyright, and trade secrets to protect their innovations, and
trademarks to distinguish their goods and services from those
of competitors.
These protections are important supports for the American
innovation system, enabling companies to capture market share
and effectively sell and export goods, in turn contributing to
economic growth and to America's overall competitiveness. The
report identifies the 75 American industries most intensively
using IP protections, and uses statistical data from across the
U.S. Government to examine both the important trends and
economic characteristics of these highly IP-intensive
industries.
There are several important findings contained in the
report, including the following. First, the entire U.S. economy
relies on some form of IP because virtually every industry
either produces it or uses it. During 2010, the IP-intensive
industries directly accounted for about 27 million American
jobs, and indirectly supported an additional 13 million jobs in
the supply chain.
This totals 40 million American jobs, or just under 28
percent of all U.S. employment. Jobs in the IP-intensive
industries pay well compared to other jobs. In 2010, average
weekly wages for these industries were 42 percent higher than
wages elsewhere in the economy. That pay differential was an
impressive 70 percent higher for jobs in the patent- and
copyright-intensive industries.
Moreover, the IP-intensive industries accounted for just
over $5 trillion in value added in 2010, or about 35 percent of
the United States gross domestic product. Finally, merchandise
exports of IP-intensive industries totaled $775 billion in
2010. That accounted for just under 61 percent of total U.S.
merchandise exports.
Mr. Chairman, in light of increasing concerns about IP
infringement and misappropriation, the Department of Commerce
is emphasizing this area in our domestic and foreign policy
objectives. At the USPTO, for instance, we are providing
American businesses with information and training such as our
China IP toolkit, available to the public on the website
stopfakes.gov.
The USPTO is also especially proud of our IP attaches
program. Currently, we have representatives on the ground in
each of the BRIC countries, with 2 attaches currently serving
in China helping U.S. companies to navigate through the IP
challenges they face there.
It is important to note that there are many efforts
underway across the Department of Commerce, ranging from the
Bureau of Industry and Securities Enforcement activities and
administrative sanctions against export violators to outreach
and advocacy across the Department directed at helping U.S.
companies compete successfully in foreign markets.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the growth, job creation, and
success of businesses of all shapes and sizes in the U.S.
economy are dependent on the effectiveness of IP protection.
The Department of Commerce is committed to supporting American
innovation, including the ability of U.S. businesses to compete
fairly and by protecting our economy from illegal copying and
theft.
We appreciate your support for the employees and operations
of the Department that make that protection possible. Thank
you.
[The statement of Mr. Graham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stuart Graham
June 28, 2012
introduction
Chairman Meehan, Ranking Member Higgins, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for this opportunity to discuss the potential
impact of economic espionage on one of this country's most important
resources--the intellectual property (IP) protections of our
innovators.
It is clear that policies supporting and protecting a higher-
quality IP system are making a difference in our Nation's economic
recovery. In my testimony today, I will primarily discuss the
importance of IP protections to U.S. businesses, with particular focus
on the findings contained in the Department of Commerce's recent report
titled ``Intellectual Property in the U.S. Economy: Industries in
Focus.'' Moreover, I will discuss actions the Department of Commerce is
taking to build capacity in the United States for new and existing
businesses to protect their innovations. The Department of Commerce is
keenly aware that America's core strength lies in our ability to
experiment, innovate, and create new value. It is axiomatic that
sensible Government policies that encourage and stimulate that spirit
of innovation and clear that appropriate protection for American
innovation can demonstrably contribute to job creation, economic well-
being, and better lives for our people.
commerce report overview: ``intellectual property in the u.s. economy:
industries in focus''
On April 11, 2012, the Department of Commerce released this report
in a White House press conference. Underlining the importance of this
topic, speakers included the Secretary of Commerce, the White House
Intellectual Property Coordinator, the President of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, and the President of the AFL-CIO. The report is a
collaborative effort by economists in the Economics and Statistical
Administration (ESA) and the United States Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO), both bureaus of the Department. This report has had a large
impact in helping to educate citizens about the role of intellectual
property in our economic health--during the first 30 days after the
report's release it was downloaded from the USPTO website over 82,000
times.
The report recognizes that innovation--the process through which
new ideas are generated and successfully introduced in the
marketplace--is a primary driver of U.S. economic growth and National
competitiveness.\1\ U.S. companies' use of patents, copyright, and
trade secrecy to protect their creations, and trademarks to distinguish
their goods and services from those of competitors represent important
supports for innovation, enabling firms to capture market share, which
contributes to growth in our economy. The granting and protection of
intellectual property rights is vital to promoting innovation and
creativity and is an essential element of our free enterprise, market-
based system. Patents, trademarks, and copyrights are the principal
means used to establish ownership of inventions and creative ideas in
their various forms, providing a legal foundation to generate tangible
benefits from innovation for companies, workers, and consumers. Without
this framework, the creators of intellectual property would tend to
lose the economic fruits of their own work, thereby undermining the
incentives to undertake the investments necessary to develop the IP in
the first place.\2\ Moreover, without IP protection, the inventor who
had invested time and money in developing the new product or service
(sunk costs) would always be at a disadvantage to the new firm that
could just copy and market the product without having to recoup any
sunk costs or pay the higher salaries required by those with the
creative talents and skills. As a result, the benefits associated with
American ingenuity would tend to more easily flow outside the United
States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Economic Council et al. 2011.
\2\ Ibid., 11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The report finds that IP is used everywhere in the economy, and IP
rights support innovation and creativity in virtually every U.S.
industry. While IP rights play a large role in generating economic
growth, too little attention has been given to identifying which
industries produce or use significant amounts of IP and rely most
intensively on these rights. The report was written to give policy
makers and the public more information about the impacts of IP
protection in the U.S. economy on which to base sound policy.
This report investigates the economic impact in the United States
of intellectual property protection by developing several industry-
level metrics on IP use and employs these measures to identify a set of
the most IP-intensive industries in the U.S. economy. To develop the
industry-level metrics discussed, several databases were used, some of
which (for the patent and trademark analyses) are publicly
available.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/data/naics_conc/
and also www.google.- com/googlebooks/usptotrademarks.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The report employs USPTO administrative data to identify the
industries that most intensively use the protection offered by patents
and trademarks. For copyrights, the report identifies the set of
industries primarily responsible for both the creation and production
of copyrighted materials. The report then uses standard statistical
methods to identify which American industries are the most patent-,
trademark-, and copyright-intensive, and defines this subset of
industries as ``IP-intensive.'' Using data collected from sources
across the U.S. Government, the report examines both the important
trends and economic characteristics of these highly IP-intensive
industries, and their meaningful contributions to the U.S. economy.
There are several important findings contained in the report.
commerce report findings
Mr. Chairman, the important findings of the Department's report are
as follows:

The entire U.S. economy relies on some form of IP, because
virtually every industry either produces or uses it.

IP-intensive industries accounted for about $5.06 trillion
in value added, or 34.8% of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP),
in 2010. Merchandise exports of IP-intensive industries totaled
$775 billion in 2010, accounting for 60.7% of total U.S.
merchandise exports.

IP-intensive industries directly accounted for 27.1 million
American jobs, or 18.8% of all employment in the economy, in
2010.

A substantial share of IP-intensive employment in the United
States was in the 60 trademark-intensive industries, with 22.6
million jobs in 2010. The 26 patent-intensive industries
accounted for 3.9 million jobs in 2010, while the 13 copyright-
intensive industries provided 5.1 million jobs.

While IP-intensive industries directly supported 27.1
million jobs either on their payrolls or under employment
contracts, these sectors also indirectly supported 12.9 million
more supply chain jobs throughout the economy.

In other words, every two jobs in IP-intensive industries
support an additional one job elsewhere in the economy. In
total, 40.0 million jobs, or 27.7% of all jobs, were directly
or indirectly attributable to the most IP-intensive industries.

Jobs in IP-intensive industries pay well compared to other
jobs. Average weekly wages for IP-intensive industries were
$1,156 in 2010 or 42% higher than the $815 average weekly wages
in other (non-IP-intensive) private industries. This wage
premium nearly doubled from 22% in 1990 to 42% by 2010.

Patent- and copyright-intensive industries have seen
particularly fast wage growth in recent years, with the wage
premium in patent-intensive industries increasing from 66% in
2005 to 73% in 2010. And the premium in copyright-intensive
industries rising from 65% to 77%.

The comparatively high wages in IP-intensive industries
correspond to, on average, the completion of more years of
schooling by these workers. More than 42% of workers aged 25
and over in these industries in 2010 were college-educated,
compared with 34% on average in non-IP intensive industries.

Due primarily to historic losses in manufacturing jobs,
overall employment in IP-intensive industries has lagged other
industries during the last 2 decades. While employment in non-
IP intensive industries was 21.7% higher in 2011 than in 1990,
overall IP-intensive industry employment grew 2.3% over this
same period.

Because patent-intensive industries are all in the
manufacturing sector, they experienced relatively more
employment losses over this period, especially during the past
decade.

While trademark-intensive industry employment had edged down
2.3% by the end of this period, copyright-intensive industries
provided a sizeable employment boost, growing by 46.3% between
1990 and 2011.

Between 2010 and 2011, the economic recovery led to a 1.6%
increase in direct employment in IP-intensive industries,
faster than the 1.0% growth in non-IP-intensive industries.

Growth in copyright-intensive industries (2.4%), patent-
intensive industries (2.3%), and trademark-intensive industries
(1.1%) all outpaced gains in non-IP-intensive industries.

Data on foreign trade of IP-intensive service-providing
industries is limited. However, this report does find that
exports of IP-intensive service-providing industries accounted
for approximately 19% of total U.S. private services exports in
2007.
the importance of protections to u.s. businesses
Mr. Chairman, it is important to point out that the findings
contained in the Commerce report concerning the positive economic
impacts of the most intensive users of IP in the economy are consistent
with previous academic studies finding that secrecy, patenting, and
other legal protections are important to U.S. businesses in securing
competitive advantage from their innovations. Notably, in response to a
survey conducted by scholars at Carnegie-Mellon University in the
1990s, managers of U.S. businesses reported that various legal
protections were effective in protecting their product and process
innovations. Across all industries surveyed, patenting was found to
effectively protect U.S. business' competitive advantage for over one-
third of their product innovations, while secrecy was found to
effectively protect competitive advantage on innovations in over one-
half of product and process innovations.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh (2000).
``Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and
Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not).'' NBER Working Paper
7552, available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w7552.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given recent evidence from the Kauffman Foundation showing that new
business creation disproportionately contributes to job creation in the
United States,\5\ it is important to note that a recent survey
conducted at the University of California examining only young
companies in high-technology industries finds results similar to the
Carnegie-Mellon survey.\6\ Managers at start-up companies told the
researchers in 2008 that patents, trademarks, copyright, and trade
secret protections were all important to securing competitive advantage
from their new product and process innovations. Notably, the most
important reason that managers cited for seeking patent protection was
to prevent others from copying their products or services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, e.g., Tim J. Kane (2010). ``The Importance of Startups in
Job Creation and Job Destruction,'' SSRN working paper, available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1646934; E.J. Reedy & Robert E. Litan (2011).
``Starting Smaller; Staying Smaller: America's Slow Leak in Job
Creation,'' SSRN working paper, available at http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1883660.
\6\ Graham, Stuart, Robert P. Merges, Pamela Samuelson, and Ted M.
Sichelman (2009). ``High Technology Entrepreneurs and the Patent
System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey. Berkeley Technology
Law Journal, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 255-327, available at http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1429049.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
department of commerce efforts to build capacity and protect american
innovation
In light of the recent and increasing concerns by U.S. right
holders on the importance of having effective mechanisms to protect
their trade secrets from misappropriation, the USPTO is emphasizing
this area in our domestic and foreign policy objectives, particularly
as they relate to other countries. USPTO attorneys are undertaking a
comprehensive study of foreign laws and other legal measures governing
trade secrets and are discussing with foreign government officials
changes that can facilitate more effective protection regimes abroad.
For instance, USPTO is using this information to update the ``China IP
Toolkit'' on Stopfakes.gov with a section dedicated to trade secret
protection and enforcement. This component of the Toolkit will provide
an overview of China's major laws and other measures affecting trade
secrets and include basic steps a company can consider to protect its
trade secrets in China, including not only information on judicial and
administrative enforcement mechanisms but also basic strategies
companies can employ to help prevent misappropriation from occurring.
Also, the USPTO is currently developing training modules on trade
secrets for small and medium enterprises and enforcement officials.
These modules will include an overview of trade secret law in the
United States, measures to protect trade secrets, criminal and civil
enforcement procedures, and international trade secret protection and
enforcement.
My presentation today focuses on USPTO efforts in support of the
administration's innovation goals. I would like to note, however, that
there are additional efforts underway across the Department of
Commerce, ranging from BIS's enforcement activities and administrative
sanctions against export violators, to outreach and advocacy directed
at helping U.S. IP-intensive industries compete successfully in foreign
markets.
conclusion
Mr. Chairman, the growth, job creation, and success of businesses
of all shapes and sizes are highly dependent on the effectiveness of IP
protection. The Department of Commerce is committed to supporting not
only the creation of innovation, but also the ability of U.S.
businesses to compete fairly with these innovations and protect our
economy from illegal copying and theft. We appreciate your support for
the employees and operations of the Department that make that
protection possible.

Mr. Long. Thank you, Dr. Graham.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Woods to testify.

STATEMENT OF JOHN P. WOODS, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, HOMELAND
SECURITY INVESTIGATIONS, IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Woods. Chairman Long, Ranking Member Higgins, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, I thank you for the
opportunity to discuss ICE's efforts to combat intellectual
property and technology fraud by foreign governments. The theft
of U.S. proprietary technology, including controlled dual-use
technology and military-grade equipment, from unwitting U.S.
companies is one of the most dangerous threats to our National
security.
By maintaining investigative partnerships with other law
enforcement agencies both in the United States and
internationally, ICE is at the forefront of our Nation's
efforts to investigate these threats. ICE's Homeland Security
Investigations handles a wide range of trade fraud
investigations, including IP theft, commercial fraud, and
export violations.
I would like to begin my discussion with our counter-
proliferation investigations program, which targets the
trafficking and/or illegal export of conventional military
equipment, firearms, controlled dual-use equipment and
technology, and materials used to manufacture weapons of mass
destruction, including chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear materials.
HSI's special agents investigate illegal exports of
military equipment and dual-use technologies to embargo
countries, and significant financial and business transactions
with these proscribed countries and/or groups. We also conduct
export enforcement training with foreign law enforcement
agencies, and provide outreach with private industries in the
United States and internationally.
HSI's export enforcement program uses a three-pronged
approach. Detecting the illegal exports, investigating those
potential violations, and obtaining international cooperation
to investigate leads abroad. One of the most effective tools
that we use is our industry outreach program, called Project
Shield America. Through this program, we conduct outreach to
manufacturers, exporters of strategic commodities to educate
them on the U.S. export control laws, discuss export licensing
issues and requirements, and identify the red-flag indicators
used in illicit procurement.
To date, we have delivered over 20,000 outreach
presentations to private industry and other entities as part of
the program. As part of the President's export control reform
initiative, it is to improve law enforcement coordination to
investigate violations of U.S. export control laws.
In November 2010, President Obama signed an Executive Order
creating the Export Enforcement Coordination Center, or the
E2C2. This multi-agency center is housed within HSI, and serves
as the primary Government forum for the exchange of
information, intelligence-related export enforcement.
The E2C2 enhances the United States' ability to combat
illicit proliferation by working to coordinate investigative
enforcement activities related to export control. The E2C2 is
staffed with full-time personnel from HSI, as well as
individuals detailed from other departments and agencies,
including from the Department of State, Treasury, Defense,
Justice, Commerce, Energy, and the ODNI to name a few.
There are a total of 18 partners that reside within the
E2C2. Around their functions include coordinating and
deconflicting our criminal and administrative enforcement
actions in resolving interagency conflicts. They act as a
primary point of contact between the enforcement authorities
and the licensing authorities. They coordinate public outreach
activities by law enforcement.
Finally, they are in the process of establishing a
Government-wide statistical tracking capability. Additionally,
as you know, ICE is the leading agency in the investigation of
criminal intellectual property violations involving the illegal
production, smuggling, and distribution of counterfeit and
pirated products as well as the associated money-laundering
violations.
The National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination
Center, or the IPR Center, which is located in Arlington,
Virginia brings together 20 Federal and international partners
to provide a comprehensive response to IP theft. Outreach to
the industry is also an important part of the IPR Center
strategy.
To combat the theft of trade secrets, the IPR Center and
the Department of Commerce have been hosting a series of
intergovernmental meetings to identify the issues and the
current U.S. Government response to trade theft. Then they plan
to engage the industry representatives and obtain their input
and support for enforcement efforts.
The IPR Center and Commerce are also providing outreach and
training at the State and local level for retailers and brand
owners. Through this effort, we are able to provide local
rights holders and businesses the valuable insight on best
practices, resources, initiatives that can help them combat IP
violations, including trade secret theft.
HSI is working hard to address the proliferation of U.S.
proprietary technology by foreign governments, and to ensure
that the technology does not reach the wrong hands, and
prosecute those who subvert the rule of law and threaten our
National security.
We look forward to continuing our work with this
subcommittee on this issue, and I thank you for involving me to
testify today. I would be glad to answer any questions, when
the time comes.
[The statement of Mr. Woods follows:]
Prepared Statement of John P. Woods
June 28, 2012
introduction
Chairman Meehan, Ranking Member Higgins, and distinguished Members
of the subcommittee: On behalf of Secretary Napolitano and Director
Morton, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
efforts of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to combat
intellectual property (IP) and technology fraud by foreign governments.
The theft of U.S. proprietary technology, including controlled dual-use
technology and military-grade equipment, from unwitting U.S. companies
is one of the most dangerous threats to National security. As I will
discuss today, by maintaining investigative partnerships with other law
enforcement agencies, both in the United States and internationally,
ICE is at the forefront of the Nation's efforts to investigate these
threats.
HSI's Counter-Proliferation Investigations Unit
ICE's Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) Directorate is the
largest investigative program within the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), with an extensive portfolio of enforcement authorities.
Notably, HSI special agents possess statutory authority to enforce more
than 400 Federal laws. Specifically, HSI investigates a wide range of
trade fraud, including IP theft, commercial fraud, and export
violations. HSI special agents detect, disrupt, and dismantle cross-
border criminal networks engaged in the smuggling of people, narcotics,
bulk cash, weapons, and weapons-related components across our borders.
HSI also has full statutory authority to investigate and enforce
criminal violations of all U.S. export laws related to military items
and controlled ``dual-use'' commodities (i.e., items with both
commercial and military applications). Further, HSI has the capability
to expand the scope of its investigations to its international offices
situated throughout the world.
ICE leads the U.S. Government's efforts to prevent foreign
adversaries from illegally obtaining U.S. military products and
sensitive technology, including weapons of mass destruction and their
components. HSI's Counter-Proliferation Investigations (CPI) Unit
targets the trafficking and/or illegal export of conventional military
equipment, firearms, controlled dual-use equipment and technology, and
materials used to manufacture weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials. HSI special
agents investigate illegal exports of military equipment and dual-use
technology to embargoed countries, and significant financial and
business transactions with proscribed countries and groups. Our HSI
special agents also conduct export enforcement training for foreign law
enforcement agencies, and provide outreach with private industry in the
United States and internationally.
The primary goal of HSI CPI investigations is the detection and
disruption of illegal exports before they, or the actors behind them,
cause damage to the National security interests of the United States.
HSI's export enforcement program uses a three-pronged approach:
Detecting illegal exports, investigating potential violations, and
obtaining international cooperation to investigate leads abroad. HSI
relies on specially-trained U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers
stationed at ports of entry to inspect suspect export shipments.
Following detection of a violation, HSI special agents deployed
throughout the country initiate and pursue investigations to identify,
arrest, and seek prosecution of offenders of the Arms Export Control
Act of 1976, the Export Administration Act of 1979, the International
Emergency Economic Powers Act, and other related statutes.
The international nature of counterproliferation networks and
schemes requires a global investigative response. The HSI Office of
International Affairs has 71 offices around the world that work to
enlist the support of their host governments to initiate new
investigative leads and to develop information in support of on-going
domestic investigations.
In fiscal year 2011, HSI special agents initiated a total of 1,785
criminal investigations into possible export violations, made over 530
arrests, and obtained 487 indictments and 304 convictions for export-
related criminal violations, more than any other Federal law
enforcement agency (as reported by the Department of Justice). In
addition, HSI agents conducted over 1,200 seizures of arms, military
weaponry, and other sensitive commodities related to illegal export
schemes. These efforts contributed to preventing sensitive U.S.
technologies and weapons from falling into the wrong hands.
Project Shield America (PSA)
One of the most effective tools HSI special agents use as part of
HSI's larger counter-proliferation strategy is our industry outreach
program, Project Shield America (PSA). Through this program, HSI
special agents conduct outreach to manufacturers and exporters of
strategic commodities to educate them on U.S. export control laws,
discuss export licensing issues and requirements, identify ``red flag''
indicators used in illegal procurement, and identify the Government
agencies responsible for the licensing of export controlled commodities
and technology. As of 2011, HSI agents have delivered over 20,000
outreach presentations to private industry and other entities as part
of the PSA program.
Export Enforcement Coordination Center (E2C2)
A part of the President's Export Control Reform Initiative is to
improve law enforcement coordination to investigate violations of U.S.
export control laws. In November 2010, President Obama signed an
Executive Order creating the Export Enforcement Coordination Center
(E2C2)--a multi-agency center housed within HSI that serves as the
primary Government forum for the exchange of information and
intelligence related to export enforcement. Operational since April of
this year, E2C2 enhances the United States' ability to combat illicit
proliferation by working to coordinate investigative and enforcement
activities related to export control.
The E2C2 is staffed with full-time personnel from HSI, as well as
individuals detailed from other departments and agencies including the
Departments of State, Treasury, Defense (DoD), Justice, Commerce,
Energy, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and other
Executive Branch departments, agencies, or offices as designated by the
President. Specifically, the functions of the E2C2 include:

Coordinating the deconfliction of criminal and
administrative enforcement actions and resolving conflicts that
have not been otherwise resolved in the field;

Acting as the primary point of contact between enforcement
authorities and agencies engaged in export licensing;

Coordinating law enforcement public outreach activities
related to U.S. export controls; and

Establishing Government-wide statistical tracking
capabilities for U.S. export enforcement activities.
The E2C2 replaced HSI's National Export Enforcement Coordination
Network (NEECN), which led coordination among DHS components to address
challenges inherent with dismantling transnational procurement
networks. Unlike the NEECN, the Executive Order requires E2C2
participation by law enforcement and the intelligence community (IC).
CPI Centers
Faced with increasingly sophisticated global procurement networks,
HSI has established and implemented CPI Centers throughout the United
States to utilize CPI resources in the field strategically. The CPI
Centers are intended to serve as a regional HSI resource for manpower,
expertise, de-confliction, undercover operational support, and/or other
CPI assistance that HSI offices may require. This concept allows for
dedicated and experienced HSI special agents to be strategically placed
in high-risk domestic areas to improve HSI's ability to combat illegal
exports and illicit procurement networks that pose a threat to the
United States.
Geographically, CPI Centers are selected based on criteria
including significant cases and statistics, threat assessments in
respective areas of responsibility, and proximity to DoD and other U.S.
Government agencies involved in export enforcement. ICE currently has
12 CPI Centers located throughout the United States.
National Intellectual Property Rights Center
ICE is a leading agency in the investigation of criminal
intellectual property violations involving the illegal production,
smuggling, and distribution of counterfeit and pirated products, as
well as associated money-laundering violations. Led by ICE, the
National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center (IPR Center),
located in Arlington, Virginia, brings together 20 Federal and
international partners to leverage resources, skills, and authorities
to provide a comprehensive response to IP theft.
The mission of the IPR Center is to address the theft of innovation
that threatens U.S. economic stability and National security,
undermines the competitiveness of U.S. industry in world markets, and
places the public's health and safety at risk. The entry of goods into
the United States is an integral part of the economic health of our
Nation. However, with the growth of international trade comes an
increased risk of border security compromises, including threats to
National security and economic crime.
IPR Center Outreach
Outreach to industry is an important part of the IPR Center's
strategy. To combat the theft of trade secrets, the IPR Center and the
Department of Commerce (DOC) have been hosting a series of intra-
governmental meetings to identify the issues and the current U.S.
Government response to trade secret theft, and then plan to engage with
industry representatives to obtain their input and support in these
efforts.
The IPR Center has further enhanced its collaboration with the DOC
to provide outreach and training at the State and local level for
retailers and brand owners. In collaboration with the U.S. Export
Assistance Centers, these outreach and awareness-raising efforts are
planned to precede or follow selected IPR Center training events.
Through this effort, DOC and the IPR Center, along with other U.S.
Government agencies and industry, are able to provide local rights
holders and businesses with valuable insight on best practices,
resources, and initiatives that can help them combat IP violations,
including trade secret theft.
conclusion
HSI special agents are working tirelessly to combat the
proliferation of U.S. proprietary technology by foreign governments,
ensure that this technology does not reach the wrong hands, and
prosecute those who subvert the rule of law and threaten our National
security. We look forward to continuing to work with the subcommittee
on this issue.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I would be pleased to answer any questions.

Mr. Long. The Chairman now recognizes--oops. Thank you, Mr.
Woods.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Figliuzzi to testify.

STATEMENT OF C. FRANK FIGLIUZZI, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Figliuzzi. Good morning, Chairman Long and Ranking
Member Higgins, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you today. For the past year-
and-a-half I have had the privilege of leading the FBI's
counterintelligence division.
Our mission is to identify, disrupt, and defeat the efforts
of foreign intelligence services operating inside a United
States. To put it simply, the FBI is in the spy-catching
business, and today I can tell you that our business is
booming. This is an appropriate time to address economic
espionage: The unauthorized acquisition of business trade
secrets or proprietary information and the illegal transfer of
technology.
With each year, foreign intelligence services and their
collectors become more sophisticated in their methods to
undermine American business and erode what gives America our
leading edge--our ability to innovate. In the FBI's pending
caseload, just this fiscal year economic espionage has cost the
American economy more than $13 billion. The health of America's
companies is vital to our economy, and our economic is a matter
of National security.
But the FBI, with our partner agencies, is making strides
in disrupting economic espionage plots. This year, we have
surpassed last year's statistics by achieving 10 arrests, 21
indictments, and 9 convictions for economic espionage-related
crimes. As the FBI's economic espionage caseload is growing, so
is the percentage of our cases attributed to an insider threat
coming from trusted employees and contractors, or former
employees and contractors.
This threat, of course, is not new. But it is becoming more
prevalent. In this time of global economic uncertainty, it is
lucrative for an employee to steal our technology and offer it
to the highest bidder. Foreign nations know that it is always
cheaper to steal U.S. technology than it is to research and
develop it themselves.
On May 11, 2012 the FBI initiated a public awareness
campaign regarding an increased targeting of unclassified trade
secrets across all American industries and sectors. Our
website, www.fbi.gov, includes many resources to help counter
this threat.
The illegal transfer of U.S. technology is a second grave
threat to our National security. The FBI is seeing an expansion
of weapons proliferation cases involving U.S.-acquired
components. These are components exported from American
companies initially headed to someplace they are allowed to be
but, ultimately, destined for someplace they should never be.
The FBI's counterproliferation center, that identifies and
disrupts networks of WMD activity, has tripled its disruptions
of illegal transfers of technology since fiscal year 2011,
including making more than a dozen arrests in the last year.
Two case examples illustrate our successes in working alongside
our U.S. law enforcement and intelligence community partners.
In the first case, an Iranian proliferator used shell
companies worldwide to supply Iran with military- and defense-
related equipment. In 4 years, FBI cases helped interdict metal
shipments headed to Iran which would have been the equivalent
of more than 80 ballistic missiles.
In the second case, another Iranian proliferation network
obtained dual-use equipment from unwitting U.S. companies and
shipped them to intermediary front companies in Asian nations
before ultimately rerouting the shipments to Iran. More than a
dozen of these components have been recovered as part of
improvised explosive devices used against American
servicemembers in Iraq from 2008 to 2011.
The threat of economic espionage and illegal transfers of
technology are not emerging threats on the horizon; they are
with us right now. As long as America has what other nations
want, and as long as there are foreign intelligence services
working to get it, we will continue to see these types of
threats.
We are producing results as a result of our robust
Government, business, and academic outreach partnerships,
including partnerships among the agencies represented today at
this hearing. We are all making it more difficult and less
lucrative for individuals and entities to carry out the illegal
taskings of foreign governments, and hardening our defenses
against those who would so us harm.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today, and I
would be happy to answer your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Figliuzzi follows:]
Prepared Statement of C. Frank Figliuzzi
June 28, 2012
Good morning Chairman Meehan, Ranking Member Higgins, and Members
of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. For the past year-and-a-half, I have had the privilege of
leading the FBI's Counterintelligence Division (``CD''). Our mission is
to identify, disrupt, and defeat the efforts of foreign intelligence
services operating inside the United States. In the FBI's pending case
load for the current fiscal year, economic espionage losses to the
American economy total more than $13 billion. The health of America's
companies is vital to our economy, and our economy is a matter of
National security. But the FBI, with our partners, is making strides in
disrupting economic espionage plots. In just the last 4 years, the
number of arrests the FBI has made associated with economic espionage
has doubled; indictments have increased five-fold; and convictions have
risen eight-fold. In just the current fiscal year, the FBI has made 10
arrests for economic espionage-related charges; Federal courts have
indicted 21 of our subjects (including indictments of five companies),
and convicted nine defendants. In the current fiscal year so far, we
have already surpassed the statistics recorded for fiscal year 2011 and
expect them to continue to rise. With each year, foreign intelligence
services and their collectors become more creative and more
sophisticated in their methods to undermine American business and erode
the one thing that most provides American business its leading edge--
our ability to innovate.
As the FBI's economic espionage caseload is growing, so is the
percentage of cases attributed to an Insider Threat, meaning that,
individuals currently (or formerly) trusted as employees and
contractors are a growing part of the problem.
According to a February 2012 indictment, several former employees
with more than 70 combined years of service to the company were
convinced to sell trade secrets to a competitor in the People's
Republic of China (``PRC''). Entities owned by the PRC government
sought information on the production of titanium dioxide, a white
pigment used to color paper, plastics, and paint. The PRC government
tried for years to compete with DuPont Corporation, which holds the
largest share of a $12 billion annual market in titanium dioxide. Five
individuals and five companies were commissioned by these PRC state-
owned enterprises collaborate in an effort to take DuPont's technology
to the PRC and build competing titanium dioxide plants, which would
undercut DuPont revenues and business. Thus far, three co-conspirators
have been arrested and one additional co-conspirator has pled guilty in
Federal court. This case is one of the largest economic espionage cases
in FBI history.
The Insider Threat, of course, is not new, but it's becoming more
prevalent for a host of reasons, including

The pervasiveness of employee financial hardships during
economic difficulties;

The global economic crisis facing foreign nations, making it
even more attractive, cost-effective, and worth the risk to
steal technology rather than invest in research and
development;

The ease of stealing anything stored electronically,
especially when one has legitimate access to it; and

The increasing exposure to foreign intelligence services
presented by the reality of global business, joint ventures,
and the growing international footprint of American firms.
To address the evolving Insider Threat, the FBI has become more
proactive to prevent losses of information and technology. CD continues
expanding our outreach and liaison alliances to Government agencies,
the defense industry, academic institutions, and, for the first time,
to the general public, because of an increased targeting of
unclassified trade secrets across all American industries and sectors.
On May 11, 2012, the FBI launched a media campaign highlighting the
Insider Threat relating to economic espionage. This campaign included
print and television interviews, billboards along busy commuter
corridors in nine leading research areas Nation-wide, and public
information on the FBI website. Through this campaign, the FBI hopes to
reach the public and business communities by explaining how the Insider
Threat affects a company's operations and educating them on how to
detect, prevent, and respond to threats to their organizations'
proprietary information. Perhaps the most important among these is
identifying and taking defensive measures against employees stealing
trade secrets.
A recent case underscores the value of the FBI and private
companies working together to stop economic espionage and prevent
financial losses or breaches of National security. An employee at a
Utah company noticed a co-worker download the recipe for manufacturing
a proprietary chemical and email it to his personal email account.
After this suspicious activity was reported, the company opened its own
investigation into the matter and learned that the employee had shared
the manufacturing secret with an individual associated with a foreign
chemical company. Because of an FBI presentation about economic
espionage, company executives called the FBI, and the employee was
arrested and charged within 10 days. If businesses, universities, and
law enforcement continue to partner together, we can track, apprehend,
and prosecute many more individuals suspected of economic espionage.
A second grave threat to our National security is the illegal
transfer of U.S. technology. The FBI is seeing an expansion of weapons
proliferation cases involving U.S.-acquired components. These are
components exported from American companies, initially headed to
someplace they're allowed to be, but ultimately destined for someplace
they should never be. The FBI's Counterproliferation Center (CPC),
which identifies and disrupts networks of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) activity, is responsible for pursuing cases of illegal technology
transfer, whether the technology is intended for WMDs or other uses.
The CPC has tripled its disruptions of illegal transfers of technology
since fiscal year 2011. We have made more than a dozen arrests since
the CPC's inception in July 2011, including the arrests of multiple
subjects on the Central Intelligence Agency's Top Ten Proliferators
List. The CPC has also surpassed statistics recorded for fiscal year
2011 and in fiscal year 2012 (to date).
One example of this sort of case involved an Iranian proliferation
network with associates in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia,
and particularly highlights our partnership with the Department of
Commerce's Office of Export Enforcement and Homeland Security
investigations. The network leader targeted dual-use electronic
equipment including radio frequency modules. The target obtained this
equipment from unwitting U.S. companies and shipped them to
intermediary front companies in East Asia before ultimately rerouting
the shipments to Iran. Over a dozen of these components have been
recovered in caches of improvised explosive devices (``IEDs'') or
recovered as part of the remote detonation systems of the pre- and
post-blast IEDs used against American soldiers in Iraq from 2008-2011.
Four co-conspirators in Singapore have been arrested and extradition
proceedings to the United States to stand trial are on-going. One U.S.
co-conspirator, who worked in research and development at the company
manufacturing and shipping these items, pled guilty in Federal court
this January.
The answer to the threat lies, in part, on the partnerships
represented at this hearing. Acting together, we are stronger than when
we act alone and are producing results. As we continue our
investigative and prosecutorial efforts we make it more painful for
individuals and entities to carry out missions related to economic
espionage. And as we strengthen and expand public awareness of the
threat through our alliances with business and academia, we harden our
defenses against those who would do us harm.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I
would be pleased to answer any questions.

Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Figliuzzi.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Wilshusen to testify.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY C. WILSHUSEN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Wilshusen. Chairman Long, Ranking Member Higgins, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify at today's hearing on the threat of economic espionage
facing the United States.
This threat is not new. In April, 1992 we testified that
the theft of U.S. proprietary information or technology by
foreign companies has long been a part of the competitive
business environment. We also testified that the unauthorized
acquisition of U.S. proprietary and other information by
foreign governments to advance their country's economic
position was growing.
Today, this threat continues to grow. The United States, a
leader in innovation and technological research and
development, remains a prime target. In addition, the
increasing dependence on network IT systems and the use of
cyberspace have vastly enhanced the reach and potential impact
of such threats by making it possible for hostile actors to
quickly steal massive amounts of information while remaining
anonymous and difficult to detect.
Mr. Chairman, I will describe some of the cyber threats,
reported incidents affecting our Nation's systems, IT security
safeguards available for helping to reduce these risks, and the
roles of key Federal entities in supporting the protection of
intellectual property. But before I do, Mr. Chairman, if I may
I would like to recognize several members of my team who were
instrumental in developing this statement.
With me today is Mike Gilmore and Angelique Lawrence. Back
at the office, Lee McCracken, Brad Becker, and Kush Malhotra
were very helpful.
Mr. Chairman, the Nation faces an evolving array of cyber-
based threats from a variety of sources. These sources include
foreign nations, business competitors, criminal groups,
hackers, and corrupt insiders engaged in criminal activities
such as fraud, computer extortion, and economic and industrial
espionage, among others.
They vary in their terms of capabilities, willingness to
act, and motives, which can include seeking monetary gain and
pursuing economic, political, or military advantage. Moreover,
they have a variety of attack techniques that can be used to
view, exfiltrate, and modify valuable information. The
magnitude of the threat is compounded by the ever-increasing
sophistication of cyber attack techniques, such as attacks that
may combine multiple exploits.
Reported attacks involving private-sector and Government
systems occur daily and demonstrate that their impact can be
serious. For example, consumers could suffer privacy and
financial loss from identity theft and on-line scams. Private
companies could lose their competitive advantage and market
value from the cyber theft of an intellectual property or
business proprietary information.
Essential Government functions and critical infrastructure
services could be impaired or disrupted. To protect against
these threats, a variety of security controls and practices are
available. These include technical controls such as those that
manage access to systems, ensure system integrity, and encrypt
sensitive data.
Risk management and strategic planning are key practices
that organizations undertake to improve their overall security
posture and reduce their exposure to cyber risk. Effective
public-private partnerships can facilitate information-sharing
about cyber threats and countermeasures. Multiple Federal
agencies have roles in supporting the protection of
intellectual property rights, such as the Departments of
Commerce, Justice, and Homeland Security.
For example, components within the Justice Department,
including the FBI, are dedicated to fighting computer-based
threats to intellectual property. In addition, both Congress
and the administration have established interagency mechanisms
to better coordinate the protection of intellectual property.
Ensuring the effective coordination among these efforts
will be imperative for enhancing the economic security of the
United States. In summary, the on-going efforts to steal U.S.
intellectual property and other sensitive information are
exacerbated by the ever-increasing prevalence and
sophistication of cyber threats facing the Nation.
Recently-reported incidents show that such actions can have
serious consequences not only on individual businesses, but on
private citizens and the economy as a whole. Effective
coordination among Federal agencies, as well as robust public-
private partnerships, are essential elements of any Nation-wide
effort to protect America's businesses and economic security
from cyber-based threats.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Higgins, this concludes my
statement. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may
have.
[The statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen
Chairman Meehan, Ranking Member Higgins, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's
hearing on the threat of economic espionage facing U.S. businesses.
The threat of economic espionage\1\ is not new. In April 1992, we
testified that the theft of U.S. proprietary information or technology
by foreign companies has long been a part of the competitive business
environment.\2\ We also testified that the unauthorized acquisition of
U.S. proprietary or other information by foreign governments to advance
their countries' economic position was growing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ According to the Office of the National Counterintelligence
Executive, economic espionage occurs when an actor, knowing or
intending that his or her actions will benefit any foreign government,
instrumentality, or agent, knowingly: (1) Steals, or without
authorization appropriates, carries away, conceals, or obtains by
deception or fraud a trade secret; (2) copies, duplicates, reproduces,
destroys, uploads, downloads, or transmits that trade secret without
authorization; or (3) receives a trade secret knowing that the trade
secret had been stolen, appropriated, obtained or converted without
authorization. See Foreign Spies Stealing U.S. Economic Secrets in
Cyberspace: Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage, 2009-2011 (October 2011).
\2\ GAO, Economic Espionage: The Threat to U.S. Industry, Testimony
before the Subcommittee on Economic and Commercial Law, Committee on
the Judiciary, House of Representatives, GAO/T-OSI-92-6 (April 29,
1992).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, this threat continues to grow. According to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the theft of intellectual property
(IP)\3\--products of human intelligence and creativity--is a growing
threat which is heightened by the rise of the use of digital
technologies.\4\ The increasing dependency upon information technology
(IT) systems and networked operations pervades nearly every aspect of
our society. In particular, increasing computer interconnectivity--most
notably growth in the use of the internet--has revolutionized the way
that our Government, our Nation, and much of the world communicate and
conduct business. While bringing significant benefits, this dependency
can also create vulnerabilities to cyber-based threats. Cyber attacks
are one way that threat actors--whether nations, companies, or
criminals--can target the intellectual property and other sensitive
information of Federal agencies and American businesses. According to
the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, sensitive
U.S. economic information and technology are targeted by intelligence
services, private-sector companies, academic and research institutions,
and citizens of dozens of countries.\5\ To help address this threat,
Federal agencies have a key role to play in law enforcement,
deterrence, and information sharing. Underscoring the importance of
this issue, we have designated Federal information security as a high-
risk area since 1997 and in 2003 expanded this area to include
protecting computerized systems supporting our Nation's critical
infrastructure.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Intellectual property is a category of legal rights that grants
owners certain exclusive rights to intangible assets or products of the
human intellect, such as inventions; literary and artistic works; and
symbols, names, images, and design.
\4\ See the FBI's website on cybercrime and intellectual property
theft at http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/cyber/ipr/ipr.
\5\ Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Foreign
Spies Stealing U.S. Economic Secrets in Cyberspace.
\6\ See, most recently, GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO-11-
278 (Washington, DC: February 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my testimony today, I will describe: (1) Cyber threats facing
the Nation's systems, (2) reported cyber incidents and their impacts,
(3) security controls and other techniques available for reducing risk,
and (4) the responsibilities of key Federal entities in support of
improving the protection of intellectual property. In preparing this
statement in June 2012, we relied on our previous work in these areas.
(Please see the related GAO products in appendix II.) These products
contain detailed overviews of the scope and methodology we used. We
also reviewed relevant reports from the Department of Justice and
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, and information
on security incidents, including those involving economic espionage,
from the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), media
reports, and other publicly available sources. The work on which this
statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
Government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform audits to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
background
As computer technology has advanced, both Government and private
entities have become increasingly dependent on computerized information
systems to carry out operations and to process, maintain, and report
essential information. Public and private organizations rely on
computer systems to transmit sensitive and proprietary information,
develop and maintain intellectual capital, conduct operations, process
business transactions, transfer funds, and deliver services. In
addition, the internet has grown increasingly important to American
business and consumers, serving as a medium for hundreds of billions of
dollars of commerce each year.
Consequently, ineffective information security controls can result
in significant risks, including:

loss or theft of resources, including money and intellectual
property;

inappropriate access to and disclosure, modification, or
destruction of sensitive information;

use of computer resources for unauthorized purposes or to
launch attacks on other computers' systems;

damage to networks and equipment;

loss of business due to lack of customer confidence; and

increased costs from remediation.
the nation faces an evolving array of cyber-based threats
Cyber-based threats are evolving and growing and arise from a wide
array of sources. These sources include business competitors, corrupt
employees, criminal groups, hackers, and foreign nations engaged in
espionage and information warfare. These threat sources vary in terms
of the capabilities of the actors, their willingness to act, and their
motives, which can include monetary gain or political advantage, among
others. Table 1 shows common sources of cyber threats.

TABLE 1.--SOURCES OF CYBERSECURITY THREATS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Threat source                         Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bot-network operators.............  Bot-net operators use a network, or
bot-net, of compromised, remotely
controlled systems to coordinate
attacks and to distribute phishing
schemes, spam, and malware attacks.
The services of these networks are
sometimes made available on
underground markets (e.g.,
purchasing a denial-of-service
attack or services to relay spam or
phishing attacks).
Business competitors..............  Companies that compete against or do
business with a target company may
seek to obtain sensitive
information to improve their
competitive advantage in various
areas, such as pricing,
manufacturing, product development,
and contracting.
Criminal groups...................  Criminal groups seek to attack
systems for monetary gain.
Specifically, organized criminal
groups use spam, phishing, and
spyware/malware to commit identity
theft, on-line fraud, and computer
extortion.
Hackers...........................  Hackers break into networks for the
thrill of the challenge, bragging
rights in the hacker community,
revenge, stalking, monetary gain,
and political activism, among other
reasons. While gaining unauthorized
access once required a fair amount
of skill or computer knowledge,
hackers can now download attack
scripts and protocols from the
internet and launch them against
victim sites. Thus, while attack
tools have become more
sophisticated, they have also
become easier to use. According to
the Central Intelligence Agency,
the large majority of hackers do
not have the requisite expertise to
threaten difficult targets such as
critical U.S. networks.
Nevertheless, the worldwide
population of hackers poses a
relatively high threat of an
isolated or brief disruption
causing serious damage.
Insiders..........................  The disgruntled or corrupt
organization insider is a source of
computer crime including economic
espionage. Insiders may not need a
great deal of knowledge about
computer intrusions because their
knowledge of a target system often
allows them to gain unrestricted
access to cause damage to the
system or to steal system data. The
insider threat includes contractors
hired by the organization, as well
as careless or poorly-trained
employees who may inadvertently
introduce malware into systems.
International corporate spies.....  International corporate spies pose a
threat to the United States through
their ability to conduct economic
and industrial espionage* and large-
scale monetary theft and to hire or
develop hacker talent.
Nations...........................  Nations use cyber tools as part of
their information-gathering and
espionage activities, including
economic espionage directed against
U.S. businesses. In addition,
several nations are aggressively
working to develop information
warfare doctrine, programs, and
capabilities. In his January 2012
testimony, the Director of National
Intelligence stated that, among
state actors, China and Russia are
of particular concern.
Phishers..........................  Individuals or small groups execute
phishing schemes in an attempt to
steal identities or information for
monetary gain. Phishers may also
use spam and spyware or malware to
accomplish their objectives.
Spammers..........................  Individuals or organizations
distribute unsolicited e-mail with
hidden or false information in
order to sell products, conduct
phishing schemes, distribute
spyware or malware, or attack
organizations (e.g., a denial of
service).
Spyware or malware authors........  Individuals or organizations with
malicious intent carry out attacks
against users by producing and
distributing spyware and malware.
Several notable destructive
computer viruses and worms have
harmed files and hard drives,
including the Melissa Macro Virus,
the Explore.Zip worm, the CIH
(Chernobyl) Virus, Nimda, Code Red,
Slammer, and Blaster.
Terrorists........................  Terrorists seek to destroy,
incapacitate, or exploit critical
infrastructures in order to
threaten National security, cause
mass casualties, weaken the
economy, and damage public morale
and confidence. Terrorists may use
phishing schemes or spyware/malware
in order to generate funds or
gather sensitive information.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* According to the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive,
industrial espionage, or theft of trade secrets, occurs when an actor,
intending or knowing that his or her offense will injure the owner of
a trade secret of a product produced for or placed in interstate or
foreign commerce, acts with the intent to convert that trade secret to
the economic benefit of anyone other than the owner. See Foreign Spies
Stealing U.S. Economic Secrets in Cyberspace.
Source.--GAO analysis based on data from the Director of National
Intelligence, Department of Justice, Central Intelligence Agency,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the Software
Engineering Institute's CERT Coordination Center.

These sources of cyber threats make use of various techniques, or
exploits, to adversely affect an organization's computers, software, or
networks, or to intercept or steal valuable or sensitive information.
Table 2 provides descriptions of common types of cyber exploits.

TABLE 2.--TYPES OF CYBER EXPLOITS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type of Exploit                        Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cross-site scripting..............  An attack that uses third-party web
resources to run script within the
victim's web browser or scriptable
application. This occurs when a
browser visits a malicious website
or clicks a malicious link. The
most dangerous consequences occur
when this method is used to exploit
additional vulnerabilities that may
permit an attacker to steal cookies
(data exchanged between a web
server and a browser), log key
strokes, capture screen shots,
discover and collect network
information, and remotely access
and control the victim's machine.
Denial-of-service.................  An attack that prevents or impairs
the authorized use of networks,
systems, or applications by
exhausting resources.
Distributed denial-of-service.....  A variant of the denial-of-service
attack that uses numerous hosts to
perform the attack.
Logic bombs.......................  A piece of programming code
intentionally inserted into a
software system that will cause a
malicious function to occur when
one or more specified conditions
are met.
Phishing..........................  A digital form of social engineering
that uses authentic-looking, but
fake, e-mails to request
information from users or direct
them to a fake website that
requests information.
Passive wiretapping...............  The monitoring or recording of data,
such as passwords transmitted in
clear text, while they are being
transmitted over a communications
link. This is done without altering
or affecting the data.
Structured Query Language (SQL)     An attack that involves the
injection.                          alteration of a database search in
a web-based application, which can
be used to obtain unauthorized
access to sensitive information in
a database.
Trojan horse......................  A computer program that appears to
have a useful function, but also
has a hidden and potentially
malicious function that evades
security mechanisms by, for
example, masquerading as a useful
program that a user would likely
execute.
Virus.............................  A computer program that can copy
itself and infect a computer
without the permission or knowledge
of the user. A virus might corrupt
or delete data on a computer, use e-
mail programs to spread itself to
other computers, or even erase
everything on a hard disk. Unlike a
computer worm, a virus requires
human involvement (usually
unwitting) to propagate.
War driving.......................  The method of driving through cities
and neighborhoods with a wireless-
equipped computer--sometimes with a
powerful antenna--searching for
unsecured wireless networks.
Worm..............................  A self-replicating, self-
propagating, self-contained program
that uses network mechanisms to
spread itself. Unlike computer
viruses, worms do not require human
involvement to propagate.
Zero-day exploit..................  An exploit that takes advantage of a
security vulnerability previously
unknown to the general public. In
many cases, the exploit code is
written by the same person who
discovered the vulnerability. By
writing an exploit for the
previously unknown vulnerability,
the attacker creates a potent
threat since the compressed time
frame between public discoveries of
both makes it difficult to defend
against.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Institute of Standards
and Technology, United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, and
industry reports.

Cyberspace--where much business activity and the development of new
ideas often take place--amplifies these threats by making it possible
for malicious actors to quickly steal and transfer massive quantities
of data while remaining anonymous and difficult to detect.\7\ For
example, cyber attackers do not need to be physically close to their
victims, technology allows attacks to easily cross State and National
borders, attacks can be carried out at high speed and directed at a
number of victims simultaneously, and cyber attackers can more easily
remain anonymous. Moreover, the use of these and other techniques is
becoming more sophisticated, with attackers using multiple or
``blended'' approaches that combine two or more techniques. Using such
techniques, threat actors may target individuals, resulting in loss of
privacy or identity theft; businesses, resulting in the compromise of
proprietary information or intellectual property; critical
infrastructures, resulting in their disruption or destruction; or
Government agencies, resulting in the loss of sensitive information and
damage to economic and National security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Foreign
Spies Stealing U.S. Economic Secrets in Cyberspace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reported cyber-incidents illustrate serious risk to the security of
intellectual property and other sensitive economic information
Reports of cyber incidents affecting both public and private
institutions are widespread. The U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team
(US-CERT) receives computer security incident reports from Federal
agencies, State and local governments, commercial enterprises, U.S.
citizens, and international computer security incident response teams.
In its fiscal year 2011 report to Congress on implementation of the
Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, the Office of
Management and Budget reported that US-CERT received over 100,000 total
incident reports in fiscal year 2011. Over half of these (about 55,000)
were phishing exploits; other categories of incidents included virus/
Trojan horse/worm/logic bombs; malicious websites; policy violations;
equipment theft or loss; suspicious network activity; attempted access;
and social engineering.
Private-sector organizations have experienced a wide range of
incidents involving data loss or theft, economic loss, computer
intrusions, and privacy breaches, underscoring the need for improved
security practices. The following examples from news media and other
public sources illustrate that a broad array of information and assets
remain at risk.

In March 2012, it was reported that a security breach at
Global Payments, a firm that processed payments for Visa and
Mastercard, could compromise the credit- and debit-card
information of millions of Americans. Subsequent to the
reported breach, the company's stock fell more than 9 percent
before trading in its stock was halted. Visa also removed the
company from its list of approved processors.

In March 2012, it was reported that Blue Cross Blue Shield
of Tennessee paid out a settlement of $1.5 million to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services arising from potential
violations stemming from the theft of 57 unencrypted computer
hard drives that contained protected health information of over
1 million individuals.

In April 2011, Sony disclosed that it suffered a massive
breach in its video game on-line network that led to the theft
of personal information, including the names, addresses, and
possibly credit card data belonging to 77 million user
accounts.

In February 2011, media reports stated that computer hackers
had broken into and stolen proprietary information worth
millions of dollars from the networks of six U.S. and European
energy companies.

A retailer reported in May 2011 that it had suffered a
breach of its customers' card data. The company discovered
tampering with the personal identification number (PIN) pads at
its checkout lanes in stores across 20 States.

In mid-2009 a research chemist with DuPont Corporation
reportedly downloaded proprietary information to a personal e-
mail account and thumb drive with the intention of transferring
this information to Peking University in China and also sought
Chinese government funding to commercialize research related to
the information he had stolen.

Between 2008 and 2009, a chemist with Valspar Corporation
reportedly used access to an internal computer network to
download secret formulas for paints and coatings, reportedly
intending to take this proprietary information to a new job
with a paint company in Shanghai, China.

In December 2006, a product engineer with Ford Motor Company
reportedly copied approximately 4,000 Ford documents onto an
external hard drive in order to acquire a job with a Chinese
automotive company.
These incidents illustrate the serious impact that cyber threats
can have on, among other things, the security of sensitive personal and
financial information and proprietary information and intellectual
property. While these effects can be difficult to quantify monetarily,
they can include any of the following:

For consumers or private citizens: Identity theft or
compromise of personal and economic information and costs
associated with lower-quality counterfeit or pirated goods.

For business: Lost sales, lost brand value or damage to
public image, cost of intellectual property protection, and
decreased incentive to invest in research and development.

For the economy as a whole: Lower economic growth due to
reduced incentives to innovate and lost revenue from declining
U.S. trade with countries that have weak IP rights regimes.
security controls and other techniques can reduce vulnerability to
cyber-based attacks
The prevalence of cyber threats and the risks they pose illustrate
the need for security controls and other actions that can reduce
organizations' vulnerability to such attacks. As we have reported,
there are a number of cybersecurity technologies that can be used to
better protect systems from cyber attacks, including access control
technologies, system integrity technologies, cryptography, audit and
monitoring tools, and configuration management and assurance
technologies.\8\ In prior reports, we have made hundreds of
recommendations to Federal agencies to better protect their systems and
cyber-reliant critical infrastructures. Table 3 summarizes some of the
common cybersecurity technologies, categorized by the type of security
control they help to implement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO, Technology Assessment: Cybersecurity for Critical
Infrastructure Protection, GAO-04-321 (Washington, DC: May 28, 2004).

TABLE 3.--COMMON CYBERSECURITY TECHNOLOGIES
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Category                             Technology                           What it does
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Access control:
Boundary protection............  Firewalls............................  Control access to and from a network
or computer.
Authentication.................  Biometrics...........................  Uses human characteristics, such as
fingerprints, irises, and voices,
to establish the identity of the
user.
Authorization..................  User rights and privileges...........  Allow or prevent access to data and
systems and actions of users based
on the established policies of an
organization.
System integrity...................  Antivirus software...................  Provides protection against
malicious code, such as viruses,
worms, and Trojan horses.
Cryptography.......................  Digital signatures and certificates..  Use public key cryptography to
provide: (1) Assurance that both
the sender and recipient of a
message or transaction will be
uniquely identified, (2) assurance
that the data have not been
accidentally or deliberately
altered, and (3) verifiable proof
of the integrity and origin of the
data.
Virtual private networks.............  Allow organizations or individuals
in two or more physical locations
to establish network connections
over a shared or public network,
such as the internet, with
functionality that is similar to
that of a private network using
cryptography.
Audit and monitoring...............  Intrusion detection systems..........  Detect inappropriate, incorrect, or
anomalous activity on a network or
computer system.
Intrusion prevention systems.........  Build on intrusion detection systems
to detect attacks on a network and
take action to prevent them from
being successful.
Computer forensics tools.............  Identify, preserve, extract, and
document computer-based evidence.
Configuration management and         Policy enforcement applications......  Enable system administrators to
assurance.                                                                  engage in centralized monitoring
and enforcement of an
organization's security policies.
Network management...................  Allow for the control and monitoring
of networks, including management
of faults, configurations,
performance, and security.
Scanners.............................  Analyze computers or networks for
security vulnerabilities.
Continuity of operations tools.......  Provide a complete backup
infrastructure to maintain
availability in the event of an
emergency or during planned
maintenance.
Patch management.....................  Acquires, tests, and applies
multiple patches to one or more
computer systems.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: GAO analysis.

In addition, the use of an overall cybersecurity framework can
assist in the selection of technologies to protect an organization
against cyber attacks. Such a framework includes:

determining the business requirements for security;

performing risk assessments;

establishing a security policy;

implementing a cybersecurity solution that includes people,
process, and technology to mitigate identified security risks;
and

continuously monitoring and managing security.
Risk assessments, which are central to this framework, help
organizations determine which assets are most at risk and to identify
countermeasures to mitigate those risks. Risk assessment is based on a
consideration of threats and vulnerabilities that could be exploited to
inflict damage.
Even with such a framework, there often are competing demands for
cybersecurity investments. For example, for some companies, mitigating
physical risks may be more important than mitigating cyber risks.
Further, investing in cybersecurity technologies needs to make business
sense. It is also important to bear in mind the limitations of some
cybersecurity technologies and to be aware that their capabilities
should not be overstated. Technologies do not work in isolation.
Cybersecurity solutions make use of people, process, and technology.
Cybersecurity technology must work within an overall security process
and be used by trained personnel. We have also emphasized the
importance of public-private partnerships for sharing information and
implementing effective cybercrime prevention strategies.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO, Cybercrime: Public and Private Entities Face Challenges in
Addressing Cyber Threats, GAO-07-705 (Washington, DC: June 22, 2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
has identified a series of ``best practices in data protection
strategies and due diligence for corporations.''\10\ These include
developing an information strategy; insider threat programs and
awareness; effective data management; network security, auditing, and
monitoring; and contingency planning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Foreign
Spies Stealing U.S. Economic Secrets in Cyberspace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
key federal agencies have responsibilities for protecting intellectual
property
Multiple Federal agencies undertake a wide range of activities in
support of IP rights. Some of these agencies are the Departments of
Commerce (including the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office), State,
Justice (including the FBI), Health and Human Services, and Homeland
Security; the U.S. Trade Representative; the U.S. Copyright Office; and
the U.S. International Trade Commission. In many cases, IP-related
efforts represent a small part of the agencies' much broader missions.
A smaller number of agencies and their components are involved in
investigating IP violations and enforcing U.S. IP laws. For example,
the Department of Justice's (DOJ) U.S. attorneys offices, Criminal
Division, and the FBI investigate and prosecute Federal IP crimes. DOJ
established the Computer Hacking and Intellectual Property program,
which consists of specially-trained assistant U.S. attorneys to pursue
IP cases. Each of the 93 U.S. attorneys offices throughout the country
have assistant U.S. attorneys designated as Computer Hacking and
Intellectual Property coordinators, who are available to work on IP
cases. In addition, DOJ has created Computer Hacking and Intellectual
Property units in 25 U.S. attorneys offices with histories of large IP
case loads. DOJ's Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section--
based in Washington, DC--consists of prosecutors devoted to enforcing
computer crime and IP laws. Computer Crime and Intellectual Property
Section attorneys prosecute cases, assist prosecutors and other
investigative agents in the field, and help develop and implement an
overall criminal enforcement strategy. The FBI's Cyber Division
oversees the bureau's IP enforcement efforts; though not all of its IP
investigations are cyber-related.
Over the years, Congress and the administration have created
interagency mechanisms to coordinate Federal IP law enforcement
efforts. These include the National Intellectual Property Law
Enforcement Coordination Council (NIPLECC), created in 1999 to
coordinate U.S. law enforcement efforts to protect and enforce IP
rights in the United States and abroad and the Strategy for Targeting
Organized Piracy initiative, created by the President in 2004 to target
cross-border trade in tangible goods and strengthen U.S. Government and
industry IP enforcement action. In December 2004, Congress passed
legislation to enhance NIPLECC's mandate and created the position of
the Coordinator for International Intellectual Property Enforcement,
located within the Department of Commerce, to lead NIPLECC. In November
2006 we reported that NIPLECC continued to face persistent
difficulties, creating doubts about its ability to carry out its
mandate.\11\ We also noted that while the Strategy for Targeting
Organized Piracy had brought attention and energy to IP efforts within
the U.S. Government, it had limited usefulness as a tool to prioritize,
guide, implement, and monitor the combined efforts of multiple
agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO, Intellectual Property: Strategy for Targeting Organized
Piracy (STOP) Requires Changes for Long-term Success, GAO-07-74
(Washington, DC: Nov. 8, 2006).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2008, Congress passed the Prioritizing Resources and
Organization for Intellectual Property Act (PRO-IP Act), which, among
other things, created the position of the Intellectual Property
Enforcement Coordinator (IPEC) to serve within the Executive Office of
the President. The duties of the coordinator outlined in the act
include specific efforts to enhance interagency coordination, such as
the development of a comprehensive joint strategic plan. The act also
required the Attorney General to devote additional resources to IP
enforcement and undertake other IP-enforcement-related efforts. In
October 2010, we noted that DOJ and FBI officials and Office of the
IPEC staff reported taking many actions to implement the requirements
of the PRO-IP Act.\12\ Moreover, the IPEC coordinated with other
Federal entities to deliver the 2010 Joint Strategic Plan on
Intellectual Property Enforcement to Congress and the public. We
reported that the plan addressed the content requirements of the act,
but that enhancements were needed, such as identifying responsible
departments and entities for all action items and estimates of
resources needed to carry out the plan's priorities. Accordingly, we
recommended that the IPEC take steps to ensure that future strategic
plans address these elements. IPEC staff generally concurred with our
findings and recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO, Intellectual Property: Agencies Progress in Implementing
Recent Legislation, but Enhancements Could Improve Future Plans, GAO-
11-39 (Washington, DC: Oct. 13, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In summary, the on-going efforts to steal U.S. companies'
intellectual property and other sensitive information are exacerbated
by the ever-increasing prevalence and sophistication of cyber-threats
facing the Nation. Recently reported incidents show that such actions
can have serious impact not only on individual businesses, but on
private citizens and the economy as a whole. While techniques exist to
reduce vulnerabilities to cyber-based threats, these require strategic
planning by affected entities. Moreover, effective coordination among
Federal agencies responsible for protecting IP and defending against
cyber-threats, as well as effective public-private partnerships, are
essential elements of any Nation-wide effort to protect America's
businesses and economic security.
Chairman Meehan, Ranking Member Higgins, and Members of the
subcommittee, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer
any questions you have at this time.

Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Wilshusen for your testimony
today, and also for acknowledging your coworkers. I know that
that is where a lot of the work gets done up here, and they go
unrecognized. So I appreciate that because I know, on a
personal level, that it is very important in my office and most
offices around here. Like I say, a pat on the back never hurts
anybody.
I now recognize myself for a round of questioning. Dr.
Graham, in April the Commerce Department released a report
showing that intellectual property-intensive industries
contributed $5 trillion and 40 million jobs to the economy in
2010. Can you speak to the threat that economic espionage poses
to various sectors of the economy, and provide some examples of
industries that are targeted by foreign actors?
Mr. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to do so.
Indeed, what this report does and why I came here today to
testify was to essentially set the stage, and to speak to what
is at stake here.
So, you know, indeed the report did identify the most
intellectual property-intensive industries in the U.S. economy,
with the statistics that I cited earlier; 35 percent of GNP,
approximately 28 percent of employment throughout the economy.
It stands to reason that the threats associated with,
created by, espionage would be particularly biting in these
industries, since so much of their competitive advantage is
built upon and based upon these intangible assets that they are
building.
There has been significant study before, particularly on
the area of how important these intellectual property
protections are for U.S. companies in capturing and maintaining
competitive advantage. What we see time and time again, from
the way in which these companies innovate and what they do with
their innovations and the economic fruits and the economic
benefits that flow to Americans and American employees from
these innovations--are disrupted when those companies, when
those firms, can't get access to these intellectual property
protections.
So at the end of the day we have to say that, you know,
when we are looking at industries--from pharmaceuticals to
machinery to chemicals to semiconductors to electronics--widely
throughout the economy the threat associated with the
undermining of the ability of these companies to maintain those
rights and expect that those rights are going to be adequately
protected will be significant to the economy.
The estimates that have been put out of $13 billion, they
seem to be perfectly appropriate estimates. But, of course,
what those estimates must be, ultimately, are an under-count.
Because what we can never count are the benefits associated to
innovation that never happened because innovators are less
likely to create their innovations, to expend those resources
and investments, because they fear that what they are going to
get at the end is an unprotectable product.
So, you know, indeed, at the end of the day, these are real
threats. They have a real impact on what is going on. The pie,
as I have said before, is incredibly larger.
Mr. Long. Okay, thank you.
Assistant Director Figliuzzi, in an interview with the San
Francisco Chronicle you stated that the economic espionage has
never been a more significant issue than it is right now. Can
you elaborate on this? Also in the article you stated that the
Bay Area and Silicon Valley is a target-rich environment for
espionage activity.
Are there certain areas of the country where the FBI and
ICE find this activity to be pervasive? Or can we characterize
this as pretty much a Nation-wide problem?
Mr. Figliuzzi. Mr. Chairman, with respect to your first
question, as to whether this is increasing, whether it is more
prevalent, whether it is on the increase, the answer is yes.
The factors involve things like the global economic crisis.
What we are seeing--as I can talk about in this
unclassified session--is that foreign nations and their
intelligence services are understanding more than ever before
that it is cheaper to steal our technology than to use their
precious budget resources, in this time of global economic
crisis, to research and develop it.
It is cheaper and it is faster to simply steal it. So we
see nations, including in some cases some of our allies even
willing, when it is in their economic interest, to steal
intellectual property for their own economic benefits. With
regard to your question about certain areas of the country,
there is no question that certain parts of our country have a
bulls-eye on them.
Those would include areas like the research triangle in the
Raleigh-Durham area of North Carolina; Silicon Valley in
California; the Boston area, with a lot of research, cutting-
edge research, going on there. But here is the risk in singling
out areas. The risk in singling out specific areas is that it
tends to put everybody at ease if they are not in those areas.
Our caseload shows that the real problem today is the
unclassified-preclassified--what I call the Mom & Pop shop--
research that is going on everywhere in this country, that is
extremely vulnerable to targeting. We see them being targeted
like never before.
Mr. Long. Thank you.
With that, I would like to recognize Ranking Member Higgins
for your questions.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Woods, according to your testimony the Immigration and
Customs Enforcement leads the Government's efforts to prevent
foreign adversaries from illegally obtaining U.S. military
products and sensitive technology through its
counterproliferation investigations unit. How does that unit
work with other components, both within the Department of
Homeland Security and outside of the agency, to identify
potential vulnerabilities?
Could you go into as much detail as possible in an
unclassified setting so that we can better understand the
effectiveness of the collaborative efforts?
Mr. Woods. Ah, yes. Thank you, Ranking Member Higgins.
ICE counterproliferation investigations works hand-in-hand
with our partners in law enforcement, specifically the FBI and
Department of Commerce. We also work with the Department of
Defense Criminal Investigative Service on many cases involving
military articles going overseas and going to the wrong hands.
I could say categorically this has been increasing over the
last number of years, where we see our defense articles being
routed to locations where they shouldn't be, through third
countries. We combat this through several ways.
Most notably, we have a robust undercover operations
program, where we engage the procurement networks that have
been seeking these armaments and arms to go to these third
countries. We use our undercover operations to move forward in
investigating these sort of illicit procurement networks.
We also, in working with our partners, deconflict through
the E2C2 to ensure that we are talking to the right people. We
are making sure that we are not blue-on-blue. That we are
making sure that if there is an effort by a state sponsor--we
are working in close hands with the FBI to ensure that--that
the sponsor is identified. Or whether it is an espionage type
of case, that they are included in our investigation.
At the same note, if we identify a list of procurement
networks that are going through to South America, we work on
working with our partners overseas to ensure that we identify
the networks that they are in source.
Mr. Higgins. Dr. Graham, according to your testimony the
entire United States economy relies on some form of
intellectual property. You also stated that every two jobs in
intellectual property-intensive industries support an
additional one job elsewhere in the economy.
Given those numbers, can you explain to us the importance
of protecting trade secrets in America, and can you further
explain the true economic impact of espionage, economic
espionage?
Mr. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Higgins. Happy to comment on
both those issues.
On the first issue, actually our report tends to undercount
the employment impacts here. So while we found that there were
on the order of 27 million American jobs in direct employment
in these industries and 13 million in supply chain jobs, those
are the upstream supply chain jobs--those jobs that were
associated with those industries that were supplying into the
IP-intensive industries.
There, of course, are other jobs in the downstream
economy--distribution systems, retail systems--associated with
these industries. So, you know, it really is a very large
impact in the economy.
On the second question associated with the importance of
trade secrecy protection, it is clear to us from everything we
know--and many academic studies bear this out, surveys that
have been done of American business managers, R&D managers at
companies--that secrecy is among the most important protections
that industries use to protect their innovations.
It tends to be much more effective than many of the other
types of intellectual property. Of course, these different
types of intentional property work together in very
sophisticated and interesting ways because they complement one
another. Trademarks will support, you know, a competitive
advantage in marketing and sales, while the patents will
protect the associated technological elements that go into the
product.
So these things work together. But one thing that we
fundamentally know is that secrecy is extremely important at
maintaining competitive advantage. Which, of course, says
something I mentioned earlier. It says something not only about
what we have today--and the ability of the companies selling
and engaging in business in the United States to sell and
compete with those goods--but it also says something about the
incentives to do innovation in the first place, right?
You know, we must be robust and focused on these issues.
Because without that, of course, we tend to undermine the
incentives of innovators that are looking for future profits in
making a decision today to whether to do innovation.
So maintaining that important protection, and ensuring that
the people at this table are doing the important work that they
are doing is, of course, fundamental to supporting our system
of innovation, which drives so much of the economic growth and
the ability to give better lives to our people in the U.S.
economy.
Mr. Long. Thank you.
Thank you all for being here today and for your valuable
testimony, and Ranking Member Higgins for his questions. The
Members of the committee may have additional questions for the
witnesses, and we will ask you all to respond to those in
writing within 10 days for which the hearing will be open.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:55 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


