- FEDERAL AGENCIES' SELECTIVE ENFORCEMENT OF ESA CONSULTATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL AGENCIES' SELECTIVE ENFORCEMENT OF ESA CONSULTATION

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, July 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-714 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Vacancy

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Parker, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, July 29, 2015.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Bean, Michael, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish
and Wildlife and Parks, U.S. Department of the Interior,
Washington, DC.............................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13
Rauch III, Sam, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Regulatory
Programs, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA,
Washington, DC.............................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Environmental Protection Agency, prepared statement of.......    55

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON FEDERAL AGENCIES' SELECTIVE ENFORCEMENT OF ESA
CONSULTATION

----------

Wednesday, July 29, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Rob Bishop
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Gohmert, Lamborn,
McClintock, Thompson, Lummis, Benishek, Labrador, LaMalfa,
Westerman, Newhouse, Zinke, Radewagen; Grijalva, Bordallo,
Huffman, Lowenthal, Beyer, Dingell, Capps, and Polis.
The Chairman. The committee will come to order. The
committee is meeting today to hear testimony on Federal
agencies' selective enforcement of Endangered Species Act
consultation. Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening
statements are limited to the Chair, the Ranking Minority
Member, and their designees. This will allow us to hear more
from our witnesses sooner.
I ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted to the Committee Clerk by 5:00 p.m. today. Hearing no
objections, that is ordered.
Also, I politely ask that everyone in the hearing room
please silence your cell phones. This will allow minimum
distraction for both Members and our guests.
I am now going to recognize myself for the first 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

The Chairman. Like every day, Americans are required to
comply with an ever-growing list of Federal regulations that
restrict their freedom, harm job creation, and slow our
economic growth. Every agency seems to be enjoying this
continuous onslaught of regulatory activity at a fever pitch.
No agency has perhaps expanded the Federal regulatory
burden more than the EPA. You can imagine our surprise when the
Environmental Protection Agency was shirking its duty under the
Endangered Species Act at the same time it was rapidly trying
to finalize two of the most expensive and far-reaching
regulations in the last 50 years.
Today we hope to discover that, if not through the front
door at least through the back door, EPA and the Fish and
Wildlife Service are not selectively enforcing a critical
component of the ESA to speed up the very rules that threaten
to slam the brakes on America's economy.
While well-intentioned, the Endangered Species Act has been
a headache for Americans as it has moved far afield from its
original intent 40 years ago. Instead of focusing on saving
species, it has become a political tool for radical special
interest groups to exact retribution on those they do not like,
especially those seeking to make use of our natural resources.
Instead of having an open and transparent process with a
partnership with the states, we have been left with a
litigation-driven system that resolves controversies in closed-
door settlement agreements. Recent proposals by this
Administration serve only to highlight that the status quo is
unacceptable and that improvements in the transparency and the
collaboration between state and local governments are
definitely long overdue.
While there is a growing consensus that ESA improvements
should and can be made, it is still hypocritical for agencies
like EPA to expect everyday Americans to follow the regulations
while they are able to evade them. They are even trying to
evade answering our questions. Amidst the EPA's confusing
statements about their expertise on the ESA, they communicated
to the committee last week that they did not have a witness
that could speak on this topic on the agency's behalf.
In March 2014, then-Chairman Vitter of the Senate
Environment and Public Works Committee wrote to Administrator
McCarthy and Director Ashe asking if EPA would be required by
law to consult with Fish and Wildlife Service with regard to
EPA's rule on new source performance standards.
In response to the letter, Director Ashe responded, ``To
date, the EPA has not asked Fish and Wildlife Service to engage
in section 7 consultation on the proposed new source
performance standard rule.'' As of today, 16 months later, EPA
still has not responded to that letter.
So, during March of this year, I asked Director Ashe if EPA
had consulted them on the rule for existing power plants. Once
again the answer was no. Ultimately, in a letter Director Ashe
stated that the determination of whether EPA's actions may
affect endangered species, and therefore require ESA
consultation, could only be completed by the EPA, given their
expertise with Clean Air Act issues.
While some of those who are trying to follow the law can
wait for years for consultation, this agency seems to be simply
picking and choosing which parts of the law they wish to
ignore.
Courts have repeatedly emphasized that this law is
intentionally a low threshold. Courts have stated, ``Any
possible effect, whether beneficial, benign, adverse, or of an
undetermined character, triggers the requirement.'' One court
even went as far as to say that the mere presence of a listed
species was enough to require consultation.
It should not be difficult to get a straight answer as to
whether these two massive rules may affect listed species; but
we will hold the Federal agencies accountable until we actually
do get that.
I do want to know one thing. We received unsigned,
unsolicited written remarks from the EPA very late last night,
as well as a belated few documents in request to a letter sent
by Chairman Inhofe and myself. If EPA thinks that this action
is acceptable as compliance, they are crazy. If Mr. Grijalva
had acted this way with this committee, I would consider him to
be arrogant, self-righteous, ineffective, unresponsive, and a
jerk. And fortunately, Mr. Grijalva is not that because he
takes his job seriously, he does things well, and he does not
act with a cavalier attitude the way EPA does.
I thank the witnesses for attending this hearing, and I
look forward to learning more about the process, if not through
the front door, at least through the back door.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bishop follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rob Bishop, Chairman, Committee on
Natural Resources
Every day, Americans are required to comply with an ever-growing
list of Federal regulations which restrict their freedoms and hinder
their efforts to create jobs and grow our economy. From nearly every
agency, the Obama administration's regulatory onslaught continues at a
fever pitch, killing jobs and condemning our Nation's economy to the
anemic growth we are currently experiencing.
No agency has done more to add to the expanding Federal regulatory
burden than the EPA. Imagine our surprise when it appeared that the EPA
was shirking its duties under the Endangered Species Act at the same
time it seeks to finalize two of the most expensive and far-reaching
regulations in the last 50 years. Today, we hope to discover that the
EPA and the Fish and Wildlife Service are not selectively enforcing a
critical component of the ESA to speed up the very rules that threaten
to slam the brakes on the American economy.
While well-intentioned, the ESA has caused more than its fair share
of headaches for Americans, moving far afield of the original intent of
40 years ago. Instead of a law focused on saving species in danger of
extinction, it has become a political tool for radical
environmentalists to exact retribution on those seeking to make use of
our natural resources.
Instead of an open, transparent, and science-based regulatory
scheme that would make partners of states, we have been left with an
opaque, litigation-driven system that resolves controversial policy
questions through closed-door settlement agreements. Recent proposals
by this Administration serve only to highlight that the status quo is
unacceptable and that improvements in transparency, science, and State-
Federal collaboration are long overdue.
But while there is growing consensus that ESA improvements can and
should be made, it is hypocritical for agencies like the EPA to expect
everyday Americans to follow its regulations while they are able to
evade them. They even are trying to evade answering our questions.
Amidst EPA's confusing statements about their expertise on ESA, they
communicated to the committee last week that they didn't have a witness
that could speak on this topic on the agency's behalf.
In March 2014, then-Chairman Vitter of the Senate Environment and
Public Works Committee wrote to Administrator McCarthy and Director
Ashe asking, among other things, if EPA was required by law to consult
with the Fish and Wildlife Service with regard to EPA's rule on new
source performance standards. In response to this and 16 other detailed
questions, Director Ashe responded, and I quote: ``To date, the EPA has
not asked the [Fish and Wildlife Service] to engage in section 7
consultation on the proposed [new source performance standard] rule.''
As of today, more than 16 months later, the EPA has still not responded
to the letter.
Then, during a hearing before this committee in March of this year,
I asked Director Ashe if EPA had consulted on its rule for existing
power plants. Director Ashe responded that EPA had not requested
consultation on the rule. Ultimately, in a letter following that
hearing, Ashe stated that the determination of whether EPA's action may
affect endangered species, and therefore require ESA consultation,
could only be completed by the EPA, given their expertise with Clean
Air Act issues.
While some trying to follow the law can wait years to complete a
consultation, Federal agencies are ignoring the basic question of
whether sweeping EPA regulations ``may affect'' listed species or
critical habitat.
Courts and agencies have repeatedly emphasized that this is an
intentionally low threshold. Courts have stated that ``[a]ny possible
effect, whether beneficial, benign, adverse or of an undetermined
character'' triggers the requirement, and one court even went as far as
to say that the mere presence of a listed species was enough to require
consultation.
It should not be this difficult to get straight answers as to
whether these two massive rules ``may affect'' listed species. But, we
will hold the Federal agencies accountable until we do.
I should note at this time that we received unsigned and
unsolicited written remarks from EPA late last night on this issue as
well as the belated first few documents supplied in response to the
letter sent by Chairman Inhofe and myself. If EPA believes a few pages
of unrequested testimony is a fair substitute for coming before this
committee and answering questions in front of the American people, then
it sorely misses the point of this institution. I will continue to
press forward with our questions until EPA has answered them to my
satisfaction.
I thank the witnesses for attending this hearing and I look forward
to learning more about this process.

SLIDES PRESENTED BY CHAIRMAN BISHOP

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[ADDITIONAL SLIDES SUBMITTED SHOWING PROJECTED GROWTH OF THE WIND
INDUSTRY OVER THE NEXT 35 YEARS ARE BEING RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
OFFICIAL FILES]

______

The Chairman. With hesitation, I now recognize the Ranking
Minority Member for his opening statement.

STATEMENT BY THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As my
momma always said, praise is praise, I guess----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Grijalva. And we take it where we can get it.
I was hoping today's hearing signaled to some extent the
end of my Republican colleagues' campaign to drive American
fish and wildlife to extinction one species at a time. I wish
the Majority wanted to see the ESA fully funded, enforced, and
implemented instead of seeing it weakened, or as one of my
Republican colleagues has called for, repealed.
Unfortunately, this is not the case. Rather than turning
over a new leaf, Committee Republicans are turning a new page
in their extinction playbook.
Today we will hear the argument that the Environmental
Protection Agency should have worked harder to assess the
impact of its proposed power plant rule on Florida manatees. We
are asked to believe that my Republican colleagues raise this
concern because they care deeply about the manatees, not
because they oppose the power plant pollution limits. The
Majority's story line is unconvincing for several reasons.
First, the proposed rules do not require the closure of a
single power plant, period. The states would decide how best to
comply with the new Clean Air Act regulations. It would be up
to power plant companies to decide if keeping an individual
plant in operation makes any business sense.
The Endangered Species Act does not and should not require
EPA to guess what the indirect effects of the industry's
reaction to a new regulation might be. What if a power plant
does close as a result of this rule and the building is
redeveloped as a hip new condo complex? Should EPA assess the
impact that a swarm of hipsters might have on the coffee scene
in the area?
The Majority has no idea whether power plants will close as
a result of this proposed rule. We are holding this hearing
today because they think the EPA should have a better crystal
ball than they do.
Second, the proposed rules are exactly that, proposed.
Today the Obama administration announced that they would push
back the deadline for states to submit their carbon-cutting
strategies by a year under the Clean Power Plant Rule and give
them an additional 2 more years, until 2022, to comply with the
plan. So, assessing any potential impact to manatees today at
this hearing seems more and more of a stretch.
Once the rule is out, if my colleagues or the public still
have concerns about manatees, the ESA includes a process for
seeking a review of the rule by the courts. On every day except
today, the Republican agenda in this committee is to limit or
wipe out public comment periods for Federal regulations and to
weaken or prohibit judicial review of Federal regulations.
Many of my Republican colleagues, by their own account,
support expedited, half-hearted review processes for rules that
help industry make more money; but here they are today
demanding that EPA must unreasonably review standards for a
rule that might result in pollution limits.
I am sorry to say that I think this newfound Republican
concern for the health and well-being of the Florida manatees
is a sham. Next Monday, they will hold an oversight hearing in
Homestead, Florida in order to attack the National Park Service
management plan for Biscayne Bay National Park. At that
hearing, Republicans will argue that the new plan is far too
restrictive.
Guess what that managed plan is designed to do? In part, to
protect the Florida manatees.

With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wish today's hearing signaled the end of the Republican campaign
to drive American fish and wildlife to extinction one species at a
time.
I wish the Majority wanted to see the ESA fully funded, enforced
and implemented, instead of seeing it weakened or, as one of my
Republican colleagues has called for, repealed.
Unfortunately, that's not the case. Rather than turning over a new
leaf, Committee Republicans are turning a new page in their extinction
playbook.
Today we will hear the argument that the Environmental Protection
Agency should have worked harder to assess the impacts of its proposed
power plant rule on Florida manatees. We are asked to believe that my
Republican colleagues raise this concern because they care deeply about
manatees, NOT because they oppose power plant pollution limits.
The Majority's storyline is unconvincing for several reasons.
First, the proposed rules do not require the closure of a single
power plant. Period. The states would decide how best to comply with
new Clean Air Act regulations. It will be up to power companies to
decide if keeping an individual plant in operation makes business
sense.
The Endangered Species Act does not--and should not--require EPA to
guess what the indirect effects of industry's reaction to a new
regulation might be.
What if a power plant does close as a result of this rule and the
building is redeveloped as a hip new condo complex? Should EPA assess
the impact that a swarm of hipsters might have on the coffee scene?
The Majority has no idea whether power plants will close as a
result of this proposed rule. We're holding this hearing today because
they think EPA should have a better crystal ball than they do.
Second, the proposed rules are exactly that: proposed. Any final
rules will take public comment into account, including what Members of
Congress and others have to say about ESA consultation with respect to
impacts on manatees.
Once the rule is out, if my colleagues or the public still have
concerns about manatees, the ESA includes a process for seeking a
review of the rule by the courts.
On every day except today, the Republican agenda in this committee
is to limit or wipe out public comment periods for Federal regulations
and to weaken or prohibit judicial review of Federal regulations.
Many of my Republican colleagues, by their own account, support
expedited, half-hearted review processes for rules that help industry
make more money. But here they are today demanding that the EPA meet
unreasonable review standards for a rule that MIGHT result in pollution
limits.
I'm sorry to say that I think this new-found Republican concern for
the health and well-being of Florida manatees is a sham. Next Monday
they'll hold an oversight hearing in Homestead, Florida, in order to
attack the National Park Service management plan for Biscayne Bay
National Park. At that hearing, Republicans will argue that the new
plan is far too restrictive.
Guess what that management plan is designed, in part, to protect?
Florida manatees.
I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
We will now have the opportunity to introduce our
witnesses. We have first Mr. Michael Bean, who is the Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks of
the U.S. Department of the Interior. And our second witness
today is Mr. Samuel Rauch, who is the Deputy Assistant
Administrator for Regulatory Programs for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA Fisheries.
I am assuming you have both been here before, so you know
the drill. Your entire written statement is part of the record.
Your oral statements are limited to 5 minutes. You have the
clock in front of you. When the light goes red, I will cut you
off.
So with that, we appreciate you being here. I recognize Mr.
Bean for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL BEAN, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR FISH AND WILDLIFE AND PARKS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Bean. Thank you. Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member
Grijalva, members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today concerning the
interagency consultation process of the Endangered Species Act.
Section 7 of the Act requires Federal agencies to ensure
that their actions that they authorize, fund, or carry out are
not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any
endangered or threatened species or adversely modify their
critical habitats.
In carrying out this duty, Federal action agencies consult
with the Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine
Fisheries Service, or both, depending upon the species
affected. The consultation process has been quite successful.
The vast majority of Federal actions that are scrutinized
under section 7 go forward with, at most, only minor
adjustments or modifications to avoid harmful impacts. As a
result, highly imperiled species have a better shot at getting
off the path to extinction and onto the road to recovery; and
many species are on that road to recovery, as my written
statement documents.
The section 7 consultation process is set forth in detail
in Joint Regulations by the two Services, issued in 1986 during
the Reagan administration. It can proceed through one, two, or
three steps.
In the first step, the action agency--the agency proposing
to undertake, authorize, or fund an action--must determine
whether that action may affect any listed species or critical
habitat. If it determines that its proposed action does not do
so, it has no further consultation obligation. The concurrence
of the Services is not required in order for an action agency
to conclude that its action does not meet the ``may affect''
test.
Although action agencies are solely responsible for making
the initial ``may affect'' finding, they may find useful the
guidance embodied in a 2008 legal opinion by the Interior
Department's Solicitor during the Bush administration.
That guidance notes that in determining whether a proposed
action may affect a listed species, the agency must take into
account both direct and indirect effects. As the Solicitor
noted, although direct effects are not defined, they are
commonly understood to refer to effects that are an immediate
and natural consequence of the taking of the proposed action.
Indirect effects, on the other hand, are defined rather
narrowly in those regulations to refer to effects that are both
caused by the proposed action and reasonably certain to occur.
Where future effects upon listed species or critical
habitats depend upon subsequent intervening actions, such as
actions by states, private interests, or both, distinguishing
effects that are reasonably certain to occur from those that
are more uncertain and speculative is often not easy. However,
the judgment reflected in the Joint Regulations is that action
agencies are the appropriate entities for making such
determinations at the initial ``may affect'' stage.
If an agency determines that its proposed action may affect
listed species or habitats, it proceeds to the second step,
known as informal consultation. The purpose of that is to
determine whether a proposed action is likely to adversely
affect a listed species or critical habitat. The process ends
at this step if the action agency determines that the proposed
action is not likely to adversely affect a listed species or
critical habitat, provided the Services concur in writing.
On average, the Fish and Wildlife Service engages in
roughly 10,000 informal consultations annually. Through the
process of informal consultation, it is often possible to
identify acceptable modifications to proposed projects that
avoid adverse effects upon endangered species.
If an action is likely to adversely affect listed species
or critical habitats, the process moves to the third and final
step, known as formal consultation. This ends with the issuance
of a written biological opinion from the Service in which the
Service expresses its view as to whether the action agency's
action complies with the requirements of section 7.
Like the informal consultation process, the formal
consultation process often identifies project modifications
that eliminate adverse effects or reduce them to acceptable
levels. On average, the Fish and Wildlife Service engages in
about 1,000 formal consultations annually; and during the
period from 2008 through 2014, only a fraction of 1 percent of
these resulted in what are known as ``jeopardy opinions.''
The Service's determinations and its biological opinions
are intended to be the expert judgment of an agency that has
the responsibility of developing and applying its biological
expertise in the conservation of imperiled species. As such,
they are quite consequential, and the action agencies typically
rely upon them. However, they are not legally binding on action
agencies. An action agency may disagree with the conclusions of
a biological opinion.
Through this process, the Act has been largely successful
in ensuring that Federal agencies do not contribute to the
extinction of rare species. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bean follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael J. Bean, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary, Fish and Wildlife and Parks, Department of the Interior
introduction
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the
committee, I am Michael J. Bean, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Fish and Wildlife and Parks at the Department of the Interior
(Department). I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today
on section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA) and on the
interagency consultation process it employs. As I will describe in
greater detail below, the interagency consultation process has largely
achieved the congressional purpose of ensuring that Federal agency
actions do not imperil the survival and recovery of endangered species;
and it has contributed to the Act's record of success in moving species
off the road to extinction and onto the path to recovery.
America's fish, wildlife, and plant resources belong to all
Americans, and ensuring the health of imperiled species is a shared
responsibility for all of us. In implementing the ESA, the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (Service) endeavors to adhere rigorously to the
congressional requirement that implementation of the law be based
strictly on science. At the same time, the Service has been responsive
to the need to develop flexible, innovative mechanisms to engage the
cooperation of private landowners and others, both to preclude the need
to list species where possible, and to speed the recovery of those
species that are listed. The Service remains committed to conserving
America's fish and wildlife by relying upon the best available science
and working in partnership to achieve recovery.
Some aspects of that record are worth noting at the outset. Already
in this Administration, more species have been taken off the endangered
list due to recovery than in any prior administration. Though still
endangered, many other species--among them the California condor,
black-footed ferret, whooping crane, Florida manatee, Kirtland's
warbler, Kemp's ridley sea turtle, and Florida panther--have had their
populations increase to or near their highest levels in decades. Scores
of other species, like the dunes sagebrush lizard, after having been
identified as candidates for Federal protection, were ultimately
determined not to need that protection as a result of conservation
efforts spurred by the potential prospect of listing. Most importantly,
nearly all of the plants and animals protected by the Endangered
Species Act are still with us. They still have a fighting chance for
survival, despite the many threats that beset them.
When Congress enacted the ESA, it envisioned creating, ``a means
whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened
species depend may be conserved, [and] a program for the conservation
of such endangered species and threatened species,'' and placed the
responsibility of conserving species that are in danger of extinction
or likely to become so in the foreseeable future upon all Federal
agencies by establishing a duty of Federal agencies to ensure that
their actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a
listed species or destroy or adversely modify its designated critical
habitat.
Section 7 of the ESA--Interagency Cooperation--plays an integral
role in accomplishing the goals of the ESA. The Service, one of the
agencies responsible for implementing the ESA, assists Federal agencies
comply with the requirements of the ESA by consulting on thousands of
Federal actions each year. Through these consultations, unintended and
avoidable harm to endangered and threatened species is avoided. And
most of these consultations do not lead to substantial changes to
project design or implementation. The vast majority of our ESA work
consists of technical assistance that usually results in minimal
modifications to a project in order to avoid project impacts to listed
species or designated critical habitat. In addition, the majority of
our informal and formal consultations are completed in a timely
fashion.
The Department and the Service are committed to making the ESA work
for the American people to accomplish its purpose of conserving
threatened and endangered species and protecting the ecosystems upon
which they depend. In addition to working diligently to complete
consultations in a timely manner, under the statutory time frames, the
Department, through the Service, has created a number of tools such as
the use of conference opinions prior to listing to make consultation
more efficient and has published regulatory changes that continue the
Administration's broader agenda for improving implementation of the
ESA.
purpose of consultation
Congress, with the passage of the ESA, placed the responsibility of
conserving threatened and endangered species upon all Federal
departments and agencies and required them to ``utilize their
authorities in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.'' Congress
assigned a special responsibility to Federal agencies--to ensure that
their actions neither jeopardize the continued existence of listed
species nor destroy or adversely modify their critical habitat.
Congress also entrusted the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the
National Marine Fisheries Service (the Services) to implement the ESA,
and through section 7, the Services serve as technical advisors on
threatened and endangered species, so Federal agencies can fulfill
their responsibilities of conserving these species.
Consultation is the procedural mechanism by which ``action
agencies'' engage the Services as necessary to ensure compliance with
their responsibilities under the ESA. Specifically, section 7(a)(1) of
the ESA charges Federal agencies to aid in the conservation of listed
species, and section 7(a)(2) requires the agencies, through
consultation with the Services, to ensure their activities are not
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed species or
destroy or adversely modify designated critical habitats.
Section 7 of the ESA is entitled, ``Interagency Cooperation,'' and
the Services are responsible for working with and assisting all Federal
agencies in carrying out their duties under the ESA. However, the title
of this hearing reflects a misapprehension of the consultation process,
as neither the Fish and Wildlife Service nor the National Marine
Fisheries Service ``enforces'' section 7. They advise and assist
Federal agencies in carrying out their responsibilities under section
7, but it is ultimately the responsibility of the action agency to
determine whether to consult and whether to adopt the Services'
recommendations.
the consultation process--sec. 7(a)(2)
The scope of Federal actions subject to the consultation process is
broad--it applies to any discretionary action authorized, funded or
carried out by a Federal agency. Because of this broad scope, the
Service provides technical assistance to tens of thousands of projects
each year. Between 2008 and 2014, the Service provided technical
assistance on over 100,000 projects; conducted nearly 80,000 informal
consultations; and conducted nearly 7,000 formal consultations.
Under regulations that were jointly promulgated by the Services and
that have been in place since 1986, consultation begins with the
determination, made by the action agency, as to whether a proposed
Federal action may affect a listed species or its critical habitat. If
the action agency determines that its proposed action will not affect a
listed species or its critical habitat, it has no further consultation
obligation. The concurrence or assent of the Services is not required
in order for an action agency to conclude that its action does not meet
the ``may affect'' test.
Although action agencies are solely responsible for making the
threshold ``may affect'' determination, they may find useful the
guidance on the consultation process embodied in a 2008 formal legal
opinion by the Interior Department Solicitor. That guidance notes that
in determining whether a proposed action may affect listed species or
designated critical habitat, an action agency must consider both direct
and indirect effects of the action. As the Solicitor noted, although
``direct effects'' are undefined in the regulations, they are commonly
understood to refer to ``effects that are the immediate and natural
consequences of the taking of the proposed action.'' Thus, for example,
the immediate and natural consequence of closing the gates on a newly
constructed dam would be to inundate the reservoir area behind the dam.
Indirect effects, on the other hand, are defined in the joint
regulations, and they are defined rather narrowly to refer to effects
that are both ``caused by the proposed action and . . . reasonably
certain to occur.'' Where future effects upon listed species or
designated critical habitats depend upon subsequent intervening
actions, such as actions by states, private interests, or both, the
task of distinguishing those effects that are reasonably certain to
occur from those that are more uncertain and speculative is often not
easy. However, the judgment reflected in the joint regulations since
1986 is that action agencies are the appropriate entities for making
such determinations at the threshold ``may affect'' stage.
Technical Assistance and Informal Consultation
In 2014, the Service provided technical assistance on more than
11,000 projects, completing those actions in a median of 8 days.
Technical assistance includes actions such as providing species lists,
providing information on potentially affected species, or recommending
surveys or conservation measures to reduce adverse effects on species.
In 2014, the Service also engaged in over 9,500 informal
consultations. Informal consultation is an optional process in which
the Service assists action agencies or a designated non-Federal
representative in determining if their projects are likely to adversely
affect listed species or designated critical habitat. Oftentimes, the
Service is able to help action agencies modify or adjust proposed
actions to eliminate any potential adverse effects upon listed species
or critical habitat. In these cases, if the action agency subsequently
determines that the proposed action is ``not likely to adversely
affect'' listed species or critical habitat, and the Service concurs
with that determination, the action agency has no further consultation
obligation. The Service completed 79 percent of the 9,500 informal
consultations in 2014 within 30 days. Those projects that fall outside
of the 30-day range tend to be complex, involving more than one listed
species.
Formal Consultation
If a proposed action is likely to adversely affect a listed species
or designated critical habitat, ``formal consultation'' between the
action agency and the Service is required. The ESA requires that
consultation be completed within 90 days, and the regulations allow an
additional 45 days for the Service to prepare a biological opinion. The
biological opinion provides the Service's analysis and findings of
whether or not the proposed action is likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of the species or destroy or adversely modify
designated critical habitat. If a jeopardy or adverse modification
determination is made, the Service works with the action agency to
identify any reasonable and prudent alternatives that would avoid the
likelihood of jeopardy or adverse modification and could allow the
project to move forward. Between 2008 and 2014, the Service engaged in
6,982 formal consultations. In those years, only three of those
consultations resulted in a jeopardy or adverse modification final
opinion.
If a proposed action is reasonably certain to cause incidental take
of a listed animal and the Service concludes that the proposed action
(or the implementation of any reasonable and prudent alternatives) is
not likely to jeopardize listed species or adversely modify or destroy
critical habitat, the Service will issue along with the biological
opinion an incidental take statement that exempts the anticipated take
from the ESA's take prohibitions, as long as reasonable and prudent
measures and associated terms and conditions to minimize the take are
followed. In other words the project can comply with the ESA, even
though it will likely take listed species, as long as there is no
jeopardy caused and as long as reasonable measures are taken to
minimize the take. Service staff, working through the consultation
process, play a key role working with the project proponents to find
reasonable ways to minimize take.
A recent example of the Service conducting a challenging formal
consultation was in Russell County, Kentucky. The Service completed a
biological opinion on the effects of restoring water levels in Lake
Cumberland on the duskytail darter, which allowed the U.S. Army Corps
Engineers (Corps) to be positioned to capture the spring rains
necessary to refill the lake to its normal recreation season elevation
after making repairs to Wolf Creek Dam. In this case, the Corps and the
Service worked together closely to implement an expedited review and
analysis process to complete the consultation in only 45 days--an
extraordinary pace--because of the recognized importance of Lake
Cumberland to the local and regional economies of Kentucky and
Tennessee and citizens who live and work in communities around the
lake.
Programmatic Consultations
Programmatic consultation is a generic term referring to
consultations on Federal programs, plans, or regulations that establish
guidelines, provide direction, or impose procedures that control
subsequent actions that may affect listed species or designated
critical habitat. Determining whether consultation is required for such
programmatic actions usually involves consideration of the potential
for indirect effects, i.e., effects that, under joint regulations, are
caused by the programmatic action, occur later in time, and are
reasonably certain to occur. Given the large variety of programmatic
actions carried out by Federal agencies, some of which are highly
complex in nature, assessing causation and reasonable certainty of
effects to listed species or designated critical habitats can be
challenging and complex. While the Service can assist Federal agencies
in that assessment, and often does so with agencies that lack
experience and expertise in section 7 consultation, we ultimately
depend upon the action agencies to establish the effects of their
programs, plans, or rules and determine whether their actions trigger
the need for section 7 consultation.
An example of a recent programmatic consultation involving a
rulemaking was our consultation with the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) on the promulgation of new regulations governing
permitting of cooling water intake structures pursuant to Section
316(b) of the Clean Water Act. EPA determined that consultation was
warranted, and we worked with them through the formal consultation
process to create procedures for EPA, state permitting authorities, and
the facilities to follow that would ensure that no permits would issue
that were likely to jeopardize listed species or destroy or adversely
modify designated critical habitat. This process allowed EPA to move
forward with their new regulation while ensuring their action was in
conformance with the ESA.
section 7(a)(1)
Section 7(a)(1) of the ESA requires all Federal agencies to utilize
their authorities, in consultation with the Fish and Wildlife Service
and the National Marine Fisheries Service to develop and carry out
programs to conserve all species listed under the ESA. The purpose of
section 7(a)(1) conservation programs is to improve endangered and
threatened species baselines (population and habitat) within the scope
of Federal action-agency authorities, thereby contributing to the
conservation of all species within that habitat.
Conservation plans developed by Federal agencies to meet the goals
of section 7(a)(1) are another example of the flexibility we are using
within the ESA to achieve positive conservation results. They are good
for our mission, good for conservation, and good for our economy. The
plans provide greater predictability and efficiency to Federal agency
partners and put in place a transparent and continuous process of
effective interagency communication, review, and feedback at all levels
of management. This ensures a strong adaptive management component of
cost-effective conservation program execution that helps streamline the
7(a)(2) consultation process.
The Corps and the Service are committed to improving the efficiency
of civil works project operations and the effectiveness of ESA
compliance through the integration of conservation planning in
development of Operation Plans for Corps projects, using existing
Operation and Maintenance authorities. In 2013, the Corps' Mississippi
Valley Division released the Conservation Plan for the Interior Least
Tern, Pallid Sturgeon, and Fat Pocketbook Mussel in the Lower
Mississippi River. The plan outlines a process to conserve the three
endangered species within the footprint of the Channel Improvement
Program in the Lower Mississippi River. The Service conducted a
consultation under section 7(a)(2) of the ESA with the Corps on the
their conservation plan.
The consultation process required close inter-agency communication
and collaboration during all phases of development. Over the course of
the consultation, it became apparent the very programs that most
significantly affected the endangered species and their river habitats
could be important and effective tools to maintain and enhance its
ecological functions. This resulted in the identification of
conservation opportunities that could be effectively incorporated into
existing channel improvement or maintenance projects, with little to no
additional program costs, and with no negative impact to the Corps'
primary flood management and navigation safety missions. It also
resulted in significantly improved habitat and population baselines for
all three endangered species within the Lower Mississippi River portion
of their ranges. Largely as a result of this work, the Service
recommended in a 5-year status review last year that the Interior Least
Tern should be delisted. This consultation demonstrates that numerous
benefits for species, their ecosystems, and agencies can be derived
under section 7(a)(1). It also demonstrates the key role played by
Service staff working with the action agencies. Species and projects
always benefit when technically competent, innovative, and engaged
Service staff are involved.
improving consultations
As part of our ongoing efforts to improve implementation of the
ESA, the Services recently finalized the regulations governing
Incidental Take Statements for listed species. The final rule clarified
and codified the current policy of the Services regarding the use of
``surrogates,'' and addressed recent court decisions related to
Incidental Take Statements for ``programmatic'' Federal actions. These
changes will improve the ESA's effectiveness and allow for flexibility
in how the Services prepare Incidental Take Statements.
The Services also jointly announced on May 18, 2015 a set of
initiatives to increase regulatory predictability, increase stakeholder
engagement, and improve science and transparency. Among the actions are
proposed revisions to interagency consultation procedures to streamline
the process for projects, such as habitat restoration activities, that
result in a net conservation benefit for the species.
conferencing for candidate species
The Service and the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
began a partnership, later named as ``Working Lands for Wildlife''
(WLFW), in 2009 to confer on the greater sage-grouse and Gunnison sage-
grouse. Work began on the conference report for the lesser prairie
chicken the next year and an additional five species--New England
cottontail, bog turtle northern population, golden-winged warbler,
gopher tortoise, and southwest willow flycatcher--were added to the
partnership in 2011. WLFW provides landowners with technical and
financial assistance to achieve specific conservation goals for at risk
species.
The Service and NRCS used a unique process for working together to
expedite the section 7 work. For each of the species covered, based
upon information from species experts, NRCS and Service staff worked
together to ``condition'' the NRCS practices used by landowners to both
conserve the species and increase productivity of the land. A
biological opinion or conference report (similar to a biological
opinion, but for proposed species and critical habitat) was then
developed depending on the status of species.
Agreements between landowners and NRCS are now being implemented
that include plans for conservation practices covered under the ESA. To
further bolster WLFW, the two agencies developed the term ``regulatory
predictability'' that clarified for participating landowners that they
would be provided coverage for incidental take under the ESA as long as
they implemented the ``conditioned'' practices.
esa consultation budget
The consultation process works to conserve species and allow action
agencies to avoid jeopardizing the existence of a listed species and
help achieve the imperative goals of the ESA. This highly beneficial,
important process depends on having skilled people with training,
technical expertise, institutional knowledge, and strong communication
ability stationed and working in field offices across the country.
During Fiscal Year (FY) 2014, the Service concluded 9,249 informal
consultations and another 323 informal consultations were ongoing at
the end of the fiscal year. Through April 15, 2015, the Service had
concluded 158 formal consultations to date, with another 195 formal
consultations ongoing.
To address the substantial workload, the President's fiscal year
2016 budget requested an increase of $10.4 million for consultation and
planning activities. The Service needs to have adequate staffing to
address the increased environmental reviews and permitting workload
associated with projects related to economic recovery, job creation and
infrastructure improvements. The Service needs these additional
resources and staffing so that we can facilitate environmentally sound
development activities through timely consultations and environmental
reviews.
conclusion
Thank you for your interest in endangered species conservation and
ESA implementation, and for the opportunity to testify.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Michael Bean, Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, U.S.
Department of the Interior

Questions Submitted by Chairman Rob Bishop

Question 1. The EPA did a regulatory impact analysis (RIA) of its
proposed rule for existing plants, and found that about 12 percent to
19 percent of all coal-fired capacity projected to be in service in the
base case would shut down by 2020 under the range of scenarios
analyzed. The RIA goes on to say: ``EPA examined whether these
projected incremental retirements may adversely impact reserve margins
and reliability planning.'' If EPA could look at coal-fired power plant
retirements and determine whether those retirements may adversely
affect reliability, why couldn't it also determine whether those
retirements would affect listed species?

Answer. Federal action agencies are ultimately responsible for
determining if their projects may affect threatened or endangered
species. In this case, we understand that EPA determined that their
rules would have no effect on threatened or endangered species. As
mentioned in our April 29, 2015 letter, EPA is the expert agency on the
Clean Air Act and is best positioned to understand if its rules may
affect listed species or designated habitat.
Though action agencies are responsible for determining whether a
proposed action may affect listed species or designated critical
habitat, in 2008, the Department of the Interior Solicitor provided
agencies with useful guidance on the consultation process through a
formal legal opinion. That guidance notes that in making the threshold
``may affect'' determination, an action agency must consider both
direct and indirect effects of the action. As the Solicitor noted,
although ``direct effects'' are undefined in the regulations, they are
commonly understood to refer to ``effects that are the immediate and
natural consequences of the taking of the proposed action.'' Indirect
effects, on the other hand, are defined in FWS's and NOAA's joint
regulations in 50 CFR 402.02 rather narrowly as effects that are both
``caused by the proposed action and . . . reasonably certain to
occur.'' Where future effects upon listed species or designated
critical habitats depend upon subsequent intervening actions, such as
actions by states, private interests, or both, the task of
distinguishing those effects that are reasonably certain to occur from
those that are more uncertain and speculative is often not easy. The
judgment reflected in the joint regulations since 1986 is that action
agencies are the appropriate entities for making such determinations at
the threshold ``may affect'' stage.

Question 2. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) recently
released its analysis of the impacts of EPA's rule for existing power
plants. The analysis uses the EIA's Annual Energy Outlook for 2015 as
the baseline, and then compares that baseline to a number of other
scenarios, including implementation of the EPA rule.
One of the EIA's primary conclusions is that the EPA rule will have
a ``significant effect on projected retirements and additions of
electric generation capacity.'' Specifically, the EIA found that
projected coal plant retirements will more than double if the EPA rule
is promulgated.
EPA itself has conducted modeling that shows, down to the
generating unit, which power plants are likely to shut down. So if, as
EIA and EPA predict, power plants do shut down--could that ``affect''
listed species like the manatee? (The EPA's modeling indicates units at
Big Bend Power Station will be retired as a result of the rule; the
plant's owner concurs with the EPA's modeling).
Unsurprisingly for a rule that specifically targets fossil fuel-
fired power plants, the EPA's modeling shows a decline in coal capacity
and power sector coal use in every model EPA has released to the public
thus far. So according to the EPA's available modeling, there is no
possible situation where coal-fired generation does not decline. Should
EPA consult with FWS on the proposed rule for existing plants, since
EPA expects plants whose operations affect manatees will shut down if
the rule is implemented?

Answer. Federal agencies are ultimately responsible for determining
if their proposed actions may affect listed species or designated
critical habitat. If they determine that their proposed action will
have no effect on listed species or designated critical habitat, no
consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) is
required. If an agency determines that an action it is proposing may
affect listed species or designated critical habitat, it must either
formally consult with the Service and/or NOAA Fisheries, or obtain
written concurrence that the proposed action is not likely to adversely
affect any listed species or critical habitat (i.e., the effects are
completely beneficial, insignificant, or discountable).

Question 3. One of this committee's goals is to create conditions
in which our forests are more resilient. To that end the House passed
the Resilient Federal Forests Act of 2015. Through this Act, the
agencies will be able to streamline their planning processes and
accomplish meaningful thinning. They will be able to finish their
planning work in one-third to one-half of the time it used to take to
conduct the NEPA analysis. However, we are still concerned about delays
which could be caused by ESA survey protocols.
For much of the intermountain West, surveys for spotted owls and
other birds of prey are required. Often 2 consecutive years of surveys
are required to make sure that the agency didn't miss the presence of
the species. However, waiting another full year for a biologist to call
for birds just to be sure, rather than initiating the thinning project,
seems to make little sense when treatment is needed to prevent the
impacts of catastrophic wildfire in high fire risk forested areas. It
is important to note that if these forests burn, so do the nests and
the habitat.
In addition, if the Fish and Wildlife Service's protocols require 2
years of surveys in burned areas, none of the dead trees will be
harvested. This is because the wood is only of value until it begins to
rot (generally less than a year after the fire). If the agency cannot
sell any dead trees, they will not have funding to reforest the burned
area, since most of the reforestation funding comes from the sale of
the dead trees. The result will be National Brush fields ripe for a new
fire instead of new forests.
Given these scenarios, do you think it makes sense to insist on 2
consecutive years of surveys, irrespective of the potential
consequences to the habitat and the forest?

Answer. The recovery plan for the northern spotted owl calls for
retaining existing spotted owls on the landscape to the greatest
possible extent, including in some of the drier portions of the range
such as eastern Washington. Low, moderate and even in some cases high-
severity fires do maintain habitat conditions conducive for NSO. With
that said, the Service and the recovery plan encourage fuels management
and thinning projects that reduce ladder fuels (those small trees and
shrubs that can carry a ground fire into the canopy resulting in stand-
replacing events) but that retain the stand canopies, which are very
important to spotted owls. The Service also promotes siting fuel
reduction zones in areas where other breaks already occur, such as
roads, landings and meadows. This increases the effectiveness of the
fuel breaks while reducing the impact to the forest. What would be most
beneficial is if fuel reduction zones were placed in non-habitat that
is often more dense than spotted owl habitat and at a higher fire risk.
This would increase effectiveness while reducing potential impacts to
spotted owl conservation.
It is extremely difficult to successfully implement fuel reduction
zones strategically such that fire behavior is affected in the short-
term (e.g., within 1 year). Longer-term fuels management planning often
involves a series of fuels treatments and thus can often incorporate 2-
year owl surveys as well as other longer-term land management
priorities. Though we do not require surveys before land management
activities begin, surveys are important to identify sites that are
occupied by spotted owls and minimize impacts; however, forest
management activities that do not modify spotted owl habitat but may
result in short term disturbance to spotted owls can be assessed using
a 1-year survey protocol (p. 17, Protocol for Surveying Proposed
Management Activities that may Impact Northern Spotted Owls, USFWS
2012). In many cases seasonal restrictions can be applied to address
the potential for disturbance during the nesting season and can be
lifted if surveys show that NSO are not nesting. Salvage and thinning
operations occurring in areas that may not be spotted owl habitat can
also be assessed using this approach or may not even require surveys.

Question 4. There are other instances where FWS, as well as the
consultation process itself, slows the initiation of fire recovery
projects that are critical to preventing additional fires in high fire
risk forested areas. In these cases, the Forest Service proposes to
remove dead trees and perform other recovery efforts after a large-
scale fire, which may impact a small amount of spotted owl and other
ESA-listed species habitat in order to protect a much larger habitat
area from catastrophic fire. However, FWS often won't agree to this
approach and is unwilling to sign off on a project unless it impacts
very little or NO habitat whatsoever.
Why is FWS unwilling to sign off on fire recovery projects in high-
fire prone forests that affect a small amount of habitat if it means
protecting a much larger habitat area from catastrophic fire?

Answer. The Service supports using the best science to implement
fuels management projects to restore more natural and less catastrophic
fire regimes, and this position is described in detail in the spotted
owl recovery plan. We also seek to prioritize expediting the completion
of emergency fuels management projects over other, non-emergency
consultation work. We work closely and collaboratively with the U.S.
Forest Service (USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management in evaluating
post-fire forest treatments where listed species occur. We follow the
requirements of the Endangered Species Act section 7 consultation
process, helping our Federal partners design and implement projects
that meet economic and resource management goals while also conserving
listed species. For example, in 2014 we quickly consulted on multiple
post-fire salvage projects that permitted harvest to proceed consistent
with the ESA and the recommendations of the spotted owl recovery plan.
We completed these consultations under established streamlined
consultation procedures, taking 30 days for informal consultations and
60 days for formal consultations. Further, if projects are for human
safety, we continue to remind the action agencies to use emergency
provisions at 50 C.F.R. Sec. 402.05 that allow for expedited informal
consultation, with formal consultation initiated after the emergency is
under control.
In our experience most post-fire salvage projects tend to be more
opportunistic than part of a larger-scale strategic planning effort to
reduce fire spread and severity. Such a larger-scale effort could
include landscape level considerations for both fuel reduction and
strategic fire breaks while incorporating considerations for spotted
owls and other land management priorities. Recovery Action 12 in the
spotted owl recovery plan recommends retaining post-disturbance legacy
structures (such as large, dead trees, whether standing or down) in
areas that are managed for spotted owl habitat because these features
greatly improve the quality of the habitat as it recovers over time.
The Service encourages working with our Federal land management
partners prior to large-scale disturbances in designing landscape scale
strategies that meet the needs of listed species while reducing fire
risk and severity, thereby reducing post-fire conflicts. It is
important for action agencies to seek ways to implement important fuel
reduction work without overutilizing salvage logging that can severely
affect the survival and recovery of natural resources.

Question 5. The Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) has correctly
recognized that the data collection methods it utilized to collect
whooping crane population information and mortality rates at the
Aransas National Wildlife Refuge during the winter of 2008 and 2009
were deficient. To address data collection issues it has now instituted
the Whooping Crane Winter Abundance Survey Protocol. What is the
Service's official position on whooping crane mortality at the Aransas
National Wildlife Refuge during the winter of 2008 and 2009? What is
the most current estimate on the whooping crane population at the
Aransas National Wildlife Refuge?

Answer. In a 2008-2009 publication, the Service's Southwest Region
reported what we believed to have been a loss of 23 whooping cranes,
using the best information available at that time. Following the
retirement of the Service's Whooping Crane Coordinator in 2011, a team
of specialists was formed to evaluate our process for estimating the
whooping crane population. After an extensive review, the team updated
the methodology used for estimating whooping crane abundance. Use of
this scientifically sound methodology has improved our knowledge and
understanding of this whooping crane population and will aid in
conservation planning, future policy decisions and the long-term
conservation of this species for the American public. However the
Service is unable to confirm the loss of whooping cranes previously
reported in 2008-2009, because the data could not be verified using the
previous methodology. Therefore the number of whooping cranes that died
at the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge during the winter of 2008-2009
remains unknown.
The Aransas-Wood Buffalo population of whooping cranes in the
winter of 2014-2015 was estimated at 308 individuals.

Please see the following peer reviewed publications for further
details:

http://ecos.fws.gov/ServCatFiles/reference/holding/28257

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006320714003115

Questions Submitted by Rep. Bruce Westerman

Question 1. The northern long-eared bat was recently listed as a
threatened species. Although the Service acknowledges that the species
decline is the predominant, over-riding factor leading to the species
decline, they've issued a 4(d) rule and, in some cases from some field
offices, consultation guidance that would apparently require extensive
surveys and avoidance of timber harvest during critical times of the
year. The Forest Service manages extensive timber lands within the
range of the bat. In general, the agency believes that existing forest
plan standards and guidelines should adequately provide for
conservation of the species and will prevent jeopardizing its
existence. Can you confirm that the listing will not require individual
National Forest Units to perform project by project consultation in the
range of the NLEB?

Answer. A rule under section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) does not remove, or alter in any way, the consultation
requirements for Federal agencies under section 7 of the ESA. The U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) has been working with the U.S.
Forest Service (USFS) nationwide to streamline consultations on the
northern long-eared bat. For example, Region 4 (Southeast) of the
Service completed a formal programmatic section 7 consultation for USFS
Land and Resource Management Plans with Region 8 (Southern) of the
USFS. In addition, Regions 3 and 5 (Midwest and Northeast) of the
Service anticipate completing a similar programmatic consultation with
Region 9 (Eastern) of the USFS by mid-October. These programmatic
consultations will address the majority of projects within the range of
the northern long-eared bat on USFS lands, and will substantially
streamline subsequent project coordination and consultation. In the few
instances where USFS activities are not covered under a programmatic
consultation, the standard regulatory requirement for project-specific
consultation would be applicable.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Madeleine Bordallo

Question 1. Like my Democratic colleagues, I am also concerned
about the funding cuts to the FWS listing program proposed by this
year's appropriations bill. I feel these cuts will further exacerbate
some of the problems we're discussing today.
However, I want to bring up my concerns over how Fish & Wildlife
Service and other cooperating agencies prioritize resourcing ESA
consultations. For example, this Administration has made a strategic
decision to prioritize the rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region.
Part of that strategic initiative is the realignment of military
forces in the region. That has led to numerous environmental impact
efforts in the Marianas region. However, these EIS efforts have run
into challenges from Fish & Wildlife Service who indicate publicly that
they do not have enough resources to get the job done. This has
negative implications for an Administration priority.
So, while I understand that Republicans continue to needlessly cut
resources, what is the Fish & Wildlife Service doing to prioritize
strategic objectives? Are there any legal impediments and do you need
any authorities? Where is the flexibility in your agency to be able to
prioritize proposed actions that are critical to larger national
priorities?

Answer. The Service defers to the Department of Defense to
prioritize the Service's consultation work on strategic military
objectives and addresses these priorities to the maximum extent
practicable within our staffing abilities. We continue to work with the
Department of Defense to explore how to leverage resources to meet our
shared goals; the Department of Defense has arranged for at least one
biologist to detail with the Service's Pacific Island Office to assist
with workload.

Question 2. As you are aware, legislation passed in last year's
Congress that authorized Fish and Wildlife and the Navy to enter into a
Memorandum of Agreement regarding placement of a safety danger zone
over the Ritidian Wildlife Refuge on Guam. This effort was to ensure
that the military buildup could continue to move forward and to address
the concerns of my constituents who didn't want DoD to take additional
land.
However, I am concerned about the potential mitigations that may be
a part of a future biological opinion for the Record of Decision on the
Marine realignment. Any mitigation plan would be tied to protection of
species under the endangered species act on Guam.
I remain concerned that these mitigations would be put in place
without a clear plan for meeting the Refuge's mission. Could you please
give a quick update about your plan to rehabilitate and reintroduce the
species, and progress on that plan? Have any species been reintroduced
on Guam?

Answer. The Service continues to work with the Navy, Air Force,
Guam Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources, and other partners to
plan for the eventual reintroduction of Guam rail, Guam Micronesian
kingfisher, and the Mariana crow on Guam. Our current focus includes
advancing research on control of brown tree snake and identifying and
restoring adequate habitat to provide for the conservation of the
birds, in anticipation of eventual reintroduction efforts. The recent
bait drop study on Anderson Air Force Base provided very encouraging
results that may lead to effective large-scale control of brown tree
snake. In addition, the Navy, through Joint Region Marianas, recently
committed to preserving over 5,200 acres of potential kingfisher
habitat in a durable conservation status for the benefit of kingfisher
and other extirpated species. The Refuge also continues to be a key
part of any future reintroduction efforts. The Service and Navy are
continuing negotiations to implement the transition of operational
responsibility for Guam NWR consistent with the National Defense
Authorization Act of FY15.

Question 3. The Final EIS for the Marianas talks about conservation
of habitat. Recently, important Chamorro archaeological sites have been
found at the Ritidian refuge.
Can I have your agency's assurance that you will work to provide
better access to these sites for the public?

Answer. The recently discovered historic Chamorro archaeological
site is located on the Ritidian Unit of the Guam National Wildlife
Refuge and within the designated Surface Danger Zone for the Marine
Corps Live Fire Training Range. Accordingly, access to this site will
be controlled by the Navy consistent with public safety concerns and
the direction provided by Congress in the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015.

Question 4. There are longstanding issues regarding landlocked
landowners whose properties border the Ritidian refuge. Can we get your
commitment that you will work with us on these issues?

Answer. The U.S. Government will continue to work with neighboring
landowners on access issues.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rauch.

STATEMENT OF SAM RAUCH III, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR
REGULATORY PROGRAMS, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, NOAA,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Rauch. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
members of the committee. My name is Sam Rauch, and I am the
Deputy Assistant Administrator for Regulatory Programs at
NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service. It is a pleasure to
testify before you today.
With global extinctions occurring at an unprecedented rate,
the Endangered Species Act was enacted to conserve threatened
and endangered species and their ecosystems. The U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service
jointly share responsibility for implementing the Endangered
Species Act. Currently there are 2,220 species listed under the
Act. Most of them are managed by the Fish and Wildlife Service;
the National Marine Fisheries Service is responsible for the
marine species, only about 125 species.
Broadly speaking, we do exactly the same things that the
Fish and Wildlife Service does. We conserve and recover marine
resources by listing species under the ESA, by designating
critical habitat, developing and implementing recovery plans,
developing and implementing protective regulations, and
enforcing violations of the Endangered Species Act.
I am not going to reiterate the details of how section 7
works; I would refer you back to the testimony that Mr. Bean
just gave. I will say, however, that from the National Marine
Fisheries Service's perspective, changes in the marine
ecosystem due to climate change and other stressors are
resulting in a greater number of ESA section 7 consultations on
Federal actions.
In addition, growing coastal community populations and
growing coastal development are also increasing the need for
section 7 consultations. This has resulted, for the National
Marine Fisheries Service, in an increase of about 131 percent
in the number of consultations in the last 3 years.
To put that in a little perspective, over the course of the
last 5 to 10 years we have engaged, total, in about 7,000
formal and informal consultations. Of those 7,000, more than
5,000 of them have been informal. In only 41 of them have we
found jeopardy or adverse modification. The vast majority of
them allow those projects to come in, they consult with us, and
they leave without any significant changes to the project at
all. In 41 of them we have engaged with the proposing agency
and made modifications to preserve the endangered species.
The result of all this action is that the ESA has been very
successful at preventing extinction. Over the last 40 years of
existence, less than 1 percent of the species have gone
extinct, and 30 species have been recovered.
For instance, ESA recovery actions have stabilized or
improved the downward population trend of many marine species,
such as the Eastern population of Steller sea lion and the
Pacific gray whales, both of which were delisted by NOAA; and
the humpback whale populations are currently growing by 3 to 7
percent annually, so much so that NOAA is considering revising
their listing status as well.
We are also seeing record returns from some of our salmon
populations, particularly the adult Chinook populations in the
Columbia River passing Bonneville Dam. Many of our salmon
populations, like many other activities, are affected by the
drought; but we are seeing very good returns of the adults.
Recovery of threatened and endangered species is a complex
and challenging process, but one which also offers long-term
benefits to the health of our environment and our communities.
Partnerships with a variety of stakeholders are critical to
implementing recovery actions and achieving species recovery
goals.
For example, from 2000 to 2013, the Pacific Coastal Salmon
Recovery Fund has provided over a billion dollars in funding to
support partnerships and recovery of listed salmonids and
steelheads. With this funding, the states and tribes have
leveraged additional resources to collectively implement tens
of thousands of projects to conserve West Coast salmon
populations.
While there are some success stories, we do face continuing
challenges in recovering numerous other species. Declines in
coastal habitat from wetlands to coral reefs are often a
significant hurdle to recovery. As stresses on coastal
ecosystems increase, it is important to place a priority on
habitat protection and restoration in order to prevent any need
for listings and to facilitate recovery for species already
listed.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss section 7 of
the Endangered Species Act. I am available to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rauch follows:]
Prepared Statement of Samuel D. Rauch III, Deputy Assistant
Administrator for Regulatory Programs for the National Marine Fisheries
Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S.
Department of Commerce

introduction

Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today. my name is Samuel D.
Rauch III and I am the Deputy Assistant Administrator for Regulatory
Programs for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's
(NOAA) National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) in the Department of
Commerce. NMFS is dedicated to the stewardship of living marine
resources through science-based conservation and management.
With global extinctions occurring at an unprecedented rate, the
Endangered Species Act (ESA) was enacted to conserve threatened and
endangered species and their ecosystems. Congress passed the ESA on
December 28, 1973, recognizing that the natural heritage of the United
States was of ``esthetic, ecological, educational, recreational, and
scientific value to our Nation and its people.'' It was understood
that, without protection, many of our Nation's living resources would
become extinct. Currently, there are 2,220 species listed under the
ESA, 1,575 of which are in the United States and its waters.
A species is considered endangered if it is in danger of extinction
throughout all or a significant portion of its range. A species is
considered threatened if it is likely to become endangered in the
foreseeable future. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) within
the Department of the Interior and NMFS share responsibility for
implementing the ESA. NMFS is responsible for 125 marine species listed
under the ESA, from whales and sea turtles to salmon and corals.

nmfs implementation of the esa

NMFS conserves and recovers marine resources by doing the
following: listing species under the ESA and designating critical
habitat (section 4); developing and implementing recovery plans for
listed species that will benefit from such plans (section 4);
developing and implementing protective regulations, where necessary and
advisable, for threatened species (section 4), developing cooperative
agreements with and providing grants to states for species conservation
(section 6); consulting on any Federal agency actions where the agency
determines that the action may affect a listed species and/or its
designated critical habitat and to minimize the impacts of incidental
take (section 7); working with U.S. agencies and foreign governments to
ensure that international trade does not threaten listed species
(section 8); enforcing against violations of the ESA (sections 9 and
11); cooperating with non-Federal partners to develop conservation
plans for the long-term conservation of species (section 10); and
authorizing research to learn more about protected species (section
10).

how species are listed or delisted

Any individual or organization may petition NMFS or USFWS to
``list'' a species under the ESA. If a petition is received, NMFS or
USFWS must determine to the maximum extent practicable within 90 days
if the petition presents enough information indicating that the listing
of the species may be warranted. If the agency finds that the listing
of the species may be warranted, it will begin a status review of the
species. The agency must, within 1 year of receiving the petition,
decide whether to propose the species for listing under the ESA. NMFS
may, on its own accord, also initiate a status review to determine
whether to list a species. In that instance, the statutory time frames
described above do not apply. The same process applies for delisting
species.
NMFS or the USFWS, for their respective species, determine if a
species should be listed as endangered or threatened because of any of
the following five factors: (1) present or threatened destruction,
modification, or curtailment of its habitat or range; (2)
overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or
educational purposes; (3) disease or predation; (4) inadequacy of
existing regulatory mechanisms; and (5) other natural or man-made
factors affecting its continued existence. The ESA requires that
listing and delisting decisions be based solely on the best scientific
and commercial data available. The ESA prohibits the consideration of
economic impacts in making species listing decisions. The ESA also
requires designation of critical habitat necessary for the conservation
of the species; this decision does consider economic impacts.
The listing of a species as endangered makes it illegal to ``take''
(harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture,
collect, or attempt to do these things) that species. Similar
prohibitions may be extended to threatened species. Federal agencies
may be allowed limited take of species through interagency
consultations with NMFS or USFWS (the Services). Non-Federal
individuals, agencies, or organizations may be authorized for limited
take for scientific research enhancement of survival, or through
special permits with conservation plans. Effects to the listed species
must be minimized and in some cases conservation efforts are required
to offset the take. NMFS' Office of Law Enforcement works with the U.S.
Coast Guard and other partners to enforce the ESA and prosecute for
violations.

interagency consultation and cooperation under section 7 of the esa

All Federal agencies are directed, under section 7 of the ESA to
utilize their authorities to carry out programs for the conservation of
threatened and endangered species. Federal agencies must also consult
with the Services on activities that may affect a listed species and/or
its designated critical habitat. These interagency consultations are
designed to assist Federal agencies in fulfilling their duty to ensure
Federal actions do not jeopardize the continued existence of listed
species and/or adversely modify their designated critical habitat.
Biological opinions document the Services' opinion as to whether the
Federal action is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of
listed species and/or adversely modify their designated critical
habitat. Where appropriate, biological opinions provide an exemption
for the ``take'' of listed species while specifying the amount or
extent of ``take'' allowed, identifying the reasonable and prudent
measures necessary to minimize impacts from the Federal action, and
defining the terms and conditions under which such take is exempted
from ESA prohibitions. Should an action be determined to be likely to
jeopardize a species or adversely modify critical habitat, NMFS will
suggest reasonable and prudent alternatives, which are alternative
methods of project implementation that would avoid the likelihood of
jeopardy to the species or adverse modification of critical habitat.
Last year, NMFS completed 1,467 ESA consultations. However, NMFS is
currently responding to over 2,100 requests for consultations, some of
which are at a national level for many species.

consultation procedures under section 7 of the esa

Formal consultation is required if an action agency determines a
proposed action ``may adversely affect'' listed species or designated
critical habitat. Action agencies often submit a biological assessment
to NMFS, USFWS, or both after a ``may adversely affect'' determination
is made. These assessments describe the proposed project, action area,
and effects of the action to listed species and their designated
critical habitat. Once consultation has been initiated, the Services
have 135 days to prepare a biological opinion that determines whether
the action is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed
species and/or adversely modify designated critical habitat. For
complex projects, the Services may require more than 135 days and may
work with the action agency to establish alternative consultation
deadlines.
Informal consultation is an option when the action agency
determines the proposed action ``may affect, but is not likely to
adversely affect'' a listed species and/or designated critical habitat.
A Federal agency, in the early stages of project planning, approaches
the Service and requests informal consultation. Discussions between the
two agencies may include what types of listed species may occur in the
proposed action area, and what effect the proposed action may have on
those species. If the Services believe that the action as proposed or
with modifications meets the standard, they write a letter of
concurrence in the determination and the consultation process ends. As
of the 3rd quarter of FY-15, informal consultations made up 75 percent
of all consultations.

increasing efficiencies and successfully implementing the section 7
consultation process

Growing populations and development in coastal communities are
increasing the need for section 7 consultations. The Services
recognizes these higher demands on our services and has asked for
increased resources through the President's fiscal year 2016 budget
request. The budget proposes an increase of $13.2 million to strengthen
NMFS's consultation and permitting capacity required to meet mandates
of the Endangered Species Act, as well as the Marine Mammal Protection
Act and the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act.
Increased species listings, natural hazards such as wide-scale drought,
and response to human-caused disasters, such as oil spills, all
necessitate increased capacity to ensure that consultations and permits
are completed in a manner that is timely and that enables the Nation's
economic engine to move forward without unnecessary delays.
Due to the importance of timely consultations, NMFS is engaging
with Federal action agencies to set priorities and better synchronize
action agency needs with NMFS consultation capacity. Where possible,
NMFS is pursuing programmatic consultations. A programmatic
consultation evaluates whether routine activities or authorizations
enable the agency to identify and address potential threats posed to
species and habitats protected under the Endangered Species Act.
Programmatic consultations can increase the efficiency of the section 7
consultation process by addressing recurring actions in one
consultation rather than through individual consultations, and by
facilitating an evaluation of aggregate risks to listed species and
designated critical habitat across larger geographies or longer time
frames.

retrospective review

NMFS and USFWS recently finalized regulations implementing the
incidental take statement provisions of the ESA to clarify and codify
the current policy regarding the use of surrogates, and address recent
court decisions related to incidental take statements for programmatic
Federal actions. These changes allow flexibility in the preparation of
incidental take statements in situations where assessing and monitoring
take of listed species may be difficult. There are several other
actions that address other aspects of the ESA; a list can be found at:
http://open.commerce.gov/news /2015 /03/20/commerce-plan-retrospective-
analysis-existing-rules-0.
NMFS and USFWS jointly announced on May 18, 2015 a set of
initiatives to increase regulatory predictability, increase stakeholder
engagement, and improve science and transparency. Among the actions are
proposed revisions to interagency consultation procedures to streamline
the process for projects, such as habitat restoration activities, that
result in a net conservation benefit for the species.
species recovery
Recovery of threatened and endangered species is a complex and
challenging process, but one which also offers long-term benefits to
the health of our environment and our communities. Actions to achieve a
species' recovery may require restoring or preserving habitat,
minimizing or offsetting effects of actions that harm species,
enhancing population numbers, or a combination of these actions. Many
of these actions also help to provide communities with healthier
ecosystems, cleaner water, and greater opportunities for recreation,
both now and for future generations.
Partnerships with a variety of stakeholders, including private
citizens, Federal, state and local agencies, tribes, interested
organizations, and industry, are critical to implementing recovery
actions and achieving species recovery goals. Several NMFS programs,
including the Species Recovery Grants to States and Tribes, the Pacific
Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund, the Prescott Marine Mammal Rescue
Assistance Grant Program, the Community-based Restoration Program, and
funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act provide support
to our partners to assist with achieving recovery goals. From 2000-
2013, the Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund has provided $1.09
billion in funding to support partnerships in the recovery of listed
salmon and steelhead. With this funding, states and tribes have
leveraged additional resources to collectively implement 11,500
projects to conserve West Coast salmon. From 2003-2015, the Species
Recovery Grant Program to states has awarded $43 million to support
state and tribal recovery and conservation efforts for other listed
species--from abalone to whales--in every coastal region of the United
States. The FY 2016 Request includes an increase of $17.0 million for
Species Recovery Grants to address high priority recovery and
conservation actions for ESA listed species. From 2001-2014, the
Prescott Program awarded over $44.8 million in funding through 483
competitive and 28 emergency grants to Stranding Network members to
respond and care for stranded marine mammals, including those listed
under the ESA. From 2001-2014, the Community-based Restoration Program
awarded over $49 million through 644 competitive awards and sub-awards
to provide habitat for species listed as threatened and endangered
under the ESA. The Community-based Restoration Program also supported
implementation of restoration projects funded through the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Of the $155 million awarded to
create habitat and jobs under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009, $63 million was awarded to projects benefiting listed
species.
A strong example of how NOAA is leveraging our expertise to protect
and recover listed fish species is in California's Russian River
watershed, one of NOAA's 10 Habitat Focus Areas. The Forecast-Informed
Reservoir Operations (FIRO) project involves scientists from NOAA, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Reclamation,
State of California, Sonoma and Mendocino Counties, and Scripps
Institution who are conducting a pilot study to determine whether more
sophisticated hydro-meteorological forecasting data can be used to
better inform water management decisions. This non-regulatory, R&D
effort could potentially improve efficiency and flexibility in managing
existing water supplies to benefit all users and the listed species.
esa successes
The ESA has been successful in preventing species extinction--less
than 1 percent of the species listed have gone extinct. Despite the
fact that species reductions often occur over long periods of time, in
only its 40-year existence, the ESA has helped recover over 30 species.
NMFS recently delisted the Eastern population of Steller sea lion, our
first delisting since 1994 when NMFS delisted the now thriving eastern
population of Pacific gray whales. Between October 1, 2012, and
September 30, 2014, of the 86 domestic endangered or threatened marine
species listed under the ESA, 29 (34 percent) were stabilized or
improving, 11 (13 percent) were known to be declining, 8 (9 percent)
were mixed, with their status varying by population location, and 38
(44 percent) were unknown, because we lacked sufficient data to make a
determination.
In addition to Pacific gray whales and Eastern Steller sea lions,
ESA recovery actions have stabilized or improved the downward
population trend of many marine species. For example, humpback whale
populations are currently growing by 3-7 percent annually, enough to
for NOAA to propose revising the listing status of some populations. In
2013, we saw record returns of nearly 820,000 adult fall Chinook salmon
passing the Bonneville Dam on their way up the Columbia River to spawn.
This is the largest number of fall Chinook salmon to pass the dam in a
single year since the dam was completed in 1938, and more than twice
the 10-year average of approximately 390,000. Once numbering in the
thousands, the North Atlantic right whale, which is one of the most
endangered whales to inhabit our coastal waters, dropped in population
to a few hundred due to directed harvest. Now, the western North
Atlantic right whale population is exhibiting promising signs of
recovery and is thought to number about 450 whales, growing at about
2.7 percent each year.
We face continuing challenges in recovering numerous other species.
Declines in coastal habitat, from wetlands to coral reefs, are often a
significant hurdle to recovery. As stresses on coastal ecosystems
increase, it is important to place a priority on habitat protection and
restoration in order to prevent any need for listings and to facilitate
recovery for species already listed.
current and proposed listing actions.
The Services currently have 13 proposed listing actions and another
3 proposed critical habitat designations either proposed or under
development for publication in the Federal Register.
conclusion
Each plant, animal, and their physical environment is part of a
complex web of ecological relationships. Because of this, the
extinction of a single species can cause a cascade of negative events
to occur that affect many species. Endangered species also serve to
indicate larger ecological problems that could affect the ecosystem
including humans. As important, species diversity is part of the
natural legacy we leave for future generations. The wide variety of
species on land and in the oceans has provided inspiration, beauty,
solace, food, livelihood and economic benefit, medicines and other
products for previous generations. The ESA is a mechanism to help guide
conservation efforts, and to remind us that our children deserve the
opportunity to enjoy the same natural world we experience.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss section 7 of the
Endangered Species Act. I am available to answer any questions you may
have.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, and I appreciate very much your
willingness to be here with us to discuss this issue. As I
said, some other agencies are not here who should be, but maybe
we can find out indirectly through you what is actually going
on.
I am going to remind members of the committee that Rule
3(d) imposes a 5-minute limit on questions. I am going to
recognize Members for questions of our witnesses, once again
with gratitude for their valuable testimony.
If the committee will humor me for just 1 minute. Normally
we ask questions on a seniority basis, but I have always felt
bad for the panel that sits in front of me on the lower dais.
Cresent Hardy never gets to be recognized by the time we are
done with one of these meetings.
What I would like to do, at least from our side, is to
allow, on a rotating basis, at least one of our new Members to
ask the first question; and we will rotate that every time I
have some kind of a hearing. Then we will go back on the
seniority basis. If that is not OK, tough, that is what I am
going to do.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. So the first one I am going to yield to is
Mr. Westerman from Arkansas, if you would like to ask the first
series of questions from our witnesses.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your indulgence today. We know that our main efforts to help
threatened and endangered species are to stop poaching or over-
harvesting and to ensure the habitats are beneficial to the
species.
Mr. Rauch, you said that it is complex and challenging, the
work that we do; and it is somewhat like Newton's Third Law of
Motion, that for every action there is often an opposite and
equal reaction. I appreciate you guys coming here today to help
us understand this issue better. I have a number of what should
be easy, short questions; and I want to start with Mr. Rauch.
Is it accurate under the consultation requirements of the
Endangered Species Act that Federal agencies must review their
discretionary actions to see if they may affect endangered
species, threatened species, or critical habitat?
Mr. Rauch. I believe that is accurate.
Mr. Westerman. So, according to the Shared Consultation
Manual of the Fish and Wildlife Service and NOAA Fisheries, one
of the enumerated actions that agencies must review for effects
is a promulgation of rules. Is that correct?
Mr. Rauch. Yes. I think so, generally.
Mr. Westerman. Is it true that for purposes of a
consultation, an effect on listed species does not have to be
adverse; it can also be discountable, insignificant, or even
beneficial, according to the Shared Consultation Manual?
Mr. Rauch. I believe those are different kinds of ways that
actions can affect listed species.
Mr. Westerman. Right. I am going to switch to Mr. Bean here
for a second. Your agency has a mapping tool on its Web site to
assist agencies in reviewing their actions. Those actions
affect some listed species. With this mapping tool called IPaC,
or the Information for Planning and Conservation, you can map a
geographical area and retrieve a list of species or their
critical habitat that may be in a selected area. Is that not
correct?
Mr. Bean. Yes. That is its purpose.
Mr. Westerman. And it only works on a desktop; it does not
work on an iPhone.
Mr. Bean. I will take your word for that, sir.
Mr. Westerman. All right. I will switch back to you, Mr.
Rauch. Are you aware that IPaC mapping shows endangered sea
turtles right near or within the area of multiple coal-fired
plants along the Southeastern Coast?
Mr. Rauch. I am not familiar with that application, so I
don't know what it says.
Mr. Westerman. Here is a picture of it.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsMr. Rauch. I will take your word for it. If you say
that is what it shows, then I will agree with you that is what
it shows.

Mr. Westerman. In order to make that map, they actually use
the immediate boundaries of power plants; and studies show that
sea turtles are attracted to the warm water discharge of power
plants. One study found that elimination of the warm water
refuge, especially during the winter months, may cause turtles
to react in different ways, including leaving to find warmer
water elsewhere or even going into winter dormancy.

If some action caused these plants to close down,
eliminating the cooling water discharges that attract sea
turtles, would that action trigger, or could you use the
determination that it may affect for purposes of ESA
consultation?

Mr. Rauch. It is not up to the National Marine Fisheries
Service to determine initially whether an action may affect.
That is a determination that the action agency makes. So, that
is not something that we would determine.

Mr. Westerman. Which agency would determine that?

Mr. Rauch. Whichever agency is proposing, in your scenario,
to shut down the facility.

Mr. Westerman. So whichever agency it was, would they be
able to possibly use that ``may affect'' designation, if
closing a facility was going to remove the warm water and cause
these sea turtles to go elsewhere?

Mr. Rauch. The determination of whether or not their action
would actually cause that is a determination that that agency
would have to make.

Mr. Westerman. So you don't know?

Mr. Rauch. I don't know whether or not----

Mr. Westerman. Mr. Bean, do you have a comment on that?

Mr. Bean. Yes. I would only comment that under our
regulations, the responsibility of the action agency is to
consider those effects, those indirect effects, that are
reasonably certain to occur. That is the regulatory definition
or regulatory requirement, if you will.
So an action agency, whoever it may be, is required to
determine what actions--what effects, rather--are caused by its
action and are reasonably certain to occur. So the answer to
your question would depend on its evaluation of that reasonable
certainty.
Mr. Westerman. But the manual actually allows to make those
different designations where you could actually close a plant
and it would affect the species in a negative way. That is not
out of the realm of the policy and the manual?
Mr. Bean. I am not sure I follow your question, sir. I
think, under the manual, a process is described. Under that
process, the action agency is in the first instance charged
with determining whether there are reasonably certain to occur
effects that would be adverse.
Mr. Westerman. I think we are out of time on that one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And I think Ranking Member Grijalva is allowing Ms.
Bordallo--by the way, congratulations on your bill the other
day, finally.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you.
The Chairman. It is good to have that one done.
Ms. Bordallo. And thank you for your sponsorship.
The Chairman. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, and I thank the Ranking
Member for giving me his spot. We cannot talk too much. Is the
clock running? No, not yet? All right. Thank you again.
Mr. Bean, my questions are for you, they are local in
nature, and they are very important to me. Legislation passed
in last year's Congress authorized Fish and Wildlife and the
Navy to enter into a Memorandum of Agreement regarding
placement of a safety zone over the Ritidian Wildlife Refuge on
Guam.
I am concerned about the potential mitigations that may be
a part of a future biological opinion for the Record of
Decision on the realignment. Any mitigation plan would be tied
to protection of species under the Endangered Species Act on
Guam. These mitigations would be put in place without a clear
plan for meeting the refuge's mission.
Could you give me an update about your plan to rehabilitate
and reintroduce the species, and progress on that plan? And
very importantly, have any species been reintroduced on Guam,
Mr. Bean?
Mr. Bean. Unfortunately, I will have to get back to you on
that, ma'am, because I do not know the answer to your question.
I am certainly aware that the problem on Guam for endangered
species is largely based upon the effects of the introduced
brown tree snake, and ensuring that the brown tree snake will
not continue to devastate the native wildlife of Guam is the
necessary and obvious first step to any successful effort to
restore and maintain its species.
Ms. Bordallo. I would appreciate if you would get back to
me on this issue. Another one is--the final EIS for the
Marianas talks about conservation of habitat. Recently,
important Chamorro sites have been found at Ritidian. Can I
have your agency's assurance that you will work to provide
better access for these sites for the public?
Mr. Bean. There again, I do not have any specifics about
your question; but I can assure you that we will do what is
required and responsible in terms of ensuring access that is
compatible with conservation and other requirements.
Ms. Bordallo. All right. The third question is also for
you. There are longstanding issues regarding landlocked
landowners whose properties border Ritidian. Can we get your
commitment that you will work with us on these issues?
Mr. Bean. You certainly have my commitment. We will
investigate and act responsibly to understand and settle these
issues, yes.
Ms. Bordallo. All right. Well, thank you. Mr. Bean, I will
appreciate your getting back to me. These are very important
issues right now. The EIS is concluded, and now we are waiting
for the Record of Decision on this realignment of the Marines
to Guam. So I really do need your answers to these questions.
Mr. Bean. You will get them.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, whether it is
sea cows or 4-H cows, I just love cows, so I welcome this
hearing today, Mr. Chairman.
The Fish and Wildlife Service recovery plan for the manatee
includes a list of recovery actions for downlisting the manatee
from endangered to threatened. One of the actions included is
to make sure that warm water manatee refuge sites are protected
as manatee sanctuaries, refuges, or safe havens. That includes
Big Bend Power Plant and Crystal River Power Plant in Florida.
Mr. Bean, do you agree that protecting these warm water
refuges near these power plants contributes to the conservation
of the manatee?
Mr. Bean. Yes.
Mrs. Lummis. Earlier this year, the U.S. Geological Survey
produced a report entitled, ``Status and Threats Analysis for
the Florida Manatee.'' The report states that the second
greatest threat to the manatee, and a very close second to the
propellers, is long-term loss of warm water habitat. The same
report agrees with the Fish and Wildlife Service Manatee
Recovery Plan regarding the importance of power plant cooling
water discharges to conservation of the manatee.
Now, specifically, that same study found that one of the
primary causes of warm water habitat loss is the retirement of
power generation plants that produce warm water flows. Other
research on manatee habitat suggests that when a power plant
goes off-line, manatees that rely on the plant do not
necessarily move elsewhere. They are apt to remain there, and
perhaps even succumb to cold stress.
Mr. Bean, are you aware of the U.S. Geological Survey study
that determined long-term loss of warm water habitat is the
second greatest threat to the manatee?
Mr. Bean. Yes, ma'am. I am aware of the study.
Mrs. Lummis. Are you aware of the same USGS study's
conclusion that a primary cause of the loss of warm water
habitat for the manatee is the retirement of power plants that
produce warm water?
Mr. Bean. I do not know the details of the study. However,
I believe the study identifies that as a potential threat for
the manatee. The manatee, of course, is a species that has
dramatically improved under the protection of the Endangered
Species Act. Indeed, the census this year is the highest ever
recorded.
Mrs. Lummis. Then why haven't they been elevated to
threatened from endangered?
Mr. Bean. The Fish and Wildlife Service is actively
considering doing exactly that.
Mrs. Lummis. Does the conclusion surprise you, based on
existing research on how manatees respond when power plants go
off-line?
Mr. Bean. No. It is well known that the manatees utilize
warm water, both natural and artificial warm water, yes.
Mrs. Lummis. Are you aware of any research at all that
shows they are likely to remain around a power plant when it
goes off-line and potentially succumb to cold stress?
Mr. Bean. I am not familiar with the research in general,
so I would be reluctant to comment about that.
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Bean, we used the Fish and Wildlife
Service's own maps to figure out how much overlap there is
between manatee habitat and coal-fired power plants. With so
many coal-fired power plants--and staff, could you put that one
up on the screen? There are at least 10 coal-fired power plants
located near the habitat of manatees or other listed species.
If you overlay Fish and Wildlife Service's own on-line mapping
tool on coal-fired power plants along the coast, there are at
least 10 where they coincide. We used the Fish and Wildlife
Service's own maps to figure out how much overlap there is.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsWith so many coal-fired plants near manatee habitat,
don't you think the EPA should have formally consulted with the
Fish and Wildlife Service on its proposed rules that would
force the closure of those power plants?
Mr. Bean. Well, I would note that many of the power plants
depicted on that map are well outside the winter range of the
manatee, when the manatee is most dependent upon warm water
discharges. So I think----
Mrs. Lummis. So, are you suggesting that when these plants
are shut down, that the manatees that die as a result are
collateral damage?
Mr. Bean. No. I am not suggesting that. I am suggesting
that some of the plants shown on the map have little or no
relationship to providing warm water refugia in the winter for
the manatee, because the manatee is typically not in North
Carolina or South Carolina in the winter.
Mrs. Lummis. Well, are they on the Gulf Coast of Florida?
Mr. Bean. In the Tampa Bay area, where I think you have two
sites indicated, that is a known winter concentration area. The
others, to my knowledge, are not.
Mrs. Lummis. What about the others over in the Panhandle?
Mr. Bean. As I said, to my knowledge, they are not major
winter concentration areas.
Mrs. Lummis. Are you suggesting that they are not important
to manatee habitat?
Mr. Bean. No. I am not suggesting that. I am suggesting
that the warm water refugia and the threat to manatees from the
potential closure of those particular plants is not as
significant as would be the case elsewhere.
Mrs. Lummis. But don't you think a consultation is
required? I mean, you would require that of anyone else,
wouldn't you, a non-government agency?
Mr. Bean. The Fish and Wildlife Service does not require
consultation of anyone. As I described, our regulations provide
that the action agency makes the initial determination whether
its action may affect listed species, taking into account those
indirect effects that are reasonably certain to occur.
Mrs. Lummis. Do you always pay ultimate deference to other
agencies in terms of whether a consultation is required?
Mr. Bean. At the ``may affect'' stage, our regulations are
absolutely clear that that is the action agency's
responsibility.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Dingell.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am about to get in
trouble because I am going unscripted, because I care about
this issue greatly, like everybody else does. When I first came
to Congress, I cared deeply about a number of issues.
But the original author of the Endangered Species Act is
someone who cares deeply about it, and I guess I feel a
commitment to understand it and protect it. I am glad to see my
colleagues talking about it this morning and wanting to
preserve it, because many times we seem to be thinking that it
does not work.
And I, like my two colleagues that have gone before me,
have a power plant in Michigan that has warm water, and it is
an incredible sight in January and February where more than 200
bald eagles gather to feed. There are a number of issues going
on there, as we look at one of the neighboring coal plants that
is likely to be closed or something is going to happen to that.
But my understanding of the Endangered Species Act is that
it addresses issues if a species would be eliminated. So, when
we talk about sea turtles, we talk about the manatees--in 1973,
the year that the Endangered Species Act was passed, there were
only 700 to 800 manatees left in Florida. Today, the manatee
population has risen to more than 6,000. The tools provided by
the Endangered Species Act have been instrumental in helping
Federal agencies address the threat to the manatee, including
thermal discharges from the power plants.
I guess as I am listening to all of these discussions, my
question is: I think that all of these species, the bald
eagles, if they were not to stay--and I hope to God they stay
because it is one of the most beautiful sights I have ever
seen--they would not be endangered, they would go to another
habitat. So am I right that the challenge here is to make sure
that we are all working together with all the agencies to make
sure we are protecting the habitats of these species?
Mr. Bean. I will be happy to answer that. First, let me say
it was my pleasure to testify on this Act before Mr. Dingell on
many occasions in the past. I greatly admire and appreciate his
role in making this law happen and making it effective.
Certainly, as you note, the manatee and many other species
have recovered dramatically under the Act's protection. Key to
that is the protection of habitat. The Endangered Species Act,
through section 7 and other mechanisms, has been quite
successful in protecting, restoring, improving, and otherwise
ensuring the availability of habitat--not just for manatees,
but also for bald eagles. Kirtland's warblers is a species in
your state that is at or near its record levels of abundance.
In the Chairman's state, we have the California condor having
reproduced in the wild last year probably for the first time
since European man set foot on the North American continent.
These are some of the dramatic examples of success of the
Endangered Species Act, and they are underscored by the need to
protect habitat. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. It is not perfect; no law is. The
last perfect law was probably the Ten Commandants; and in
today's Congress, those probably would not be perfect, either.
But the Obama administration is on track to delist more
species than any other administration has in the history of the
law. Mr. Bean, this year the Fish and Wildlife Service
requested an increase of $10.4 million for your activities. Can
you talk about section 7 consultations and other planning
activities and how they would improve if you had adequate
funding?
Mr. Bean. Yes. Thank you. The section 7 consultation
process is subject to some statutory timelines for completing a
consultation. However, it is often the case that because of
insufficient resources, the Fish and Wildlife Service has to
ask the action agency for extensions of those timelines, which
the action agencies are generally willing to give in order to
allow the process to be completed.
With the requested increase in funding, we expect the
Service to be able to address more consultations more quickly.
So the question, for example, about the buildup in Guam and
some of the consultations there, the Service has had to
prioritize consultations with the Defense Department because it
lacks the resources to process multiple consultations
simultaneously. The requested increase in funding would allow
us to get a better handle on that.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses being here.
Mr. Bean, my colleagues have talked to you about the
section 7 consultation, but I want to follow up on that since
that requirement is to determine which protected species might
be impacted by the EPA's actions. Correct? Is that a confusing
question?
Mr. Bean. The question for the action agency is not only
what species might be affected, but whether they will be
affected, whether they are reasonably certain to be affected.
Yes.
Mr. Gohmert. Right. That is part of the step by step that
section 7 would require.
On the Fish and Wildlife Service's Web site, you have a
tool called IPaC. I have to say, I was really impressed. I have
given the FWS some hard times on some issues that I have been
concerned about, but I am really impressed with this Web site.
It stands for Information for Planning and Conservation.
IPaC is a project planning tool obviously intended to
streamline the FWS review process and give agencies a quick and
easy access to information by which endangered species may be
impacted by any given project. It takes less than 2 minutes,
and I would like to go ahead and just have the video run to
show what it takes to use the IPaC service on the Internet.
[Video played.]
Mr. Gohmert. If somebody were wanting to make an inquiry of
an area, they could zoom in down on Florida. It would appear so
easy that even the EPA, if somebody had adequate training with
a mouse, could be able to utilize this service. That would
require you to keep enlarging until you could get down; that
might take additional training.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Gohmert. Then, rather than the street, you would get
the actual satellite view of the area. Then take the mouse,
draw the area in question. If someone would want to find out
what species might be impacted--in this case, draw the area,
and voila. Here this comes.
Then we have species listed that might be impacted. It
would seem that if somebody at the EPA had adequate training
with a mouse, they could use this service and be able to
determine--I mean, that is a really fantastic service, and I
commend Fish and Wildlife for being able to put something
together that actually is so very usable.
Any agency is allowed to use IPaC. Correct?
Mr. Bean. Yes, sir. Thank you for your kind words about
IPaC. It is intended to do just what you said--to make it easy
for agencies and others to know what species may be present in
a particular area, so that they can more intelligently evaluate
whether their actions are reasonably certain to affect those
species.
Mr. Gohmert. So, in less than 2 minutes, you can find out
what species are affected. Mr. Bean, do you have any record of
EPA ever requesting a list of species that might be affected or
further inquiring about any species that was listed in the
IPaC?
Mr. Bean. I am not aware of that, sir. But then again, I
would not normally be made aware of such things.
Mr. Gohmert. Does Fish and Wildlife have any record of EPA
requesting a list of impacted species in the course of a ``may
affect'' analysis?
Mr. Bean. The answer to that is, I don't know, sir.
Mr. Gohmert. You would know, wouldn't you, if they had made
such a request?
Mr. Bean. Ever, with respect to any of their actions?
Mr. Gohmert. On this project in Florida that we were
working on.
Mr. Bean. I am sorry, sir. Which project are we referring
to?
Mr. Gohmert. Well, the one that was outlined there in the
video.
Mr. Bean. That was an EPA project?
Mr. Gohmert. Right.
Mr. Bean. I don't know the answer to your question.
Mr. Gohmert. All right. I see my time is expired.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you both very
much for coming and being part of this. It is fascinating. It
seems to me that the heart of the matter is, given that section
7 of the Endangered Species Act clearly says that the action
agency is required to seek consultation and that neither Fish
and Wildlife or National Marine Fisheries has any enforcement
action, that you are in the rather passive sense of providing
consultation when requested.
So the key question is, why didn't the EPA ask you for
advice on the new Clean Power Plan rules, the Clean Air Act
rules? The EPA, in their memo that they submitted, argued that
the data was insufficient to draw a causal connection between
the reduction in emissions, which is different from the water,
and the effect on endangered species.
The Majority memo says that it is not just adverse effects,
like loss of habitat, that trigger the consultation
requirement, but also beneficial effects, negligible
discountable effects. It then notes also that the EPA says the
positive environmental effects are not necessarily beneficial
effects.
Mr. Bean, do you think the EPA had a responsibility, under
this action agency section 7, with the beneficial effects for
the manatee, to come to you?
Mr. Bean. EPA's responsibility was to evaluate the
likelihood that its actions would cause beneficial or
detrimental effects that were reasonably certain to occur. That
is the same responsibility that any Federal action agency has
when considering this first step of the consultation process.
Mr. Beyer. It is fascinating that the No. 1 cause of death
for manatees, I understand, is from propellers. If they take
away the warm water in those 2 out of the 10 sites that were on
the map, and cold water and they flee that area, are we likely
to have fewer manatee deaths because they are not near the
boats? Is there any way to assess the net impact on manatees
from not having this artificial environment prompted by coal-
fired power plants, also putting them at risk from boats?
Mr. Bean. Whether there is an increased risk from boats, I
really couldn't say. Clearly, the manatees utilize the warm
water discharge areas. Were those areas not to be available,
they would have to find other warm water discharge areas,
presumably.
Mr. Beyer. With the Fish and Wildlife Service or National
Marine Fisheries, Mr. Rauch, would you view the positive
effects any differently whether they were man-made and
artificial, say a power plant discharge, versus those that come
from the natural environment, non-manmade? Or is the protection
of the endangered species paramount regardless of what created
the habitat?
Mr. Rauch. Thank you. I think that----
Mr. Beyer. You look confused. I am confused, too.
Mr. Rauch. I am trying to parse out the question. When we
analyze and the action agency analyzes, we are looking at the
effects of the action. Usually that is looking at the man-made
effects of the action because that is what the action is.
Occasionally, we do deal with species displacement issues,
where the action may displace a species from one habitat to
another. Sometimes that is beneficial; sometimes that is not.
We do look at changes to the natural environment. I am not
exactly sure whether that answered your question, but we do
consider the difference in habitats as a potential effect if
you cause a species to move.
Mr. Beyer. The Majority memo suggests that perhaps the
reason the EPA did not ask is because it would create a delay
in implementing the new power plant rules, the new Clean Air
Act rules. Given all the written testimony that you offer about
how quickly these consultations are conducted and approved--15
days, 35 days--is this a meaningful concern for the EPA that
would slow down the power plant rules, to have sought
consultation or perhaps to seek consultation before the rules
are finalized?
Mr. Bean. I don't know the answer to your question, sir. I
do believe that what EPA described in its proposed rule for
existing sources went into some detail as to the basis for
their ``no effect'' determination. Quite frankly, that is
unusual, for action agencies to provide that level of detail.
The Fish and Wildlife Service does not, as a general
matter, receive and certainly under its regulations has no
duty, responsibility, or ability to compel an explanation from
an action agency for its ``no effect'' determination. In this
instance, EPA provided one, which appeared to reflect an
understanding of how our process works.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you. I am pleased, too, that the manatee
is now getting this kind of attention that we hope the sage-
grouse and the gray wolves will also get on this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you know,
California is suffering what hydrologists suggest may be the
worst drought in 1,200 years; certainly it is the worst drought
in recorded history. Yet we continue to see massive releases of
what precious little water remains behind our dams to meet ESA
requirements for fish.
For example, in April, 30,000 acre-feet of water was
deliberately released out of the New Melones Dam down the
Stanislaus River for what, the Fish and Wildlife Service
admitted, was 29 steelhead trout--30,000 acre-feet of water is
enough to meet the annual residential needs of a human
population of 300,000.
So, on the one hand, you have the immediate and desperate
needs of 300,000 human beings, as opposed to nudging 29
steelhead trout to swim to the ocean, which they generally tend
to do anyway. How do you justify such a policy? And by the way,
New Melones is now at 16 percent of its capacity.
Mr. Rauch. Thank you for the question. I think you are
absolutely correct that California is facing a drought of
historic----
Mr. McClintock. That is not what I asked. How do you
justify this policy, putting the needs of 29 steelhead trout
over the needs of 300,000 human beings in the worst drought in
the recorded history of the state?
Mr. Rauch. There is not enough water to meet the needs of
either the human beings, the fish, or the agricultural users--
--
Mr. McClintock. But you made a choice to favor the fish
over the human beings, and 29 of them as opposed to 300,000
human beings for a year.
Mr. Rauch. You cited Fish and Wildlife Service. I am not
aware of that number. I know that the fish are critically
endangered. We lost 95 percent of the Chinook run last year.
Mr. McClintock. Well, there are a lot of folks that think
that the human population is now seriously endangered. They may
run out of water before the end of the summer.
Mr. Rauch. We were trying to balance the needs of all the
users of the water.
Mr. McClintock. By the way, that is just one dam. We are
seeing these pulse flows out of dams across the state and are
unable to get a straight answer on just how much. But the
anecdotal information is huge amounts of water.
Mr. Rauch. The fish do need water in order to survive.
Mr. McClintock. The human beings need water, too, to
survive. We build these water systems so that surplus water can
be retained for beneficial human use; so you have no moral
justification other than you favor the fish over the human
population?
Mr. Rauch. No, sir. We are trying to--the fish are----
Mr. McClintock. Let's talk about the fish for a moment. The
biologist told me that you are not doing any favors for the
fish, either. What he told me was that no salmon in its right
mind is going to enter a river in a drought. The water is too
warm and there is not enough of it. So by doing these pulse
flows, we trick fish into doing things their own common sense
tells them not to do; and it does not end well for them.
Mr. Rauch. I am not aware of what biologist may have told
you that. The fish need to go upstream and downstream in order
to survive. If they cannot do that, they will go extinct.
Mr. McClintock. But what you are doing is upsetting their
own natural guidance, by inducing them to enter rivers that
normally their common sense would tell them to stay out of.
Mr. Rauch. Their natural guidance would tell them, for
certain species during the middle of the summer, they need to
go upstream or they need to go downstream.
Mr. McClintock. Well, let's go on to one other question.
Mr. Rauch. That is what their instinct tells them, sir.
Mr. McClintock. I used to have the Klamath River in my
district, where four perfectly good hydroelectric dams are
slated for destruction to meet ESA requirements--again for
salmon, because of what we are told is a catastrophic decline
in the salmon population. I said, ``Well, that is terrible; how
many are left? '' They said, ``Oh, just a few hundred left in
the entire river.'' And I said, ``That is terrible; why doesn't
somebody build a fish hatchery? '' Well, it turns out somebody
did build a fish hatchery years ago at the Iron Gate Dam. The
Iron Gate Fish Hatchery produces 5 million salmon smolts a
year; 17,000 return every year as fully grown adults to spawn
in the Klamath.
The problem is, they are not allowed to be included in the
population count. Then, to add insult to insanity, when they
tear down the Iron Gate Dam, the Iron Gate Fish Hatchery goes
with it. I am wondering, do you have any way to justify that
policy?
Mr. Rauch. The Endangered Species Act tries to preserve
these species in their natural state, in the state in which
they do not rely on humans for their continued survival. They
do not require----
Mr. McClintock. Stop. Once the smolts are released, they do
not rely on human care. They go out into the oceans, they spend
years in the oceans, and return as fully grown adults to spawn.
There is no more difference between a hatchery fish and a wild-
born fish than the difference between a baby born at a hospital
and a baby born at home.
Mr. Rauch. We do not have most of our wild species born in
hospitals, sir. It is quite common that these species are
heavily manipulated. They are brought into a hatchery. They
spend a great part of their very vulnerable life in a hatchery.
And they have to do that----
Mr. McClintock. And then they spend years out----
Mr. Rauch [continuing]. Because we have so altered the
ecosystem.
The Chairman. Time is expired.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad my friend
from California went right before me because the attack on the
Endangered Species Act protections for anadromous fish is more
characteristic of the discussions we have about the ESA in this
committee.
Normally, when we have hearings here about the Endangered
Species Act, it is about how to weaken it, how to undermine it,
how to throw obstacles in the way of citizen enforcement, and
so on and so forth, and an endless stream of policy proposals
that would essentially gut this critically important law that
has been so effective and that is so popular with the American
people.
But today we have a little bit of political whiplash,
because some folks across the aisle have come up with the
clever argument that perhaps the Endangered Species Act, a
critical law that was intended to protect our environment, can
be used to stop one of the most important environmental
proposals perhaps in any of our lifetimes, the Clean Power
rule, and an attempt to take meaningful action on global
climate change.
Suddenly, instead of the usual assault on the Endangered
Species Act, we have a meeting of America's newest
environmental group, Friends of the Coal-Powered Manatee, with
generous funding from the Koch brothers.
One thing I think we should all be very clear about, is
that this is not about the manatee. This is about climate
change, climate denial, and the continued boosterism of the
fossil fuel industry that has become the trademark of this
committee and, unfortunately, too many of my friends across the
aisle.
I just want to ask each of you, since we have you here, to
speak about the bigger picture. What are the environmental
effects, not just for the manatee but for other species that we
care about, of global climate change?
Mr. Bean. Thank you, sir. I will be happy to try to answer
that. Clearly, climate change is a threat that has both
economic and environmental dimensions to it. We are aware that
increased temperatures, sea level rise, and ocean acidification
present new threats to species and make an already difficult
task of conserving endangered species even more challenging.
We often lack the information to make specific connections
between a particular action that may contribute to climate
change or reduce climate change and its effects upon endangered
species. As a general matter, however, it is quite clear that
the effects of climate change are going to be detrimental for
the environment in general.
Mr. Huffman. Mr. Rauch, would you agree? And since your
agency focuses on the marine environment, maybe specifically
the effects of ocean acidification as well.
Mr. Rauch. Yes, sir. Thank you very much. We are very much
concerned, as is the Fish and Wildlife Service, about the
generic effects of climate change. I would agree it is very
hard to tie it to one specific action.
But we know that climate change is currently threatening
the health of many of our coral reef systems. The structure
upon which these coral reefs are built is very sensitive to
ocean acidification. We are concerned about the effects of
ocean acidification on our shellfish industry in this country,
one of our most vibrant coastal economies. Those shells are all
made of calcium carbonate and are subject to ocean
acidification.
We are seeing dramatic changes in some of our commercial
fish populations, not an Endangered Species Act issue, but an
issue which is affecting the fishing industry in the Northeast
and other places, due to climate change and the fact that
certain areas where these fish breed are the warmest they have
ever been.
So, our concerns about climate change touch on many
endangered species and the health of reef systems, but it also
extends to many of our industries that rely on the ocean for
their livelihood.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. As I mentioned, my friends in the
Majority generally have little use for the Endangered Species
Act when it is protecting salmon, steelhead, delta smelt,
prairie chicken, sage-grouse, et cetera, et cetera; but today
it appears there is some concern, at least, for the manatee, or
at least some manatee in certain locations.
Do either of you have any suggestions, if Congress really
cares about the manatee, on some things we can actually do to
enhance their continued recovery, thanks in large part to the
Endangered Species Act?
Mr. Bean. I would answer that this way. Part of the reasons
that manatees have become dependent, at least in part, upon
these artificial warm water discharges is because the natural
warm water springs have been either developed or degraded, or
spring flow has been reduced.
There are measures that the Fish and Wildlife Service has
taken and plans to take to help restore manatee access to some
of these natural warm water areas, as well as ensure sufficient
flows to maintain those over time. These are the sorts of
activities that the Fish and Wildlife Service, through its
recovery budget, can promote.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me say thank
you for your deference to those of us in the lower part of the
chamber.
I appreciate you two being here this morning and visiting
about this important topic. There are a couple of things I
wanted to talk about, but the subject today certainly has been
about the selective enforcement.
So, to pivot off of the previous questioner, impacts of
actions taken can be beneficial or negative. Given the last
remarks we just heard, even if the benefits are beneficial,
isn't EPA still required to consult and approve one way or the
other the impacts of an action, whether they be good or bad?
Mr. Bean. Thank you, sir. I will answer that this way.
EPA's responsibility in the first instance is to determine
whether its actions will cause effects that are reasonably
certain to occur. Those can be either beneficial or detrimental
for a particular endangered species. That is their obligation.
Mr. Newhouse. Right. Good or bad. Unlike some believe,
people on both sides of the aisle have concerns for endangered
species and certainly want to be as smart as we can about rules
that we implement to protect them.
In my home state of Washington and many other parts of the
Northwest, since the salmon door has been opened, I will just
ask about this. Multiple agencies, including NOAA, have been
locked in litigation for many years over operation of
hydroelectric dams, irrigation projects, certainly on the
Columbia-Snake River system, regarding whether these projects
affect several species of ESA-listed salmon.
In the Northwest, we spend close to a billion dollars a
year, as you are aware, the ratepayers do, on this issue. Yet
many species have seen multiple years of record or near record
returns, as you referenced in your testimony. Could you comment
quickly--we don't have much time--on why the agency has not
been able to produce a defensible biological opinion that I
think would end years of uncertainty and litigation for our
Northwest citizens?
As a followup question to that while you are thinking, I
understand that NOAA is reviewing the status of 28 species of
salmon in the Northwest. Could you speculate as to whether any
of these species will be delisted in the future?
Mr. Rauch. Yes. Thank you for the question. As you
indicate, we have had numerous biological claims on the Federal
Columbia River power system. Some of them we did win in court
on; some of them we had to reinitiate consultation, and we
subsequently lost.
The current one, which is a 2008 opinion, was initially
found by the court to be invalid. That litigation is ongoing.
We supplemented that opinion, and we are currently in
litigation. We believe that we have developed a defensible
biological opinion, and we are waiting, hopefully, on the court
to agree with us. We expect a ruling sometime this year.
In terms of the other species, you are absolutely right. We
are reviewing the status of all of our Pacific salmonids. We
expect to have initial determinations on that sometime next
year, early next year. I cannot tell you at the moment whether
or not any of them are candidates for delisting, but we are
actively looking at that question.
Mr. Newhouse. Mr. Bean, I am certainly concerned about the
lack of progress in advancing the proposed rule to delist the
gray wolf. I am sure you are familiar with the situation in my
state of Washington. Do you think that the Service should move
forward with finalizing and implementing the proposed rule for
delisting? Also, could you please explain why the Service has
not met its statutory deadline to do so?
Mr. Bean. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. Certainly
the view of the Fish and Wildlife Service, expressed many
times, is that wolves have recovered and no longer need the
protection of the Endangered Species Act. The proposal that you
have referenced was built upon an assumption that the wolves in
the Great Lakes would be delisted, and they were for a time.
But a court decision overturned that, and that has forced
the Fish and Wildlife Service to re-evaluate its options. It
remains, however, of the view that wolves have recovered and no
longer need the protection of the Act.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mrs. Capps.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing; and to our witnesses, thank you for your testimony.
The Endangered Species Act, or ESA, is one of our Nation's
most essential and effective conservation laws. Since 1973, it
has played a critical role in successfully protecting our
vulnerable plant and wildlife populations from threat of
extinction.
Threatened wildlife populations are an invaluable and
precious part of our global ecosystems, and we have a
responsibility to ensure their survival through ESA. Not only
has ESA successfully prevented the extinction of hundreds of
vulnerable species, it has achieved this goal by using the best
scientific and commercial data available.
ESA played a critical role in the survival of key wildlife
populations in my district in California and throughout the
Nation; for example, the California condor, which you have
referenced already, Mr. Bean. The largest land bird in North
America has been on the verge of extinction and is now one of
the world's rarest bird species; but thanks to the hard work of
the Fish and Wildlife Service under ESA, more condors are
flying free in the wild today on the central coast of
California than in captive breeding for the first time since
recovery efforts began.
Also in my congressional district, the island fox; it is
found only on the Channel Islands. It was also on the verge of
extinction, but is making a strong recovery thanks to the
strong collaboration between our conservation agencies.
These examples are a testament to the remarkable success
ESA has had for precious species just in my district. My
constituents and I know this. Any attempts to undermine key
provisions of ESA would only deny our future generations the
opportunity to fully explore the gifts of nature we are
privileged to experience.
My question to you, Mr. Bean is: How has the ESA helped the
California condor recovery? Are there specific ways that you
can highlight, so we can understand the role the Fish and
Wildlife Service has played?
Mr. Bean. Thank you, Mrs. Capps. The condor is a remarkable
success story, because it was once gone from the wild entirely.
There were none left in the wild. There were but a handful of
survivors in captivity at a time when there had been no
experience in successfully breeding these birds in captivity,
no experience restoring these birds to the wild. So those were
the steps taken. With the cooperation of the L.A. Zoo, the San
Diego Zoo, and other partners, there was a successful captive
breeding effort. They provided enough condors to begin
restoring them to the wild, not only in California but also to
the Grand Canyon in Arizona, from which they have since
expanded into Utah.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Mr. Bean. It is a remarkable success. There are, as you
know, more condors alive today in the wild than probably any
time in well over half a century.
Mrs. Capps. Right. I don't mean to interrupt, but community
stakeholders, even private citizens, have also been part of
this. Is that correct?
Mr. Bean. That is correct. For one example, the Peregrine
Fund, a private nonprofit organization, has been instrumental
in helping in the captive rearing and release of condors.
Mrs. Capps. Dr. Rauch, in your testimony you highlight the
need to address declining coastal habitats to improve marine
life in our oceans. How can Congress improve ESA to better
protect vulnerable marine populations?
Mr. Rauch. Thank you. I think the Endangered Species Act,
at the moment, works very well. When we consult, we are
suffering from--as Mr. Bean indicated from the Fish and
Wildlife Service, the National Marine Fisheries Service also is
falling behind on the pace of its consultations, because the
consultation workload has increased over 131 percent because of
the increased coastal consultation.
The President has asked for additional funds to help us
continue our work. We believe that the engagement of our
National Marine Fisheries Service staff with project proponents
at an early stage allows them, at a low cost, to modify their
projects to protect the habitat and to protect the species.
It has worked very well for us, but we cannot continue at
the pace that we are. We continue to fall further behind in the
pace of our consultation.
Mrs. Capps. So the success has created the extra workload?
Mr. Rauch. I think the increase in coastal development has
created the extra workload.
Mrs. Capps. Right. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is for either one of you. Last year, members of the
Senate Environment and Public Works Committee raised the issue
of consultation on EPA's rule for new power plants, but the
proposed rule EPA released does not include a ``may affect''
analysis or even any Endangered Species Act analysis at all.
If the final rule still does not include a ``may affect''
analysis, would either of the Services raise the issue with the
EPA?
Mr. Bean. I do not know what EPA's plans are with respect
to that rule. I do know that as a general matter, the
obligations of action agencies is to make a ``may affect'' or
``no effect'' determination. If they make a ``no effect''
determination, they have fulfilled their consultation
responsibilities.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is not in the role of
enforcing compliance with section 7. Section 7, rather, allows
the Service to provide technical assistance and advice to other
agencies, but we can neither compel nor require agencies to
take any particular action.
Mr. Rauch. I would concur with that answer.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Bean, if EPA--just to drill
down a little bit more on this--finalized a rule that expressly
and solely mandated the closure of all coal-fired power plants
in Florida and determined it would have no effect on manatees
or sea turtles, what would you do? Would FWS take any action?
Mr. Bean. I don't know whether that hypothetical is even in
the realm of the possible. Clearly, were all coal-fired plants
that manatees depend upon closed, there would be some impact to
manatees; but I think in the current situation--as I understand
it, and I cannot speak for EPA in this regard--the question EPA
asks itself, at this stage, is whether there are reasonably
certain to occur effects upon manatees or other endangered
species. Framed in that way, the EPA has to answer that
question as best it can.
The question is not, as I understand it, whether specific
plants will be closed, but whether their action will have
reasonably certain to occur effects upon any listed species.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Also, as a followup, if EPA's rule
was reasonably certain to cause the retirement of coal plants
with cooling water discharges where manatees are known to
gather, would that rise to the level of ``may affect'' for
purposes of section 7? I know you have already partially
answered that, but----
Mr. Bean. If it is reasonably certain to occur, then it is
a ``may affect'' situation, yes.
Mr. Lamborn. Changing gears, I would like to ask you more
of a broad philosophical question. What is the policy of the
Fish and Wildlife Service if a species is introduced where it
is not native, but it is a rare species, like the Canadian
lynx, for instance? What then becomes the responsibility, if
any, of the Fish and Wildlife Service for a non-native species
that people are wanting to introduce into the United States?
Mr. Bean. I don't know that we have a specific policy. I
know as a matter of practice, the Fish and Wildlife Service has
not listed non-native species in the United States as
endangered species. Certainly parts of the Endangered Species
Act--for example, section 10(j), which allows for the
establishment of experimental populations of endangered
species--is pretty clear that those experimental populations
are to be established within the historic range of the species,
not outside of it. That is the best I can do to answer your
question, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. I appreciate that. Another philosophical
question, since I've got you here and I appreciate the
opportunity--what about a species that is endangered or
threatened, arguably, within the borders of the United States,
but outside the borders of the United States is not? I think
the polar bear might be one example of that.
Mr. Bean. I am not sure the polar bear is a good example.
But I would say this--under the Endangered Species Act, the
Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries
Service can list as threatened or endangered either species
that are true biological species, subspecies, or distinct
population segments.
There are some instances in which the Fish and Wildlife
Service has listed the U.S. population or the Lower 48
population of a species that occurs, for example, in Canada or
Mexico. That is within the authority of the Service; and to a
limited degree, the Service has used that authority.
Mr. Lamborn. I think that is something we need to further
debate in the future, but I appreciate your answers. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bean, just a couple of rudimentary questions. We heard
a lot of talk about power plants and their warm water
discharges being necessary for the survival of manatees, and
sea turtles were included in that discussion as well. I would
like to ask you just a few basic questions.
Which inhabited Florida first, manatees or coal-fueled
power plants?
Mr. Bean. I believe the answer is manatees, sir.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. What allowed manatees to survive
cold winters before the power plants existed?
Mr. Bean. Manatees utilize warm water springs and warm
water areas in general to escape the cold conditions in the
winter. Before there were artificial sources, they relied upon
natural sources.
Mr. Grijalva. Why can't these natural springs that you
mentioned support that manatee population now?
Mr. Bean. Those remaining natural springs or natural warm
water sources do, in fact, provide a winter habitat that is
important to manatees. Many of those natural warm water refugia
have been adversely affected by development or reductions in
spring flow. I indicated a moment ago in my answer to an
earlier question that there are things that can be done and are
being done to try to improve those habitats.
Mr. Grijalva. Is the Fish and Wildlife Service developing a
plan for how to protect manatees if any power plant discharges
would become unavailable in the future?
Mr. Bean. I think all of the power plants in Florida are
subject to National Pollution and Discharge Elimination System
Permits that the state issues; and the Fish and Wildlife
Service works very closely with the State Fish and Wildlife
agency to ensure that those permits include manatee measures to
protect manatees against the loss of warm water discharges
during cold snaps in the winter, for example.
Mr. Grijalva. For both of you gentlemen, if you don't mind,
to the issue of required consultations--the backlog of those
requests and need-to-do items on consultation, the budget, the
relationship between even the discussion today and other
discussions and the budget, and the consultation that the
agencies must do and the budget requests and that relationship
in order to be able to expedite, get them done?
Mr. Rauch. I cannot speak to the specifics of Fish and
Wildlife Service's, but for the National Marine Fisheries
Service, as I indicated, we have in the last few years done
7,000 consultations, of which we only found jeopardy or adverse
modification on 41 of them. The rest of them we were able to
work with the applicants in the time allowed to put in
reasonable restrictions, small changes, or no changes in order
to make sure that the species could benefit.
Mr. Grijalva. Relative to the budget, in order to be able
to do that?
Mr. Rauch. Right. In order to do that, the pace has been
picking up, over a 131 percent increase. We could not do that,
so we asked for--the President asked for--$13 million for the
Fisheries Service to continue to do that to keep up the pace.
Mr. Grijalva. And predictably, if you do not get that?
Mr. Rauch. If we do not get that, we will not be able to
work through that. Projects will be slowed down. Many of them
are in the Southeast, but they happen across the country. Our
ability to both protect species and to allow this coastal
development to continue will be imperiled.
Mr. Bean. The same is very much true for the Fish and
Wildlife Service.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Mr. Bean, yesterday--this is a
request off the subject--multiple media outlets reported that
Cecil, an African legendary lion among tourists and locals in
Zimbabwe, was lured out of the national park and killed by an
American trophy hunter, who paid 50 grand for the privilege.
I am very concerned about this as it relates to others
around the world as the United States tries to take a
leadership role in fighting this global wildlife poaching and
trafficking crisis. I understand the details are still
emerging, but let me ask you some questions that you can get
back to the committee as opposed to answering them now.
Question one: Did the hunter import any part of the poached
lion into the United States? Question two: The hunter is a
convicted wildlife poacher in the United States. Does the Fish
and Wildlife Service prohibit or restrict the importation of
wildlife by people with such convictions?
Last October, Fish and Wildlife Service proposed listing
the African lion as threatened under the Endangered Species
Act. Incidents like this one show clearly that ESA protection
is needed. What is the status of that final listing? Also, I
ask my colleagues to consider H.R. 2697 as a partial remedy to
what just occurred.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Gentlemen, thank you for
being here. A series of questions here, pretty straightforward,
just some clarifications.
What types of agency actions require consultation under
section 7 regulations?
Mr. Bean. Many different types of agency actions require
consultation. Typically, they are place-specific projects, like
building a highway, a dam, or something of that sort. But they
also can cover issuance of regulations or adoption of land use
plans. It is quite encompassing.
Mr. Thompson. When a Federal agency has broad statutory
authority to act, is the promulgation of a rule considered a
discretionary agency action?
Mr. Bean. Yes. The regulations that I referenced in my
statement, the 1986 Joint Implementation Regulations, clearly
specify that issuance of regulations is a Federal action.
Mr. Thompson. How impactful does the effect have to be to
trigger consultation? Is it a broad effect on the population,
or a single effect on one member of an ESA-protected species?
Mr. Bean. It does not have to broadly affect the species as
a whole, but it does have to be a reasonably certain to occur
effect, if it is an indirect effect. That is a key requirement
of our regulations--that an agency must, in making its ``may
affect'' determination, take into account direct effects, which
are those things that happen immediately and naturally as a
result of an action, as well as indirect effects, provided the
indirect effects are reasonably certain to occur.
Mr. Thompson. As you know, under the ESA, ``take'' means to
harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture,
collect, or attempt to engage in any such conduct. For section
7 purpose, is an effect above or below the threshold of a
``take'' ?
Mr. Bean. The Fish and Wildlife Service view on that is
that if a take occurs, it would be an effect that would have to
be taken into account. I would note, however, that the Supreme
Court, some years ago in a case known as the Sweet Home Case,
held that the requirement that--excuse me, the prohibition
against ``take''--was based upon ordinary principles of
proximate causation. So, the take has to be proximately caused
by the action in order for it to be a cognizable take.
Mr. Thompson. Can adverse effects occur even if a take is
unlikely?
Mr. Bean. There are certainly ways to adversely affect a
species without taking it, so I guess the answer to your
question is yes.
Mr. Thompson. When does an agency need to ask the
appropriate Services for a concurrence letter?
Mr. Bean. If the agency in step one of the process has
determined that its action may affect a listed species, that
then triggers step two, which is the informal consultation
process. If the action agency in that second step concludes
that its action is not likely to adversely affect the species,
consultation ends, provided that the Service issues a written
letter of concurrence. Without that written letter of
concurrence, however, the agency's duty is to enter into the
third and final step, the formal consultation phase.
Mr. Thompson. You touched on this briefly, I think, but
what kinds of effects trigger consultation? Any effect or only
certain effects?
Mr. Bean. Direct effects, and indirect effects that are
reasonably certain to occur.
Mr. Thompson. I want to change gears with what little time
I have left and just zero right in on one endangered species
that is impactful in 38 states, including my Keystone State,
the northern long-eared bat. I do think your agency needs
resources to deal with this species. It was listed as
threatened, but you need the right resources. I would argue
that elevating that at any time to endangered would be the
wrong resources.
I think Congress has provided--and I appreciate the
distribution about 2 or 3 weeks ago of about a million dollars'
worth of grants. My question is, though, that was distributed
in chunks of about maybe $35,000. So what was the rationale?
What is the level of effectiveness when we disburse it in such
small pieces across so many different places?
Mr. Bean. I don't know the details of those particular
grants; but I would say that we are constrained, the Fish and
Wildlife Service is constrained, by a budget that does not
allow it to make grants that are commensurate with the
challenge we face, in that case white-nose syndrome.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bean, in the proposed rule for existing plants, EPA
states, ``There are substantial questions as to whether any
potential for relevant effects results from any element of the
proposed rule, or would result instead from the separate
actions of states establishing standards of performance for
existing sources and implementing and enforcing those
standards.'' What are the substantial questions EPA is
referring to in the preamble?
Mr. Bean. I cannot speak for EPA or explain beyond the
words of their statement that you read.
Mr. Labrador. Have you spoken to the EPA about this?
Mr. Bean. I have not.
Mr. Labrador. Why have you not spoken to the EPA about
this? If there are substantial questions, shouldn't we know
what those substantial questions are?
Mr. Bean. My interpretation, if you will, of those
remarks----
Mr. Labrador. Please.
Mr. Bean [continuing]. Is that their proposed plan, in and
of itself, does not have any particular effects upon particular
facilities in particular places; that their proposed plan sets
in place a process whereby states develop implementation plans.
Pursuant to those state plans, particular facilities may or may
not change their operations. Those, I think, are the
intervening steps that in EPA's mind, apparently, led it to the
conclusion that there were not reasonably certain to occur
impacts.
Mr. Labrador. Does it concern you that EPA has concluded
that there are no effects, but has made that determination
while acknowledging their substantial questions about whether
the effects are a result of the Federal action?
Mr. Bean. I understand their identification of substantial
questions to be part and parcel of their apparent determination
that there are not reasonably certain to occur impacts upon
endangered species.
Mr. Labrador. So, it does not concern you in any way that
they would write this statement in the preamble in this way?
Mr. Bean. I think the statement in the preamble is a more
detailed explanation of a ``no effect'' determination than the
Fish and Wildlife Service typically sees, because it typically
does not see any at all from action agencies.
Mr. Labrador. EPA's own modeling shows Big Bend generating
units will close. EIA analysis predicts that coal-fired power
plant closures will double, and Tampa Electric asserts in its
comments on the Clean Power Plan that Big Bend will have to
shut down.
Big Bend is a primary warm water refuge for manatees, and
has a manatee protection permit appended to its NPDS permit;
and according to EPA's modeling and the plant operator, will
shut down as a result of this rule. Does this not adequately
demonstrate that EPA's rule is reasonably certain to adversely
affect that listed species?
Mr. Bean. I don't know whether those projections are
accurate, whether they are shared by EPA, or whether they are
disputed; so I really cannot intelligently inform that
discussion.
Mr. Labrador. You are doubting that those are accurate. If
they happen, do you agree that then you will be putting a
listed species in danger?
Mr. Bean. If what happens, sir?
Mr. Labrador. If these things actually occur, as they have
been reported. Do you not think that it will actually make the
manatee, which is a listed species, be adversely impacted by
this?
Mr. Bean. There is the potential for an adverse effect from
a closure of a facility, any facility, that provides warm water
refugia during the winter. If that occurs during a cold snap,
that is a particularly dangerous time. If it occurs in the
summer, there may be an opportunity for manatees to find other
places to seek warm water refugia in the winter. So, it is
somewhat conjectural.
Mr. Labrador. You are saying the EPA does not even agree
with its own modeling? Because it is their own modeling that
shows that Big Bend generating units will close.
Mr. Bean. Unfortunately, I don't have any information about
their modeling. I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Labrador. Well, you should look it up.
If the likely effects of a discretionary Federal action on
listed species are positive, how would you best describe those
effects for section 7 purposes--beneficial, insignificant,
discountable, or no effect?
Mr. Bean. If there are reasonably certain to occur
beneficial effects, those would justify a ``may affect''
situation.
Mr. Labrador. What about effects that are remote or very
small? How would you best categorize those--beneficial,
insignificant, discountable, or no effect?
Mr. Bean. If the effects are remote and very small, they
would, in all likelihood, not justify a ``may affect''
determination.
Mr. Labrador. If there is only a very slight effect, is
that still an effect?
Mr. Bean. The magnitude of the effect is one question. The
other question is the certainty of its happening. Our
regulations are quite clear that, at least for indirect
effects, those need to be taken into account if they are
reasonably certain to occur.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize I was not
here at the beginning of the hearing today. So Mr.--how do you
pronounce it, Rauch?
Mr. Rauch. Rauch.
Mr. LaMalfa. Rauch. I am sorry about that. Thank you, Mr.
Rauch.
Following up on a previous hearing here, my colleague, Mr.
Denham--I am acting as him today--asked a question of Deputy
Regional Administrator Barry Thom about predator prevention
programs. The subject at that time had been the Columbia River
basin, but as well, predator problems we have in California;
and he was not aware of any.
What we are talking about basically is the Delta, where we
have invasive striped bass that your own agency stats have
shown consume approximately 98 percent of endangered winter run
salmon. Ninety-eight percent of that run is gone by the time it
works its way down the Sacramento and gets through the Delta.
What I am wondering is, do you have any information on what
NOAA is doing to reduce the number of these predators of the
invasive striped bass, so that that endangered run would be
able to continue, and we would be more effective in the whole
matrix of what we are doing to prevent that loss?
Mr. Rauch. As you indicated, we are very concerned about
predation on the listed populations in the Sacramento Central
Valley. Predation is a natural occurrence, but given that the
system is so altered and our fish are so stressed, the impacts
of predation can be quite severe.
Depending on the agency we work with, we do try to impose
or try to work with them to lessen the impacts of predation. We
have worked with----
Mr. LaMalfa. We are letting an incredible amount of water
run out through the Delta to address a smaller percentage of
the population, whereas predation obviously is a giant
percentage of what we are losing here. Wouldn't we get the most
bang for the buck by getting after the predators, these striped
bass, that are indeed gobbling up so much of this endangered
fish, rather than letting so much valuable water out in a
drought situation that only helps a tiny percentage of that,
that is not subject to that depredation?
Mr. Rauch. I am not familiar with the statistics that you
provided that 95 percent of the fish were lost due to
predation. I know that last year, for the winter run, we lost
95 percent of the run above Red Bluff Diversion Dam, because of
the extremely hot temperature and because there was not enough
cold water flushing down there. It may well be that----
Mr. LaMalfa. What percentage are you attributing to the hot
water?
Mr. Rauch. Ninety-five percent, I think. I don't know what
we attributed. We lost----
Mr. LaMalfa. We have numbers that show that 90-plus percent
is due to predators and not----
Mr. Rauch. I don't want to debate that. That was the number
I had. Clearly, predation----
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, evidently you do not have a plan for
predators, really, to speak of, then, bottom line?
Mr. Rauch. We do not have a comprehensive plan. Different
agencies have different roles in predation. We are working----
Mr. LaMalfa. I am sorry. I have limited time here, sir. The
bottom line is you do not really have a broad plan?
Mr. Rauch. We work with different agencies using their
authorities to address predation under whatever authority----
Mr. LaMalfa. So which one do we need to talk to? What other
agency?
Mr. Rauch. We work with the Bureau of Reclamation in
designing their projects, so as to minimize the water flows for
predation. We are working with land management agencies to try
to better improve the habitat so that our fish have more hiding
places to hide.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right. Very good. Thank you, sir. I am
sorry on the time here.
Mr. Bean, I want to come back over to you. We have been
having a problem with the regulatory load from this
Administration--not a lot of consultation with Congress here.
For example, new regulations on a listing of yellow-legged frog
in the Sierra Nevada has caused some very detrimental economic
effects.
For example, an event called the Lost Sierra Endurance Run,
which is a 32-mile charity foot race through private land and
through National Forest--it has been a very important economic
engine, they have faced a consultation fee that was too great,
and they have actually canceled the event.
Now, this is on the heels of a couple of field hearings we
had on yellow-legged frog possible listings, where the agencies
involved said, well, there is really not going to be an
economic effect on the area other than on government agencies,
what it will cost them to do it.
So, we see that has been canceled. Big economic effect, and
they have not come up with any effect on the local economy. Has
the Administration ever exempted any entity like the Lost
Sierra Endurance Run from ESA consultation requirements?
Mr. Bean. I am not familiar with that particular run. I
would note----
Mr. LaMalfa. In general. Have you ever exempted entities
from such a thing?
Mr. Bean. I am not aware of exemptions. We do have a
programmatic consultation with, I think, nine National Forests
that cover some thousand or more activities that has expedited
the consultation process for all of those activities.
Mr. LaMalfa. At a high cost?
Mr. Bean. I don't know the cost, sir.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just to shift gears a little on the process--looking at the
Ivanpah Solar Electric Generation System, and that is the one
on 15 near the California border; looking at a timeline, on
December 7, 2009, the BLM requested a consultation. That
initial consultation was completed on April 26, 2010. That is 4
months.
Then subsequently, they went on. There was some cause. It
went to the second one, which was completed, the whole thing,
on June 10, 2011. That is less than a year, in looking at it.
Now, it is interesting that it allowed 1,100 takes of
tortoises. When I looked at this, in my experience as a SEAL
commander in Niland, Twentynine Palms, and everywhere else that
the military trains, 1,100 seems excessive. I remember seeing
one or two and stopping training, stopping special operations
training, stopping SEAL training in the height of what we now
engage in. So 1,100. Do you think the 1,100 was a little
excessive in this review of takes for desert tortoises?
Mr. Bean. I believe what the Fish and Wildlife Service
required in that instance was the relocation of tortoises from
the project site to places outside the site where they would be
expected to survive. I think it is important to emphasize that,
as I understand it, this was not 1,100 tortoises being killed,
but rather moved.
Mr. Zinke. Was the same program offered to the U.S. Navy
and the U.S. Marine Corps to relocate tortoises? Because I was
involved in at least two EISs and maybe a dozen EAs, and it was
never brought to our attention that we could relocate tortoises
within the Niland training area or Twentynine Palms.
Mr. Bean. I don't know about your particular situation. I
would say that the relocation of tortoises has been widely used
by the Fish and Wildlife Service for a variety of projects.
Mr. Zinke. The point I am getting at, it was a very short
period, 1,100 tortoises. Then you turn to other things, such as
the mine in northwest Montana--that project took 3 years of
consultation, and they still do not have a permit.
The consultation in which the mining company provided about
$100,000 of funding to your agency to do the review--the review
came back, in this case it was the grizzly bear habitat and the
bull trout, no effect. Yet it takes over 3 years, and again, a
case where they have a small footprint, no effect, and it takes
a year for 1,100 tortoises.
Why is there such a difference in timing?
Mr. Bean. I don't know the facts of these particular cases
you have posed. I would say, as a general matter, the
differences stem from the complexity of the action under
consideration and the resources available to address it.
Mr. Zinke. In my experience, and I have seen the mine up in
northwest Montana--that mine started, the project started, when
I was in high school; and I did not graduate 2 years ago. That
is how long it has taken this company that has invested to do
it, and it seems like every roadblock is put in their way.
Also, the mine footprint is nowhere near Ivanpah, and I think
we have all seen Ivanpah; nor does it have streamers from
Ivanpah.
I find that it seems like we are picking and choosing
projects that we like going the fast track, and the projects
that we do not like seem to be stopped. Do you see that as part
of--are we playing favorites?
Mr. Bean. In my experience, no, sir. In my experience, what
the Service tries to do is to be responsive to agency needs
insofar as its resources allow it that flexibility. Often it
simply lacks the resources to process some of these
particularly challenging consultations in a rapid fashion.
I think about 80 percent of the informal consultations are
completed within 30 days or less, but some of them last much
longer. The example of Guam is a good example in which it was
necessary, because of resource limitations, to stagger
consultations over a period of time to address what were most
important to the Defense Department first.
Mr. Zinke. All right. Thank you. And thank you gentlemen
for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
both of you gentlemen for your testimony.
Mr. Bean, yesterday EPA made its first and belated delivery
of documents in response to a request from Chairman Bishop and
Chairman Inhofe relating to the Clean Power Plant and ESA
consultation. Were you, or any officials in your respective
agency, made aware of the documents EPA provided to the
committee?
Mr. Bean. No, I was not.
Mrs. Radewagen. Mr. Rauch?
Mr. Rauch. I think I received them at the same time the
committee did.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. I have a few questions for you as
well, and I appreciate you two being here. I realize it would
probably be easier if EPA had decided to show up and defend
themselves at the same time, and we are getting at information
in an inverse way. Also, you are facing a difficult time trying
to walk a fine line here, but I do appreciate your commitment
to stay here and talk to us at the same time.
We have gone somewhat far afield in the time of this
hearing. The issue, at least for today, is not whether the
Endangered Species Act is an effective law or not. The question
is whether the law is actually being followed, and if agencies
are ignoring the law to reach their conclusions.
If it is appropriate for that, then the law should be
changed. If not, then the agency should be held accountable.
The question is, if they are ignoring requirements of the law
in one area, are they requiring it in other areas?
I have some specific questions dealing with that, but let
me go far afield as well, because questions have been given to
you and you have both commented on the threat of climate change
to endangered species. The question is very simple. Will EPA's
rules be beneficial for endangered species or critical habitat?
Mr. Bean. Mr. Chairman, I presume so, but I have no
particular knowledge on which to base a definitive answer.
The Chairman. Mr. Rauch, can you give me a definitive
answer?
Mr. Rauch. I would agree with Mr. Bean on that.
The Chairman. That you do not know?
Mr. Rauch. I do not know. I assume that that is one of the
goals of that, and anything that benefits climate change will
benefit some of our listed species.
The Chairman. We have had assumption of goals before in a
lot of areas, and it does not necessarily have the same effect.
It seems to me that one of the issues we have today is that the
hatred of coal seems to overwhelm our love of endangered
species.
When we are talking about whether a consultation needs to
take place, obviously the courts have had some specific
guidance on those things as well, and that you are right.
Whether you determine both the informal or formal, it does not
have to just be an adverse effect, beneficial, benign, or
actually any undetermined character.
The one court did say the presence of a listed species was
enough to affect a required consultation. I don't know if
personally I would go that far, but to be honest with you, it
does not really matter whether I personally believe that--that
is what the courts have held, and that should be a standard
which should be looked at.
Let me try and walk through this again. I am going to do
this as specifically as I can. Under the Clean Water Act, plant
operators must have a permit to discharge their cooling water.
The permit is called a National Pollution and Discharge
Elimination System Permit, and as a condition of this permit
for the Big Bend and Crystal River power plants, those power
plants must abide by the Manatee Protection Plan attached to
their permits.
Among other things, these plans include provisions
requiring the plant to notify Fish and Wildlife Service if any
generating units are going to be retired. They also require the
operator to immediately report any unplanned interruptions
where there is no thermal discharge for 24 hours or longer to
the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. I assume
that is correct. Right? I actually do not need an answer. Yes,
it is correct.
So, if EPA has conducted their modelings to the effect that
the 111(d) rule, the proposed rule for these existing power
plants, according to the EPA models, as Mr. Labrador said--all
their runs indicate that these will be shut down. Tampa
Electric Company, which owns them, has also done their modeling
service for the Public Service Commission, which requires it,
and said the essentials really require them to be shut down.
Once again, if EPA's own modeling shows they will be shut
down and Big Bend's owners are correct that it would be shut
down, is the EPA rule not affecting the manatee?
Mr. Bean. Mr. Chairman, I would say the following. What
EPA's modeling shows, I do not know. I would say, however, that
EPA's decision on whether its action may affect a listed
species will be based on its own assessment rather than
somebody else's assessment of the impact.
The Chairman. You are coming close to an answer. But if
EPA's modeling shows it will shut down, and if the company says
the modeling shows it will shut down, does that not affect the
manatee?
Mr. Bean. On the face of it, one would presume so, yes.
The Chairman. So, even though EPA's own modeling shows it
would shut down, and the electric company says it would shut
down, who would be held accountable for affecting the manatee
if not the EPA?
Mr. Bean. Held accountable, sir?
The Chairman. Yes. If not the EPA, who actually has
accountability for that?
Mr. Bean. Well, with respect to the section 7 consultation
process, it is EPA's obligation to make the ``may affect''
determination. If the facts are as you describe--and I do not
know whether they are or are not--but if they are as you
describe, it is the EPA's----
The Chairman. You can trust me. I am always honest here.
Mr. Bean [continuing]. Responsibility to make that
determination.
The Chairman. Then the EPA would be held accountable?
Mr. Bean. They would be responsible. There is no mechanism,
sir, for the Fish and Wildlife Service to enforce section 7
compliance obligations.
The Chairman. Close enough, then. Let's go back to the
question that was asked of you by Mrs. Lummis, Mr. Gohmert, and
Mr. Beyer again: Should EPA have insisted on a section 7
consultation? Is that not required by the law?
Mr. Bean. It is required by the law if, sir----
The Chairman. Now, not if----
Mr. Bean. Yes, if----
The Chairman. What the court said. If there is any kind of
impact--in fact, the one court said even if it was a listed
species, that should require it.
Mr. Bean. Our regulations are quite clear that they must be
reasonably certain to occur effects.
The Chairman. Let me ask if Mr. Thompson has any other
questions, because I am coming back to you on that one.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Yes. I would like to
follow up. Actually, with the gentleman, I want to zero in on
the reasonably certain standards. The consultation handbook
explains that indirect effects are caused by or result from
proposed action or later in time, and are reasonably certain to
occur.
Some examples from the handbook of indirect effects are
that predators may follow off-the-road vehicle tracks into
piping plover nesting habitat or destroy nests, and also the
people moving into a housing unit bring cats that prey on the
mice left in the adjacent habitat.
If it is reasonably certain that predators will follow off-
the-road vehicle tracks, and new occupants will bring cats that
prey on nearby mice, is it reasonably certain that the power
plants in question will close as EPA models predict and as the
owner/operator of Big Bend argues?
Mr. Bean. My answer, sir, is I have no idea whether that is
reasonably certain or not. I am not familiar enough with the
details of the EPA rule or the expectation as to how the state
of Florida will respond to that rule in developing an
implementation plan.
Mr. Thompson. If a Federal rule directs states to decrease
carbon dioxide emissions from power plants, is it reasonably
certain that some power plants will generate less power or shut
down altogether and, consequently, will discharge less cooling
water, thereby negatively impacting the existing species that
has been talked about so much today?
Mr. Bean. Again, sir, that is really outside my area of
expertise. I do not know whether that is reasonably certain or
not.
Mr. Thompson. What about the negative impact in terms of
the lack of discharge, of the less cooling water being
discharged?
Mr. Bean. I think it is quite clear for the Fish and
Wildlife Service that the availability of warm water refugia is
an important conservation consideration for manatees. Whether
this proposed rule of EPA will have the effect of reducing that
availability, I do not know.
Mr. Thompson. Is it reasonably certain that the power
plants that EPA modeling shows will shut down will actually
shut down? Are they wrong? Do you question the EPA's expertise
on this matter?
Mr. Bean. I have neither reviewed their models nor would I
have the competence to evaluate their models so I really could
not say, sir.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to
pursue these questions. Obviously, the EPA's actions that are
taken based on what I have heard will have an impact
specifically on the manatee. But I would say, beyond that, any
time we shut down the source of affordable and reliable
electricity, one of the largest species to be impacted is
probably the human species. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. Let me tie a couple of loose ends
together, if I might here. I appreciate once again what you
have gone through. The question, once again, is: Are agencies
ignoring the law? And the answer, we have said, is yes, they
are. There should have been those consultations. Either the law
needs to be changed, or agencies need to in some way, shape, or
form be held accountable.
Mr. Bean, I would also like to change or at least clear up
one of the comments you made to Mr. Zinke, who is no longer
here, about the 1,100 desert tortoise takings. You were
inaccurate in your response to him. What it clearly said was
not that it was removing them to another spot. The ruling was
that actually between 405 and 1,136 tortoises and their eggs
would be directly affected by it, not taken and moved somewhere
else, but would be directly affected by it.
Let me go through a couple of other things here. In TVA v.
Hill, the Supreme Court said--well, let me not do that one
first.
Mr. Rauch, you said that EPA--who once again should be
here--you saw their written testimony that was sent to us late
last night.
Mr. Rauch. I have seen their written testimony, sir, at
some point before this hearing.
The Chairman. Did you get it last night?
Mr. Rauch. I think so.
The Chairman. So they sent it directly to you?
Mr. Rauch. I don't know how I get these things.
The Chairman. Well, we did not send it to you, so I am
assuming they----
Mr. Rauch. No. I assume it came from them somewhere. Yes,
sir.
The Chairman. Don't you find it interesting that they will
share their testimony with you right away, but they will not
ask for a section 7 consultation on something that it directly
affects? That is rhetorical. You know it. You do not have to
answer that question.
I also would remind the Fish and Wildlife Service that
there are some issues that were dealing with endangered species
in which you are actually the action agency and should be
initiating section 7 consultations at the same time, even
though EPA should have been initiating section 7 consultations
on this particular issue.
But in TVA v. Hill, the Supreme Court said that the ESA
reflected--and I am quoting here--``the decision to give
endangered species priority over the primary missions of
Federal agencies.'' Was the Supreme Court right?
Mr. Bean. One does not question the Supreme Court, sir.
The Chairman. Yes, you can. You should never confuse
Supreme Court decisions with the Constitution. Let me ask you
the question again. Was that statement correct?
Mr. Bean. That statement, as I understand it, was part of
the process by which the court in that case concluded that TVA
had an obligation to refrain from completing the completion of
Tellico Dam.
The Chairman. Do I take that as a yes, it was correct?
Mr. Bean. As I said a moment ago----
The Chairman. Or no, you disagree with it?
Mr. Bean. I do not disagree with the Supreme Court ever. It
is pointless to do so.
The Chairman. So yes, it was correct?
Mr. Bean. In our system, the Supreme Court has the ultimate
say on these matters, as you know.
The Chairman. I am still waiting for your opinion. Let me
go on and give you an easier one, then. Under the ESA, do
listed species take first priority over the missions of Federal
agencies?
Mr. Bean. Under the ESA, Federal agencies have an
obligation to ensure that their actions do not jeopardize the
existence of listed species or adversely modify critical
habitat. So to that degree, yes.
The Chairman. So they do. So do listed species take
priority over EPA's Power Plant Rule?
Mr. Bean. The same answer, I would say, that----
The Chairman. Yes?
Mr. Bean [continuing]. What the law requires is that
agencies ensure that their actions not jeopardize the existence
of listed species.
The Chairman. Thank you. Which meant there should have been
a consultation, a section 7 consultation. It is very clear and
it is very obvious. I appreciate your efforts of being here.
Once again, I thank you for having the courage to come and
talk to us and give us the input from the receiving end of what
should have taken place. I wish the other agencies, instead of
giving us unsolicited and unsigned testimony late last night,
would have actually shown up here to answer the specific
questions on why or what took place and why it did not.
At the same time, the question is not if ESA is ineffective
or not. If the provisions of the Endangered Species Act are not
being followed by the agencies, then we either change the law
or we insist that the agencies do follow the law. They do not
have the option of simply picking and choosing what is there
and what is not there.
Can I just give one last comment here? The concept of
extinction and lack of extinction, showing the success of an
Act, is not really a good standard. As another Beane in
Moneyball once said, ``If you play the game and commit no
errors, that is not a great deal. It could mean that you are
simply too bad of a player to actually touch the ball.''
We have a lot of work to do on the Endangered Species Act
to make sure that it is doing what it was supposed to do--
actually preserving and rehabilitating species, not just
listing them and managing them. We also have to make sure that
if the law is there, the law needs to be followed.
I appreciate your appearance here today. Thank you for
spending your time with us. If there is no other business--I do
want to mention that there may be other questions as time
develops, and we would ask you to respond to those in writing.
Under Committee Rule 4(h), the hearing record is held open for
10 business days.
Therefore, if there is nothing else--Mr. Thompson, anything
else? We thank you for being here. The hearing is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Prepared Statement of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
This statement describes the Environmental Protection Agency's role
in addressing section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act (ESA)
consultations, specifically as it relates to EPA's proposed greenhouse
gas regulations for new and existing fossil fuel-fired power plants.
EPA is very aware of the requirements of section 7(a)(2) of ESA and
is carefully considering those requirements as they relate to the EPA's
proposed greenhouse gas regulations for new and existing power plants.
I can assure you that any rule EPA finalizes regulating greenhouse gas
emissions from new or existing fossil fuel-fired power plants will be
based on sound science, will be legally sound, will comply with the
ESA, and will also address any comments we receive on the ESA during
the comment period on EPA's proposed rules.
EPA recognizes that ESA section 7(a)(2) requires Federal agencies,
in consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and/or the
National Marine Fisheries Service (together, the Services), to ensure
that actions they authorize, fund, or carry out are not likely to
jeopardize the continued existence of federally listed endangered or
threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification
of designated critical habitat of such species. Importantly, under the
Services' implementing regulations, section 7(a)(2) applies only to
actions where there is discretionary Federal involvement or control,
and consultation is required only for actions that may affect listed
species or designated critical habitat. Consultation is not required
where the action has no effect on such species or habitat. It is the
Federal agency taking the action that evaluates and determines whether
consultation is required.
EPA appreciates that section 7(a)(2) addresses a broad range of
potential direct and indirect effects on listed species and critical
habitat. However, not all Federal actions will meet the ESA's ``may
affect'' threshold. In the Clean Power Plan proposal, the EPA noted
that we did not believe there would be effects on listed species that
would trigger the section 7(a)(2) consultation requirement. 79 Fed.
Reg. 34830. 34,933-34 (June 18, 2014). At this point, the EPA has not
finalized this determination or taken any final action in connection
with this proposal or with the proposed rule for new power plants. The
EPA would finalize its consideration of ESA requirements in connection
with the issuance of any final rules and in that context would address
any comments raising ESA issues in response to comments.
With regard to the ESA and the Clean Power Plan, EPA considered in
the preamble to the proposed rule a variety of categories of potential
effects. For example, as described in the proposed Clean Power Plan
preamble and my response to your request letter, in the context of a
separate rule involving GHG emission standards for light duty vehicles,
EPA examined the GHG emission reductions achieved by that rule and
concluded that available modeling tools cannot link the calculated
small, time-attenuated changes in global metrics to effects on specific
listed species in their particular habitats (Docket EPA-OAR-HQ-2009-
4782). As EPA noted in the proposed Clean Power Plan, the agency
believes the same reasoning would apply to the GHG emission reductions
that would be achieved if the proposed regulations for fossil fuel-
fired power plants are finalized. EPA thus proposed to conclude that
any potential for effects related to GHG emission reductions would be
too remote to call for section 7 consultation.
As explained in the preamble for the proposed Clean Power Plan, EPA
also considered reductions in non-GHG air emissions that would be
achieved by the rule, if promulgated. However, because EPA lacks
relevant discretion under section 111 of the Clean Air Act to adjust
the standard based on potential impacts of such pollutants on listed
species, EPA proposed to conclude that section 7 consultation would not
be required with regard to such emissions, consistent with longstanding
ESA regulations promulgated by the Services.
As EPA further stated in the preamble to the proposed Clean Power
Plan, the agency also considered other potential outcomes (beyond
reductions in air pollutants) and whether any such matters would fall
within the ESA regulatory definition of the effects of an action. As
EPA explained, there are substantial questions as to whether any
potential for relevant effects results from any element of the rule or
would result instead from separate decisions and actions made in
connection with the development, implementation, and enforcement of
plans to implement the standards established in the rule. EPA
recognized, for instance, that questions may exist whether decisions
such as increased use of solar or wind power could have effects on
listed species. Subsequent to publication of the proposal, EPA also
received questions from Chairman Bishop regarding whether the rule may
have potential effects on certain facilities located in the state of
Florida whose discharge effluent may provide a warm water refuge for
manatees.
As EPA explained in the preamble to the proposed Clean Power Plan,
the precise steps taken to implement any final rule are at this point
uncertain and cannot be determined or ordered by the rule. EPA cannot
predict with reasonable certainty where specific implementation
measures would take effect or which measures would be adopted. It is
thus uncertain whether particular types of facilities (such as new wind
or solar facilities) might be built, where those facilities might be
located, or how a future implementation plan for a particular state,
such as Florida, might affect, if at all, the operations of a specific
existing facility. Although EPA would only finalize its consideration
of ESA issues in the context of a final rulemaking, EPA notes that
section 7(a)(2) of the ESA does not provide for such speculation.
Rather, effects must be caused by EPA's action and reasonably certain
to occur to qualify for ESA purposes.
In conclusion, I would note that climate change is one of the
greatest challenges of our time. It already threatens human health and
welfare and economic well-being. The science is clear. The risks are
clear. And the high costs of climate inaction are clear. We must act.
As the climate changes, species will need to either adapt to the new
local climate or migrate to stay within their preferred climate zone.
The National Research Council stated that some species will be at risk
of extinction, particularly those whose migration potential is limited
whether because they live on mountaintops or fragmented habitats with
barriers to movement, or because climatic conditions are changing more
rapidly than the species can move or adapt. Likewise, the 2014 National
Climate Assessment found that currently prevalent species may disappear
from certain areas due to rapidly changing habitats caused by climate
change and other stressors.
