- EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S SPENDING PRIORITIES AND THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S SPENDING PRIORITIES AND THE
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, March 1, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-380 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Democratic Chief Counsel

----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, March 1, 2016...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lummis, Hon. Cynthia M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho, a Delegate in Congress
from the Northern Mariana Islands..........................     8
Prepared statement of....................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:
Jewell, Hon. Sally, Secretary, Department of the Interior,
Accompanied by Mike Connor, Deputy Secretary of the
Interior, and Kristen Sarri, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Policy, Management and Budget, U.S. Department
of the Interior, Washington, DC............................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    29

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submission by Rep. Jeff Duncan

Representatives Hudson, Duncan, and Rigell, February 29, 2016
Letter to Secretary Sally Jewell, Department of the
Interior...................................................    83

Submissions by Rep. Ben Ray Lujan

Right-of-Way Agreement between San Ildefonso Pueblo and Santa
Fe County..................................................   114
Fry, Raymond, Superintendent, U.S. Department of the
Interior, Espanola, New Mexico, December 6, 2013 Letter to
Katherine Miller, Santa Fe County Manager..................   122
Miller, Katherine, Santa Fe County Manager, January 7, 2014
Letter to Raymond Fry, U.S. Department of the Interior.....   125

EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S SPENDING PRIORITIES AND THE
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL

----------

Tuesday, March 1, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Rob Bishop
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Young, Lamborn, Fleming,
McClintock, Thompson, Lummis, Benishek, Duncan, Gosar,
Labrador, LaMalfa, Denham, Westerman, Graves, Newhouse, Zinke,
Radewagen, Mooney, Hardy, LaHood; Grijalva, Bordallo, Costa,
Sablan, Tsongas, Huffman, Ruiz, Lowenthal, Cartwright, Beyer,
Torres, Dingell, Gallego, and Polis.
Also present: Representatives Walden and Lujan.
The Chairman. All right, we are ready to get started here.
This hearing will come to order.
We are examining the Department of the Interior's spending
priorities in the Fiscal Year 2017 budget. Under Rule 4(f) any
oral opening statements are limited to the Chair, the Ranking
Minority Member, the Vice Chair, and a designee of the Ranking
Minority Member. So we will allow that to happen.
Therefore, I ask unanimous consent that any other Members'
opening statements, if they wish to have some, be included as
part of the hearing record if you submit them to the Clerk by
5:00 p.m. today, Eastern Time, or the close of this hearing,
whichever comes first. I had to lie about that one, too.
So, without objection, it will be so ordered.
I am also going to ask unanimous consent that
Representative Greg Walden be allowed, if he is able, to join
us to sit on the dais and participate in today's hearings.
[No response.]
The Chairman. Seeing no objection, it will be so ordered.
I am going to recognize myself first for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

The Chairman. As we begin this process, I sarcastically
said the other day that the only thing positive about this
budget is it is going to be the last one we are going to see.
That is both sarcastic, an oversimplification, but,
unfortunately, terribly accurate.
With a $19 trillion deficit, this is a $20 billion budget
that is basically the same old. It rewards friends, it punishes
enemies, it listens to some and ignores others. The people who
need to be cared about and need to be served are those that are
not going to be heard in this particular budget.
The budget omits tens of millions of dollars that are going
to be spent to defend against frivolous lawsuits that groups
file against this Department. These lawsuits, together with
more than 200 regulations it issued last year, stifle economic
development, but without any compensation that benefits the
land, wildlife, air, water, resources, the people who live in
that area, or the people who come to recreate in those
particular areas. Some of these rules include a hydraulic
fracturing rule, which is legally deficient; rules that
discourage onshore energy leases; plans to redirect millions
from Gulf offshore resources toward a flawed climate action
plan; the withdrawal of 10 million acres from mineral
development of the West for a habitat for the Greater sage-
grouse, which is doing poorly on Federal land, but is doing
great on state and private land, because they know what to do;
and ESA changes that designate critical habitat in areas that
are not now nor have been occupied by any endangered species.
I am also perplexed by the Department's double standard of
stringently enforcing ESA consultation. Apparently, on the
EPA's Clean Power Plant rule, or when the EPA dumps 3 million
gallons of crap into the Animas River, that is an ``Oops, we
will just whitewash the entire thing.''
Last week, this committee did receive subpoenaed documents
from the Army Corps and a partial response from the Interior
Department. I know that staff will be reviewing those, and we
will be following up, and await your full response for those
issues.
Look, we have a $19 billion backlog that is facing this
Department, yet we still want to add more lands with an LWCF
that needs to spend more on the stateside programs and less on
land acquisitions. We are undercutting future grazing on
Federal lands, with a sizable increase to grazing fees that is
in addition to a 25 percent increase that already occurred last
year. And, rather than informing Congress of the largest
grazing fee increase in years, BLM chose to leak it to an
online news agency. So I learned of it when a reporter asked me
a question about it. That is not what I consider to be
transparency.
The ESA regulations: we have a Department budget that does
nothing to address the West's drought problems. When we could
be putting 200,000 acres of land into agriculture productions,
instead we are going to be diverting more water in California
to the Delta smelt. You have a $166 million program in there
that deals with drought mitigation and rehabilitation. To those
of us in the Republican areas of the northern part of the
Colorado Basin, we are going to get $3.5 million of that. The
other $162 million, we do not.
The drought hits all of the West. It is not a blue- or red-
state drought, but you would not be able to recognize it by
this budget. In fact, when we had a hearing the other day in
St. George, we dealt with a land use plan that, by law, had to
have consultation and coordination with local government. Yet
the city had not been consulted in any way, and the county said
when they made calls they were never returned. Yet a special
interest group panelist who happened to be there said, ``I
don't understand; they always pick up my phone when I call.''
That is part of the problem that we have. There are some
groups that are openly listened to, there are some groups that
seem to be ignored, and this budget does that same thing again.
It has no creative solutions. It will not expand or strengthen
affordable domestic energy portfolio, it does nothing for
catastrophic wildfires, does nothing for severe droughts across
the West. But it does give opportunity for more regulatory red
tape, more jobs going overseas, higher taxes, and especially
higher fees for the American people.
Look, when we go into this, part of the process is when I
turn it over to my friends on that side of the aisle, their job
is to defend your budget. It is going to be a difficult task to
do. There will be a whole lot of spin doing that. I understand.
That is what I had to do in the last few years of the Bush
administration, when we were in the Minority. You get to do
that same thing.
I am just telling you, though, that your spin is going to
be the envy of every Las Vegas contortionist, because this
budget could have been a blueprint for future cooperation, and
instead I think it is a blueprint for future partisan
bickering. It is not what it could have been; I feel bad about
that.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bishop follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rob Bishop, Chairman, Committee on
Natural Resources
I have said, the only thing positive about the President's budget
is that it will be his last. Amidst a $19 trillion and growing national
debt, the Interior Department's $20 billion budget request,
unfortunately, is the same approach put forward for 8 years regarding
our Nation's natural resources challenges: it increases runaway Federal
spending; ramps up regulations that threaten our energy and water
security; punishes already-struggling economies by increasing fees and
taxes, and expands Federal land ownership, adding to the billions of
maintenance backlogs and poorly managed forests that are being ravaged
by wildfires.
This budget omits tens of millions of dollars spent to defend
against frivolous lawsuits groups file against the Department. These
lawsuits--together with more than 200 regulations it issued last year--
stifle economic development without commensurate benefit to land,
wildlife, air, and water resources.
Some of these rules include: a hydraulic fracturing rule found to
be legally deficient; rules that discourage onshore energy leases on
Federal land; plans to redirect millions of dollars in Gulf offshore
revenues toward the Administration's Climate Action Plan; the
withdrawal of 10 million acres from mineral development in western
states to create higher standards for Greater Sage-Grouse habitat; and
new ESA changes to designate critical habitat in areas not now occupied
by any endangered species.
As an aside, I am troubled by the Department's double standard of
stringently enforcing ESA consultations, while exempting EPA's Clean
Power Plan rules, or failing to consult on EPA's excavating a
pressurized mine that dumped 3 million gallons of pollution into rivers
with endangered species.
The Department's $900 million proposal for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund again devotes far too much for Federal land
acquisition and not enough for stateside programs. I have proposed that
states and local communities should receive at least 45 percent of the
total LWCF allocation--no less than $405 million.
Compounding this problem is the nearly $19 billion deferred
maintenance backlog facing the Department and the Forest Service. With
the scope of these backlogs, I'm puzzled why the Department continues
to add more land under its management purview, which only exacerbates
the backlog.
The Department also proposes to undercut future grazing on Federal
lands with a sizable increase to grazing fees on Federal lands in
addition to the 25 percent increase that already occurred this year.
Rather than inform Congress of the largest grazing fee increase in
years, BLM chose to ``leak'' it to an online news outlet, and I learned
about it from a reporter asking questions. The lack of transparency of
the Administration (despite their claims to the contrary) is
astounding.
While increasing funding for ESA regulations, the Department's
budget does nothing to address the West's drought problems. This
committee recently heard that precious water that could have been used
to put 200,000 acres of land into agriculture production was diverted
in California for the Delta Smelt. The drought problem will only be
addressed when the Department completes studies for new water storage
and executes agreed-upon water projects, including the Central Utah
Project, so Americans have adequate water supplies even in dry times.
The Department's proposal to increase energy taxes by $10 per
barrel squanders any remaining leverage from our recent energy
renaissance and forces American families to foot the bill on legacy-
building and the far left's policy fantasies. The Administration's
regulations have resulted in surging oil and natural gas production on
non-Federal lands, but astonishing declines on Federal lands. Under
these policies, we lose our competitive edge and are forced to rely
upon countries like Iran to meet our energy needs.
Unfortunately, this budget offers no creative solutions--it won't
sustain or expand a strong and affordable domestic energy portfolio, it
won't curb catastrophic wildfires destroying millions of acres of
Federal forests, or severe droughts across the West. But it does offer
plenty of regulatory red tape and policies to send jobs overseas and
further tax the American people.
Welcome, Secretary Jewell. We appreciate you coming and look
forward to your testimony.

______

The Chairman. With that, I will yield back my time, and
notice I have 30 seconds left. Look at this, as we are going
through, trying to get everyone to ask Ms. Jewell questions. I
will yield to Mr. Grijalva, so you can start the spin.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Defend the indefensible.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much for this rare opportunity
to defend. Thank you, Secretary Jewell, for being here. Only
one person in the room, I might add, has actually produced a
budget for the coming fiscal year, and that is Secretary
Jewell. Despite announcing they would have a budget by now,
House Republicans cannot seem to agree on a plan. The failure
is due to internal bickering and the same Republican extremism
that caused government shutdowns, a debt crisis, and the
resignation of our previous Speaker.
When it comes to appropriations, the last time the House
passed a stand-alone Interior bill was 2009, when the House was
controlled by the Democrats. This is 6 fiscal years of failure
in a row.
The budget request the Secretary has submitted would result
in more than $10 billion in revenue flowing into the pockets of
American taxpayers. The request also includes legislative
proposals that, if enacted by the Congress, would result in
another $4.5 billion in revenue.
In other words, if Congress just got out of the way and
enacted this budget request, the Department would pay for
itself and have more than a billion dollars left over. House
Republicans have no budget of their own, and cannot seem to
pass individual appropriation bills, but that does not stop
them from having loud opinions about the Administration's
proposals. As with health care policy, foreign policy, defense
policy, and even nominees to the Supreme Court, the President
is the adult in the room, while the House Republicans criticize
all of the Administration's work.
To fail to do your job, then criticize those who are doing
theirs, is hypocritical and irresponsible. I would urge my
colleagues across the aisle, rather than spending your 5
minutes attacking the Administration's budget, take at least
some of your time to explain your own views on what our
spending priorities should be, and how you suggest we pay for
them.
The budget request would spend $860 million, including $300
million in mandatory spending to mark the 100th anniversary of
the National Park Service, and invest in restoring and
maintaining NPS resources over the next decade. The committee
has yet to move on NPS Centennial legislation.
This budget includes $2 billion in mandatory funding to
respond to the impacts of climate change in at-risk coastal
communities. This committee has yet to consider legislation
related to climate change impacts, and it is not even clear
that the Majority of the committee believes climate change is
real.
This budget includes responsible, realistic spending
proposals to address wildfire and drought, two of the most
devastating problems facing the West. This committee continues
to hold partisan, industry-friendly hearings during which they
blame trees for the fire and fish for the drought.
This budget contemplates real investments in clean energy
on Federal lands. This committee only invests in the tired, old
rhetoric of ``drill, baby, drill.''
This budget calls for a meaningful investment in programs
serving the First Americans, while this committee pursues deals
that will destroy Native American sacred sites and harm the
quality of life in Indian Country.
I expect some of my colleagues will ignore these specifics
and spend today railing against Democratic spending in general.
To them, I would offer a reminder: only two presidents have
reduced the deficit during their tenure--Bill Clinton and
Barack Obama.
Producing a detailed annual budget request for the entire
Federal Government is an enormous task that requires serious
work and political courage. Attacking this budget without
producing an alternative requires none of the above.
With that, let me yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources
Only one person in this room has actually produced a budget for the
coming fiscal year, and that is Secretary Jewell. Despite announcing
they would have a budget by now, House Republicans can't seem to agree
on a plan. This failure is due to internal bickering and the same
Republican extremism that caused government shutdowns, debt crises, and
the resignation of the previous Speaker.
When it comes to appropriations, the last time the House passed a
stand-alone Interior bill was 2009, when the House was controlled by
Democrats; that is 6 fiscal years of failure in a row. The budget
request the Secretary has submitted would result in more than $10
billion in revenue flowing into the pockets of American taxpayers. The
request also includes legislative proposals that, if enacted by the
Congress, would result in another $4.5 billion in revenue.
In other words, if the Congress just got out of the way and enacted
this budget request, the Department would pay for itself, and have more
than a billion dollars left over. House Republicans have no budget of
their own, and can't seem to pass individual appropriations bills, but
that doesn't stop them from having loud opinions about the
Administration's proposals. As with healthcare policy, foreign policy,
defense policy, and even nominees for the Supreme Court, the President
is the adult in the room, while House Republicans shoot spitballs at
the Administration's work.
To fail to do your job, and then criticize those who are doing
theirs, is worse than lazy; it is hypocritical and irresponsible. I
would urge my colleagues across the aisle: rather than spending your 5
minutes taking pot-shots at the Administration's budget, take at least
some of your time to explain your own views on what our spending
priorities should be and how you suggest we pay for them.
This budget request would spend $860 million, including $300
million in mandatory spending, to mark the 100th anniversary of the
National Park Service and invest in restoring and maintaining NPS
resources over the next decade. This committee has yet to move NPS
Centennial legislation.
This budget request includes $2 billion in mandatory funding to
respond to the impacts of climate change in at-risk, coastal
communities. This committee has yet to consider legislation related to
climate change impacts; it is not even clear that a majority of the
committee believes climate change is real.
This budget includes reasonable, realistic spending proposals to
address wildfire and drought, two of the most devastating problems
facing the American West. This committee continues to hold partisan,
industry-friendly hearings, during which they blame trees for fire and
fish for drought.
This budget contemplates real investments in clean energy on
Federal lands. This committee only invests in the tired, old rhetoric
of ``Drill-Baby-Drill.''
This budget calls for meaningful investment in programs serving the
First Americans, while this committee pursues land deals that will
destroy Native American Sacred Sites and harm the quality of life in
Indian Country.
I expect some of my colleagues will ignore these specifics and
spend today railing against Democratic spending in general. To them I
would offer a reminder: only two Presidents have reduced the deficit
during their tenure: Bill Clinton and Barack Obama.
Producing a detailed, annual budget request for the entire Federal
Government is an enormous task which requires serious work and
political courage. Attacking this budget request, without producing an
alternative, requires almost no work at all, and even less courage.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Jewell. It is always nice to have you here in our
committee.
The Department of the Interior manages 500 million acres of
land. It is about one-fifth of the whole United States and half
of my state. Half is managed by the Department of the Interior.
So you manage as much as I am responsible for representing in
that state. BLM is the majority of that, of course, with
smaller portions being controlled by the Fish and Wildlife
Service, National Park Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, and
Bureau of Reclamation. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management in
DOI governs the waters generally past 3 miles offshore, except
in the Gulf of Mexico out to the territorial limit, or some
1.76 billion acres. That is a lot to be responsible for.
But in the part that I am responsible for, which is the
state of Wyoming, we are officially back in recession, with
only four other states. And it is because, in large part I
would argue, of the policies of the Department of the Interior,
especially with regard to the coal moratorium and the rules on
BLM lands for oil and gas management. The rules are putting
people out of work.
There are railroad locomotives sitting idle in my state for
the first time I can ever remember, just parked, hundreds of
them. In fact, nationwide, I asked someone with the Union
Pacific Railroad this question, and she told me the Union
Pacific Railroad has 150,000 locomotives parked with nothing to
haul in the Nation right now. That is the extent of the slow-
down that agencies such as yours have put on this economy. We
are unable to produce the wealth of this country in a way that
can emphasize the importance of having clean, reliable,
redundant energy, and concentrate our time on making it even
cleaner all the time.
Now, of course, a lot of that energy comes from land
managed by the Department of the Interior. More than 40 percent
of the coal produced in America is produced on Federal lands.
Of course, the vast majority of that is in my state of Wyoming.
Wyoming also produces a large share of the natural gas and oil
that is produced on Federal lands, along with production in New
Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico.
Our energy industry is facing huge challenges right now. So
you can expect my questioning to focus on how the Department of
the Interior intends to respond to this situation: the
recession, the lack of jobs, and our inability to effectively
produce the wealth this Nation holds.
Also, I am interested in hearing about management of the
National Park System for the Centennial, and updates on
management of wildlife. I look forward to your testimony,
Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Lummis follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Cynthia M. Lummis, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Wyoming
Thank you, Chairman Bishop, for holding this hearing regarding the
Fiscal Year 2017 Budget Request for the Department of the Interior.
Secretary Jewell, it is always nice to get to talk with you.
The Department of the Interior manages some 500 million acres of
land, about one-fifth of the entire United States. More than half of
this land is managed by the Bureau of Land Management, with smaller but
still sizable portions being controlled by the Fish and Wildlife
Service, the National Park Service, the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Bureau of Reclamation. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management in DOI
governs the waters generally past 3 miles offshore except in the Gulf
of Mexico out to the territorial limit, or some 1.76 billion acres.
That's a lot of responsibility.
A huge portion of the energy in this country comes from these areas
managed by the Department of the Interior. More than 40 percent of the
coal produced in America is produced on Federal lands, and the vast
majority of that coal is produced in Wyoming. Wyoming also produces a
large share of the natural gas and oil that is produced on Federal
lands, along with production in New Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico.
Obviously, the energy sector is facing huge challenges right now.
Oil and gas production on Federal lands has lagged behind production on
state and private lands, and Interior continues to churn out
regulations that make production more difficult. The Fish and Wildlife
Service continues to be preoccupied with responding to litigation
instead of moving recovered species off the endangered species list.
The BLM continues to seek to acquire more land, without dealing with
the maintenance requirements of the current inventory.
I look forward to finding out how the Department of the Interior
intends to respond to these challenges in a fiscally realistic way, as
well as how it plans to improve its management of the National Parks
System for the Centennial and update its management of federally
protected wildlife.
Secretary Jewell, I look forward to your testimony.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, I appreciate that.
We will now turn to Mr. Sablan.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, A
DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS

Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
Secretary, welcome, and thank you for your service to our
country. Many of the questions I have for Secretary Jewell are
local in nature. I am interested in programs that the
Department funds in the Northern Marianas. But there are two
concerns I have that are larger in scope, so let me just make
that my focus right now, and I will try to be brief.
The relationship between the United States and the Republic
of Palau is based on a Compact of Free Association established
during the administration of President Ronald Reagan. Today,
with the expansion of China in the Pacific, Reagan's foresight
in assuring that Palau would be an ally of the United States is
more clear than ever.
Palau, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the island of Guam
are links on a chain of islands that form a strategic perimeter
to the east of China. China certainly understands how important
islands can be. But right now, China is actually creating
islands where none existed before.
So, I am very glad to see in the Department of the Interior
budget a proposal to cement that relationship between the
United States and the island nation of Palau. There is an
agreement negotiated by the United States and Palau in 2010 to
extend the Reagan-era Compact for 15 years. The Department has
budgeted for that agreement and says legislation will be sent
up to Congress to make it happen.
I think we do need to approve that Compact in this
Congress, with the aggressive assistance of this
Administration. In fact, I have legislation already introduced
and referred to this committee for that purpose. So, Mr.
Chairman, with all due respect I hope that we can find time to
schedule the hearing on H.R. 4531, because we need to build on
the strong defensive foundation in the Pacific created by
President Reagan. China is not sitting back doing nothing, and
neither should we.
Last Thursday, this committee held a hearing featuring a
representative of the Treasury Department on the Obama
administration's assessment of the Puerto Rico debt crisis. It
was the third formal legislative action taken by this committee
since Speaker Paul Ryan's public pronouncement instructing
House committees of jurisdiction to come up with a responsible
solution to the fiscal, economic, and demographic crisis in
Puerto Rico by March 31, 2016.
On February 4, Ranking Member Grijalva and Judiciary
Committee Ranking Member John Conyers wrote to Chairman Bishop
and Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte to request that
we immediately begin bipartisan discussions on legislation to
address Puerto Rico's fiscal crisis. While we still await your
response, time is running out fast if we are to meet the
Speaker's deadline, as well as avoid what Treasury is warning
could be a humanitarian crisis on the island of Puerto Rico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sablan follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, a
Delegate in Congress from the Northern Mariana Islands
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Many of the questions I have for Secretary Jewell are local in
nature: I am interested in programs that the Department funds in the
Northern Marianas.
But there is one concern I have that is national in scope. So let
me make that my focus right now, and I will be brief.
The relationship between the United States and the Republic of
Palau is based on a Compact of Free Association, established during the
administration of President Ronald Reagan. Today, with the expansion of
China in the Pacific, Reagan's foresight in assuring that Palau would
be an ally of the United States is more clear than ever.
Palau, and the Northern Mariana Islands for that matter, are links
in a chain of islands that form a strategic perimeter to the east of
China. China certainly understands how important islands can be. Right
now, China is actually creating islands, where none existed before.
So I am very glad to see in the Department of Interior budget a
proposal to cement the relationship between the United States and the
island nation of Palau. There is an agreement, negotiated by the United
States and Palau in 2010, to extend the Reagan-era Compact for 15
years. The Department has budgeted for that agreement and says
legislation will be sent up to Congress to make it happen.
I think we do need to approve that Compact. In this Congress, with
the aggressive assistance of this Administration.
In fact, I have legislation, already introduced and referred to
this committee, for that purpose. So, Mr. Chairman, with all due
respect I hope that we can find time to schedule a hearing on my bill,
H.R. 4531, because we need to build on the strong defensive foundation
in the Pacific created by President Reagan. China is not sitting back
doing nothing. Neither should we.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.

______

The Chairman. Thank you. With the close of the opening
statements, we are now ready to hear testimony from the
Secretary of the Department of the Interior, Ms. Sally Jewell,
who will be accompanied here by Deputy Secretary Connor and the
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Policy, Management and
Budget, Ms. Sarri.
We thank you for coming here and taking your time to be
with us. Your entire written testimony appears in the record,
so now we would like to turn to you for an oral presentation.
You have been here before; you know how the lights work. The
time is yours. Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SALLY JEWELL, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR, ACCOMPANIED BY MIKE CONNOR, DEPUTY SECRETARY OF
THE INTERIOR, AND KRISTEN SARRI, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF POLICY, MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Secretary Jewell. Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva,
and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Department's Fiscal Year 2017 budget request. I
would like to take a moment to mention the incident at the
Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Harney County, Oregon.
Through tremendous patience and professionalism, the FBI,
with support from state and local law enforcement, ended the
occupation on February 11 as quickly and safely as possible,
after more than 40 days. It was incredibly disruptive and
distressing for our employees, their families, and the Harney
County community. I am proud of our DOI law enforcement
personnel who supported the response and helped keep our
employees safe. We continue to cooperate with DOJ, the FBI, and
others as the investigations move forward, and we remain
committed to working with local communities on the management
of public lands.
Interior's Fiscal 2017 budget request is $13.4 billion,
half a percent above the 2016 enacted level. It builds on the
successes we are achieving through partnerships, the
application of science and innovation, and balanced
stewardship. It gives us the tools to help communities
strengthen resilience in the face of climate change, conserve
natural and cultural resources, secure clean and sustainable
water, engage the next generation with the great outdoors,
promote a balanced approach to safe and responsible energy
development, and expand opportunities for Native American
communities. These areas are core to our mission, and play a
vital role in job creation and economic growth.
The budget invests in our public lands, providing $5
billion to support operation of our national parks, historic
and cultural sites, wildlife refuges and habitat, and managing
multiple-use and sustained yield on our Nation's public lands.
It focuses investment on important working landscapes, like the
western Sage Steppe and the Arctic, and proposes a 10-year, $2
billion coastal climate resilience program to support at-risk
coastal states and local governments, including funding for
communities in Alaska, to prepare for and adapt to climate
change.
As the National Park Service begins its second century, the
budget provides $3 billion, and includes a proposal to dedicate
significant funding to reducing the deferred maintenance
backlog. It calls for full and permanent funding of the Land
and Water Conservation Fund, and extends the expired authority
for the Historic Preservation Fund. It reflects the
Administration's strategy to more effectively budget for
catastrophic wildfires. And in response to drought challenges
across the West, it continues to safeguard sustainable and
secure water supplies.
We continue to engage the next generation of Americans to
play, learn, serve, and work outdoors, with $103 million for
youth engagement. This includes mentoring and research
opportunities at the USGS, urban community partnerships,
scholarships and Job Corps training for tribal, rural, and
urban youth, and work opportunities in our bureaus.
There is $20 million for the Every Kid in a Park
Initiative, which introduces America's fourth-graders to their
public lands, providing education programs across the country
and transportation support for low-income students.
We continue to promote a balanced approach to safe and
responsible energy development that maximizes a fair return for
taxpayers with $800 million for renewable and conventional
energy development, a $42 million increase.
We are on track to meet the President's goals of permitting
20,000 megawatts of renewable energy capacity on public lands
by 2020, with nearly $100 million for renewable energy
development and infrastructure. Offshore, this budget supports
the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and the Bureau of Safety
and Environmental Enforcement with funding to reform and
strengthen responsiveness, oversight, and safety of oil and gas
development.
Onshore, $20 million supports BLM's efforts to develop a
landscape-level approach to oil and gas development, modernize
and streamline permitting, and strengthen inspection capacity.
We are expanding educational and job opportunities for
Native American communities, with $3 billion for Indian
Affairs, a 5 percent increase to support Native youth
education, American Indian and Alaska Native families, public
safety, and building resilience to climate change.
The President's budget calls for a $1 billion investment in
Indian education as part of Generation Indigenous, and $278
million to fully fund contract support costs, a cornerstone of
tribal self-determination.
The budget supports our commitment to resolve Indian water
rights settlements and support sustainable water management in
Indian Country, with $215 million, a $5 million increase.
The budget includes funding to strengthen cyber security
controls across all agencies. It invests in science and
innovation with $150 million for natural hazards at the USGS,
an $11 million increase, and $5 million increase for 3D
elevation mapping in Alaska and nationwide. Funding will
continue development of Landsat 9, a critical new satellite
expected to launch in 2021.
This is a smart budget, and it builds on previous successes
and strengthens partnerships to ensure we balance the needs of
today with opportunity for future generations. Thanks, and I am
happy to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Jewell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sally Jewell, Secretary of the Interior,
Washington, DC
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the
committee, I am pleased to present the 2017 President's Budget for the
Department of the Interior providing $13.4 billion for the Department's
programs with $290 million available in the event of catastrophic
fires.
This is a strong budget that builds on our accomplishments. Our
request enables us to carry out our important missions--maintain our
core capabilities, meet commitments, and invest in key priorities. The
investments in this request show the Administration remains focused on
meeting the Nation's greatest challenges looking forward and ensuring
our economy works for all.
Our budget is part of the President's broader strategy to make
critical investments in domestic and national security priorities while
adhering to the bipartisan budget agreement signed into law last fall,
and lifts sequestration in future years to continue investment in the
future. This budget recognizes the importance of Interior's programs to
the overall strength of the Nation's economy. To put this into
perspective, in 2014, Interior-managed lands and activities contributed
about $360 billion in national economic output, supporting an estimated
2 million jobs. Of this, energy and mineral development on Interior-
managed lands and offshore areas generated more than $241 billion in
economic activity and supported nearly 1.1 million jobs.
At the same time, our 2017 proposed investments lay the groundwork
for promoting renewable energy development, managing the Nation's lands
responsibly, helping to protect communities in the face of climate
change, and investing in science to inform natural resource management.
Our budget features investments to launch the second century of the
national parks and expand public accessibility to and enjoyment of
America's public lands. It supports tribal priorities in Indian
Country, including a $1.1 billion investment to transform Indian
schools and education, and provides full funding for tribal contract
support costs. This request addresses significant resource challenges
for the Nation, including water availability, particularly in the arid
West, and makes important investments in America's water
infrastructure.
The 2017 budget includes $1.0 billion for research and development
activities throughout the Department, an increase of $84.5 million from
the 2016 enacted level. Activities supported include scientific
analysis of natural systems and applied field research to address
specific problems, such as thawing permafrost, invasive species, and
flooding. With multiple science programs across the Department's
bureaus and offices, science coordination remains a critical component
in the process of effective science application. Interior is well
served by the deployment of science advisors in each bureau. These
advisors serve critical roles within the organizations and across the
Department by sharing information concerning new research efforts,
identifying and evaluating emerging science needs, and ensuring
effective science delivery and application. The Interior 2017 budget
reflects high priority needs identified for scientific research across
the Department.

The 2017 Budget Advances a Record of Achievement

This budget builds on a record of achievement across Interior's
diverse mission. For the past several years, the Department led an
unprecedented proactive strategy to develop land use plans with
Federal, state, and local partners to address the deteriorating health
of America's sagebrush landscapes and the declining population of the
greater sage-grouse. This landscape scale conservation effort is an
extraordinary collaboration to significantly address threats to the
greater sage-grouse across 90 percent of the species' breeding habitat.
These efforts enabled the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to conclude
the charismatic rangeland bird does not warrant protection under the
Endangered Species Act. This collaborative, science-based strategy is
the largest land conservation effort in U.S. history, and helps to
protect the species and its habitat while also providing certainty
needed for sustainable economic development across millions of acres of
Federal and private lands throughout the western United States. The
2017 budget includes $89.7 million for Sage Steppe conservation, an
increase of $22.9 million over 2016 enacted.
This budget continues to advance development of renewable energy.
Over the summer of 2015, Interior's offshore wind energy leasing
efforts led to beginning construction of the first offshore wind farm.
This first of its kind project will provide a model for future
development of offshore wind energy. Since 2009, Interior has approved
56 wind, solar, and geothermal utility scale projects on public or
tribal lands. When built, these projects could provide about 14,600
megawatts--enough energy to power nearly 4.9 million homes and support
more than 24,000 construction jobs. The 2017 budget includes $97.3
million for clean energy programs, an increase of $3.1 million over
2016 enacted.
The 2017 budget sustains President Obama's strong commitment to
tribal self-determination, strengthening tribal nations, and investing
in the future of Native youth. Interior established the Land Buy Back
Program which, in only 2 years of active land purchases, invested more
than $730 million in Indian Country to restore nearly 1.5 million acres
of land to Indian tribes. The effort to improve and transform the
Bureau of Indian Education to better serve American Indian and Alaska
Native youth is building the foundation for improved student outcomes
and enduring traditions and native cultures. In 2016, work will begin
to replace the final 2 of 14 Bureau of Indian Education schools
identified in 2004 as requiring the greatest need for replacement
construction. Also, in 2016, Interior will finalize the next list of
replacement schools determined through a negotiated rulemaking process.
This budget includes $138.3 million for education construction and
maintains a commitment to continue to invest in improving educational
opportunities and quality from the earliest years through college.
Interior continues to engage in innovative efforts to leverage
youth engagement and partnerships to advance the Department's
extraordinary mission. Interior set the goal to provide 40,000 work and
training opportunities during 2014 and 2015 for young adults, toward a
goal of 100,000 by 2017. Interior met its priority goal--providing
52,596 work and training opportunities over the past 2 fiscal years by
collaborating across all levels of government and mobilizing the 21st
Century Conservation Corps. From Denali to the Everglades, members of
the youth conservation corps are gaining work experience, helping
improve the visitor experience, and mobilizing entire communities in
the stewardship of our parks, refuges, waters and heritage. The 2017
budget includes a total of $102.5 million, an increase of $37.6 million
over 2016 enacted, for programs to advance youth engagement.
Bureau of Reclamation projects funded from 2010 through 2015
exceeded the cumulative water savings target of 910,000 acre-feet of
water/year, achieving savings of over 970,000 acre-feet, roughly the
amount of water needed for household use in Phoenix and the surrounding
area each year. The budget keeps Reclamation on track to conserve
1,040,000 acre-feet by the end of Fiscal Year 2017.
Partnerships are critical to enhancing our public lands and
providing additional recreational opportunities to the public. An
example of the significant impact of these efforts is the CityArchRiver
project is a public-private partnership building connections that
enhance downtown St. Louis, the Gateway Arch grounds at the Jefferson
National Expansion Memorial, and the Mississippi riverfront. This
partnership includes the National Park Service, Missouri Department of
Transportation, Great Rivers Greenway District, city of St. Louis, Bi-
State Development Agency, CityArchRiver Foundation, and others. In
January, the Foundation completed a $250 million capital campaign which
means the Foundation has raised $221 million in private funding for
construction of the $380 million CityArchRiver project and an
additional $29 million to seed an endowment that will help maintain and
operate the park moving forward.

Promotes the Conservation and Protection of America's Natural and
Cultural Resources

This year, the National Park Service celebrates 100 years of
preserving and sharing America's natural, cultural, and historic
treasures. Interior's 2017 budget makes investments to connect a new
generation to ``America's Best Idea,'' and to care for and maintain our
national parks for the next 100 years. Last year, the National Park
Service's 410 units welcomed 307 million visitors--setting a new
visitation record. Every tax dollar invested in a park returns more
than $10 to the U.S. economy.
The budget includes a discretionary increase of $190.5 million to
invest in the next century of the National Park Service. This includes
a $20.0 million increase for the Every Kid in a Park initiative, a
$20.0 million increase to the Centennial Challenge program providing a
Federal match to leverage partner donations for projects and programs
at national parks, and a $150.5 million increase to address high
priority deferred maintenance needs across the national park system.
This current funding is complemented by a legislative proposal to
provide new mandatory funding, The National Park Service Centennial Act
includes $100.0 million a year, for 3 years, for Centennial Challenge
projects to provide the Federal match in support of signature projects
at park units; $100.0 million a year for 3 years for the Public Lands
Centennial Fund, a competitive opportunity for public lands agencies to
support conservation and maintenance projects; and $300.0 million a
year, for 3 years, for Second Century Infrastructure Investment
projects to make a meaningful and lasting impact on the NPS deferred
maintenance backlog. The Act also provides authority to collect and
retain additional camping or lodging fees and funds collected from
purchases of the lifetime pass for citizens 62 years of age or older.
Receipts for this Second Century Fund will be matched by donations to
fund visitor enhancement projects.
Together, the discretionary and mandatory funding proposals will
allow the National Park Service to make targeted, measurable upgrades
over the next 10 years to all of its highest priority, non-
transportation assets, restoring and maintaining them in good
condition.
America's public lands and waters offer space to get outside and
get active, and provide living classrooms with hands-on opportunities
to build skills. The Administration launched the Every Kid in a Park
Initiative to inspire the next generation to discover all America's
public lands and waters have to offer. Starting with the 2015-2016
school year, all fourth grade students and their families are able to
receive free admission to all national parks and other Federal lands
for a full year. The National Park Service budget for 2017 includes
$20.0 million for Every Kid in a Park to introduce at least 1 million
fourth grade students from elementary schools serving disadvantaged
students in urban areas to nearby national parks and provide park
programs tailored for young people and their families, especially at
high visitation and urban parks.
Investments in America's great outdoors create and sustain millions
of jobs and spur billions of dollars in national economic activity
through outdoor recreation and tourism. An estimated 423 million
recreational visits to Interior lands contributed $42 billion to the
economy and supported about 375,000 jobs nationwide. The 2017 budget
proposes full funding for Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF)
programs at Interior and the Department of Agriculture. This
innovative, highly successful program reinvests royalties from offshore
oil and gas activities into public lands across the Nation. Starting in
2017, the budget will invest $900.0 million annually into conservation
and recreation projects, equal to the amount of receipts authorized for
deposit into the LWCF each year, through a combination of $475.0
million in current discretionary funding and $425.0 million in
mandatory funding. These investments will conserve public lands in or
near national parks, refuges, forests and other public lands, and
provide grants to states for close-to-home recreation and conservation
projects on non-Federal lands.
The budget continues efforts to manage and promote the health and
resilience of ecosystems on a landscape scale, including a continued
focus in priority landscapes such as the California Bay-Delta, the
Everglades, the Great Lakes, Chesapeake Bay, and the Gulf Coast. The
request includes a total of $79.2 million for Bureau of Land Management
efforts, to protect and restore America's vast sage steppe landscape
supporting abundant wildlife and significant economic activity,
including recreation, ranching and energy development. This investment
reflects Interior's continued support of the unprecedented Federal and
state collaboration to conserve the imperiled sage steppe landscape in
the face of threats from fire, invasive species, expanding development,
and habitat fragmentation. The budget also invests $160.6 million in
landscape scale efforts to address the complex natural resource issues
facing the Arctic.

Implements the President's Climate Action Plan

As manager of roughly 20 percent of the land area of the United
States and a partner with tribal, Federal, state, local, and
territorial government land managers, the Interior Department works to
address the challenges of natural hazards brought on by a changing
climate as an integral part of its mission. The budget includes funding
to improve the resilience of communities and ecosystems to changing
stressors, including flooding, severe storm events, and drought as part
of the Administration's effort to better understand and prepare for the
impacts of a changing climate.
The budget proposes $2.0 billion in mandatory funding for a new
Coastal Climate Resilience program, to provide resources over 10 years
for at-risk coastal states, local governments, and their communities to
prepare for and adapt to climate change. This program would be paid for
by redirecting roughly half of the savings that result from the repeal
of offshore oil and gas revenue sharing payments that are set to be
paid to only four states under current law. A portion of these program
funds would be set aside to cover the unique impacts of climate change
in Alaska where rising seas, coastal erosion, and storm surges are
threatening Native Villages that must prepare for potential
relocations.
Population growth near forests and rangelands and a changing
climate are increasing wildfire risk and resulting costs. The budget
calls for a new funding framework for wildland fire suppression,
similar to how other natural disasters are addressed. The budget
includes base level funding of 70 percent of the 10-year average for
suppression costs and an additional $290.0 million through a cap
adjustment, available in the event of the most severe fire activity,
which comprises only 2 percent of the fires but 30 percent of the
costs. This framework allows for a balanced suppression and fuels
management and restoration program, with flexibility to accommodate
peak fire seasons, but not at the cost of other Interior and U.S.
Department of Agriculture missions.
Healthy communities require secure, sustainable water supplies.
This is particularly challenging with record drought conditions and
increasing demand taxing watersheds throughout the country, especially
in the arid West. To help increase the security and sustainability of
Western watersheds, the budget continues investment in the Department's
WaterSMART program to promote water reuse, recycling, and conservation,
in partnership with states, tribes, and other partners. Funding is also
included for research, development, and challenge competitions to find
longer term solutions through new water technologies. The budget
invests in the Nation's water infrastructure to ensure millions of
customers receive the water and power that are the foundation of a
healthy economy.

Powers the Future Through Balanced Energy Development

To enhance national energy security and create jobs in new
industries, the budget invests in renewable energy development programs
to review and permit renewable energy projects on public lands and in
offshore waters. Under the President's Climate Action Plan, these funds
will allow Interior to continue progress toward its goal of increasing
approved capacity authorized for renewable--solar, wind, geothermal,
and hydropower--energy resources affecting Interior managed lands,
while ensuring full environmental review, to at least 16,600 Megawatts
(since the end of FY 2009). The budget includes an increase of $2.0
million for the Office of Insular Affairs to provide assistance to
implement energy projects identified by the territories in their
comprehensive sustainable energy strategies.
To address the continuing legacy of abandoned mine lands on the
health, safety, environment, and economic opportunity of communities,
the budget proposes $1.0 billion to states and tribes over 5 years from
the unappropriated balance of the AML Trust Fund, administered by the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement. As part of the
President's POWER+ Plan, the AML funding will be used to target the
reclamation of mine land sites and associated polluted waters in a
manner that promotes sustainable redevelopment in economically
distressed coalfield communities. The budget includes legislative
reforms to strengthen the health care and pension plans that provide
for the health and retirement security of coal miners and their
families.
The budget provides support for onshore energy permitting and
oversight on Federal lands, with the Bureau of Land Management's
discretionary and permanent oil and gas program receiving a 17 percent
increase in funding compared to the 2016 enacted level. The funding
increase will enhance BLM's capacity to oversee safe, environmentally
sound development and ensure a fair return to taxpayers, with increases
targeted to improve leasing processes, implementation of new
regulations and rules, and a modernized automated permitting process.
The BLM's costs would be partially offset through new inspection fees
totaling $48 million in 2017, requiring the onshore oil and gas
industry to share in the cost of managing the program from which it
benefits, just as the offshore industry currently does.
The budget also supports reforms to strengthen oversight of
offshore industry operations following the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil
spill, with an additional emphasis on risk management. The budget
includes $175.1 million for the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and
$204.9 million for the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement,
which share responsibility for overseeing development of oil and gas
resources on the Outer Continental Shelf.

Strengthening Tribal Nations

The President's budget maintains the Administration's strong
support for the principle of tribal self-determination and
strengthening tribal communities across Indian Country. This commitment
is reflected in a nearly 5 percent increase for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs over the 2016 enacted level. The budget calls for full funding
for contract support costs that tribes incur from managing Federal
programs, complemented by a proposal to secure mandatory funding in
future years. The budget provides significant increases across a wide
range of Federal programs that serve tribes; proposes a ``one-stop''
approach to improve and coordinate access to Federal programs and
resources; seeks to improve the quality of data by partnering with the
Census Bureau; supports sustainable stewardship of land, water, and
other natural resources; provides funds for communities to plan,
prepare, and respond to the impacts of climate change; and expands
resources to promote tribally based solutions and capacity building to
strengthen tribal communities as a whole. The budget continues to
address Indian water rights settlement commitments and programs to
support tribes in resolving water rights claims, developing water
sharing agreements, and supporting sustainable water management.
The budget includes key investments to support Generation
Indigenous, an initiative addressing barriers to success for American
Indian and Alaska Native children and teenagers. In addition to
Interior, multiple agencies--including the Departments of Education,
Housing and Urban Development, Health and Human Services, Agriculture,
and Justice--are working collaboratively with tribes on new and
increased investments to implement education reforms and address issues
facing Native youth. The budget provides over $1 billion for Interior
investments in Indian education.

Improves Oversight and Use of Federal Dollars

Interior has several multi-year efforts underway to reduce its
nationwide facilities footprint, and improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of its information technology infrastructure and
financial reporting capabilities. The budget includes $6.4 million to
consolidate building space and reduce costs to the taxpayer for
privately leased space. Interior achieved a 4.6 percent reduction--2.1
million square feet--in office and warehouse space between FY 2012 and
FY 2015. This represents a net annual cost avoidance of approximately
$8 million. In 2016, the modernization of the sixth and final wing of
the Main Interior Building will be completed, including infrastructure
upgrades that improve energy efficiency and sustainability and
reconfigured space to support higher occupancy.
The budget includes $3.0 million for Interior's Digital Services
team to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the agency's
highest impact digital services. The budget continues to optimize the
Department wide Financial and Business Management System with targeted
investments to improve reporting and increase data quality and
transparency, as envisioned in the DATA Act.
The budget includes an increase of $2.6 million to support
implementation of Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform
Act, to improve standardization of information technology investments
by strengthening the role of the Department's Chief Information Officer
in strategic planning, budget formulation and execution, and
acquisition of information management and technology activities. The
budget includes $34.7 million in the appropriated working capital fund
to continue the Department's remediation of its cybersecurity systems
and processes, an increase of $24.7 million above the 2016 enacted
level. The additional funding will allow the Department to secure its
valuable information on behalf of our employees, customers, partners
and the American public.
The U.S. Treasury received $7.2 billion in 2015 from fees,
royalties and other payments related to oil and gas development on
public lands and waters. A number of studies by the Government
Accountability Office and Interior's Office of Inspector General found
taxpayers could earn a better return through policy changes and more
rigorous oversight. The budget proposes a package of legislative
reforms to bolster administrative actions focused on advancing royalty
reforms, encouraging diligent development of oil and gas leases, and
improving revenue collection processes. The Administration is committed
to ensuring American taxpayers receive a fair return from the sale of
public resources and benefit from the development of energy resources
owned by all Americans.
The budget includes legislative proposals related to Reforms of
Hardrock Mining. To increase safety and minimize environmental impacts,
the budget proposes a fee on hardrock mining, with receipts to be used
by states, tribes and Federal agencies to restore the most hazardous
sites--similar to how coal Abandoned Mine Lands funds are used. In
addition, to ensure taxpayers receive a fair return from mineral
development on public lands, the budget proposes a royalty on select
hardrock minerals--such as silver, gold and copper--and terminating
unwarranted payments to coal producing states and tribes that no longer
need funds to clean up abandoned coal mines.

Bureau Highlights

Bureau of Land Management--The 2017 request is $1.3 billion, $7.1
million above 2016. This includes $1.2 billion for BLM operations, an
increase of $2.1 million above the 2016 enacted level, with $1.1
billion for Management of Lands and Resources and $107.0 million for
Oregon and California Grant Lands programs. The change in total program
resources from 2016 and 2017 is larger, as the budget proposes
offsetting user fees in the Rangeland Management and Oil and Gas
Management programs which reduce the total request by $64.5 million.
The budget also includes $44.0 million in current appropriations
for LWCF land acquisition, including $8.0 million to improve access to
public lands for hunting, fishing, and other recreation. BLM's LWCF
land acquisition investments promote the conservation of natural
landscapes and resources by consolidating public lands through
purchase, exchange and donation to increase management efficiency and
preserve areas of natural, cultural, and recreational importance. The
BLM estimates 23 million acres (or 9 percent) of BLM-managed public
lands lack public access or have inadequate public access, primarily
due to checkerboard land ownership patterns. The BLM's proposed land
acquisition project within the Rio Grande del Norte National Monument
in New Mexico illustrates the many benefits of land acquisition to
BLM's mission. An investment of $1.3 million would allow BLM to acquire
1,186 acres of private inholdings within the monument to preserve
traditional uses, secure connectivity to the Rio Grande Wild & Scenic
Corridor, preserve avian and wildlife habitat, protect prehistoric
human habitation sites, and improve recreation and tourism.
Complementing the second century of the parks, the BLM budget
includes investments in the National Conservation Lands, which recently
celebrated their 15th anniversary. Thirteen new National Conservation
Lands units were designated during the current Administration and
visitation and visitor expectations and demands have consistently
increased for the whole National Conservation Lands system during this
period. The 2017 budget features a $13.7 million increase to meet basic
operating requirements and support critical and overdue investments to
effectively safeguard the cultural, ecological, and scientific values
for which they were designated and provide the quality of recreational
opportunities intended with the National Conservation Lands
designation. A program increase of $1.1 million in Cultural Resources
Management will enhance BLM's capacity to preserve and protect the vast
treasure of heritage resources on public lands and a program increase
of $2.0 million in Recreation Resources Management will further
implement a National Recreation Strategy to facilitate access to public
lands.
The BLM continues to support the President's broad energy strategy,
with significant increases requested in 2017 to strengthen its ability
to effectively manage onshore oil and gas development on Federal lands.
The 2017 budget for oil and gas management activities, including the
request for direct and fee funded appropriations and estimated
permanent appropriations totals $186.6 million, an increase of $27.6
million in total program resources over the 2016 enacted level.
For direct appropriations, the oil and gas request is a net program
increase of $19.9 million. Within this net total, $13.1 million will
support implementation of rules and regulations to ensure oil and gas
operations are safe, environmentally responsible, and ensure a fair
return to the taxpayer. These include new oil and gas measurement and
site security regulations, hydraulic fracturing regulations, and
venting and flaring regulations. A $2.1 million increase will complete
modernization of the Automated Fluid Minerals Support System. The
development work associated with Phase II of AFMSS modernization
includes new functionality supporting new proposed rules and those
currently expected to be finalized in 2016. Overall, the AFMSS
modernization project also will support greater efficiencies in oil and
gas permitting and inspection activities.
The Oil and Gas Management request also includes a program increase
of $2.6 million for oil and gas special pay costs to improve BLM's
ability to recruit and retain high caliber oil and gas program staff to
provide effective oversight and meet workload and industry demand.
Finally, the BLM budget request includes a program increase of $2.8
million to enhance BLM's capability to address high priority legacy
wells in the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska to supplement permanent
funds provided in the Helium Security Act of 2013. The 2017 budget
continues to request authority to charge inspection fees similar to
those in place for offshore oil and gas inspections. Such authority
will reduce the net costs to taxpayers of operating BLM's oil and gas
program and allow BLM to be more responsive to industry demand and
increased inspection workload in the future. A $48.0 million decrease
in requested appropriations reflects shifting the cost of inspection
activities to fees.
In 2017, BLM will continue to invest heavily in the Greater Sage
Grouse Conservation Strategy and the budget includes a program increase
of $14.2 million to protect, improve, or restore sage steppe habitat.
Funds will also assist states in implementing GSG conservation plans.
The BLM's efforts to implement the Greater Sage Grouse Conservation
Strategy are also reliant upon successful execution of the National
Seed Strategy, which is also integral to the Administration's wildland
fire rehabilitation efforts and the success of the Secretary's
Integrated Rangeland Fire Management Strategy. The budget includes a
$5.0 million program increase within Wildlife Management to more
aggressively implement the National Seed Strategy.
Other budget highlights include program increases totaling $16.9
million in the Resource Management Planning, Assessment, and Monitoring
subactivity. This includes $4.3 million to expand the BLM Assessment,
Inventory, and Monitoring program for increased data collection and
monitoring central to the success of high priority landscape management
efforts such as the Western Solar Energy Plan, as well as
implementation of the Department's plan for the National Petroleum
Reserve-Alaska, the Greater Sage Grouse Conservation Strategy, and the
broader landscape mitigation strategy. The request also includes an
increase of $6.9 million to accelerate implementation of the BLM
enterprise geographic information system, which aggregates data across
boundaries to capture ecological conditions and trends; natural and
human influences; and opportunities for resource conservation,
restoration, development, and partnering. The remaining $5.7 million
increase will support high priority planning efforts that could include
the initiation of new plan revisions in 2017, as well as plan
evaluations and implementation strategies.

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management--The 2017 President's budget for
BOEM is $175.1 million, including $80.2 million in current
appropriations and $94.9 million in offsetting collections. This is a
net increase of $4.3 million in current appropriations above the 2016
enacted level.
The total 2017 estimate of $94.9 million for offsetting collections
is a net decrease of $1.7 million, including reductions in rental
receipts partially offset by a new $2.9 million cost recovery fee for
the Risk Management Program. An increase in direct appropriations of
$6.0 million makes up for the projected decrease in rental receipts.
The budget provides $23.9 million for offshore renewable energy
activities. To date, BOEM has issued 11 commercial wind energy leases
offshore; conducted 5 competitive wind energy lease sales for areas
offshore Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and
Virginia; and approved the Construction and Operations Plan for the
Cape Wind project offshore Massachusetts. Additionally, BOEM is in the
planning stages for wind leasing offshore New York, North Carolina, and
South Carolina. In 2015, BOEM executed the first wind energy research
lease in U.S. Federal waters with the Commonwealth of Virginia's
Department of Mines, Minerals, and Energy.
The 2017 budget provides $64.2 million for conventional energy
development, a programmatic increase of $4.2 million above 2016. These
funds support high priority offshore oil and gas development
activities, including lease sales outlined in BOEM's Five-Year OCS Oil
and Gas Leasing Program for 2012-2017. Under this program, BOEM's eight
sales generated over $2.97 billion in high bids. Five lease sales
remain on the lease sale schedule through mid-2017. The next lease
sales are Eastern Gulf of Mexico Lease Sale 226, Central Gulf of Mexico
Lease Sale 241, and Western Gulf of Mexico Lease Sale 248, all
scheduled to be held during 2016.
The 2017 provides $68.4 million for BOEM's Environmental Programs.
These funds support world class scientific research to provide critical
information informing policy decisions regarding energy and mineral
development on the OCS.

Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement--The 2017
President's budget for the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement is $204.9 million, including $96.3 million in current
appropriations and $108.5 million in offsetting collections. The 2017
budget is a net $196,000 increase above the 2016 enacted level,
reflecting an increase of $7.9 million in current appropriations and a
$7.7 million decrease in offsetting collections. The total 2017
estimate of $108.5 million in offsetting collections assumes decreases
from 2016 of $11.5 million for rental receipts, $2.2 million for cost
recoveries, and a $6.0 million increase for inspection fee collections.
Funding for Oil Spill Research is maintained at the 2016 enacted level
of $14.9 million. The 2017 budget supports continued safe and
responsible offshore energy development.

Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement--The 2017
budget request is $157.9 million, $82.6 million below the 2016 enacted
level.
The 2017 budget for Regulation and Technology is $127.6 million,
$4.3 million above 2016. The request includes $10.5 million, $1.8
million above 2016, to improve implementation of existing laws and
support state and tribal programs. The 2017 budget includes $65.5
million for state and tribal regulatory grants, this level of funding
supports state requirements.
The budget includes program increases of $2.5 million to advance
the Bureau's GeoMine Project; $1.2 million for applied science to
conduct studies to advance technologies and practices specific to coal
mined sites for more comprehensive ecosystem restoration; $1.0 million
to expand the use of reforestation techniques in coal mine reclamation
and provide opportunities for youth and community engagement; $2.3
million to support Technical Assistance; and $1.6 million for National
Environment Policy Act compliance document preparation, legal review,
and program monitoring.
The 2017 budget for the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund is $30.4
million, $86.9 million below 2016. The 2016 enacted level included a
$90.0 million increase for grants to three states for the reclamation
of abandoned mine lands in conjunction with economic and community
development activities. The 2017 budget proposes a broader legislative
effort to support reclamation and economic and community development as
part of the Administration's POWER+ Plan. POWER+ would provide $200
million per year to target the cleanup and redevelopment of AML sites
and AML coal mine polluted waters in a manner that facilitates
sustainable revitalization in economically depressed coalfield
communities. The budget includes a $1.5 million program increase for
technical assistance to states, tribes, and communities to address AML
technological advances and issues for AML site reclamation. The budget
also includes program increases of $525,000 for applied science studies
pertaining to abandoned mines, $799,000 to enhance and expedite current
OSMRE efforts in digitizing underground mine maps, and $287,000 for
support within the Office of the Solicitor.

Bureau of Reclamation and Central Utah Project Completion Act--The
2017 budget for Reclamation and CUPCA totals $1.1 billion and focuses
on investments in Indian water rights settlements, ecosystem
restoration, healthy watersheds and sustainable, secure water supplies.
Funding for Water and Related Resources shows a reduction of $305.6
million from 2016, reflecting the shift of $106.2 million to the
requested new Indian Water Rights Settlements account and $36.0 million
for a separate discretionary account within the San Joaquin River
Restoration Fund.
Reclamation requests establishment of an Indian Water Rights
Settlements account in 2017 to assure continuity in the construction of
the authorized projects and to highlight and enhance transparency in
handling these funds. The budget includes $12.8 million to implement
the Crow Tribe Rights Settlement Act, $6.4 million for the Aamodt
Litigation Settlement Act, and $87.0 million for the Navajo-Gallup
Water Supply Project.
The extreme and prolonged drought facing the western states affects
major U.S. river basins in virtually every western state. The effects
of the current drought on California water, its agrarian economy, and
its communities are particularly acute. The estimated cost of the 2015
drought on California agriculture-crop production, livestock, and
dairies is $2.7 billion with a total loss of 21,000 seasonal and part-
time jobs. The Colorado River Basin--crucial for seven states and
several tribes, in addition to two countries--is also enduring historic
drought. Nearly 40 million people rely on the Colorado River and its
tributaries for some, if not all, of their municipal needs. The Basin
is experiencing the worst drought in recorded history; the period of
2000-2015 was the driest 16-year period in more than 100 years of
record keeping.
Reclamation's WaterSMART program, requested at $61.5 million, is
helping to address the drought and other water supply issues across the
West. WaterSMART Grants, Water Conservation Field Services, and Title
XVI Programs, along with other Reclamation activities are enabling the
West to better adapt to the impacts of a changing environment by
helping to conserve tens of thousands of acre-feet of water each year
in urban and rural settings, and on both large and small scales. The
Drought Response Program will implement a comprehensive new approach to
drought planning and will implement actions to help communities manage
drought and develop long-term resilience strategies. Reclamation
continues to promote research and development through its Science and
Technology and Desalination and Water Purification Research Programs to
produce new clean water technologies, reduce costs, and decrease
environmental impacts while converting unusable water into viable water
supplies. The 2017 budget includes $8.5 million for an X-Prize
competition to encourage innovative water purification and treatment
technologies.
Separately, the budget includes $5.6 million for the Central Utah
Project Completion Account program, $4.4 million below 2016. The
request provides funding to complete construction of the North Pipeline
component of the Utah Lake System; provides for recovery of endangered
species; and implements fish, wildlife, and recreation mitigation and
water conservation projects.

U.S. Geological Survey--The 2017 budget is $1.2 billion, $106.8
million above 2016, to advance our national commitment to research and
development that supports economic growth, balances priorities on
resource use, addresses climate change, and ensures the security and
well-being of the Nation. The budget improves response to and warning
of natural disasters, responds to drought and other water challenges,
supports sustainable domestic energy and minerals development, and
advances scientific understanding of land use, land change, and the
effects of resource decisions to assist communities and land managers
in making choices informed by sound science.
The 2017 budget invests in the USGS's capabilities for science and
innovation to monitor and respond to natural disasters with increases
for priority science to help stabilize and rehabilitate ecosystems
after fires and provide geospatial information, monitoring strategies,
and other relevant scientific information faster for real-time fire
response. Related increases build USGS' capability to respond to
landslide crises, and expand the use of flood inundation mapping and
rapidly deployable streamgages to meet urgent needs of flood-threatened
communities lacking a permanent streamgage.
The budget continues $8.2 million to develop the West Coast
Earthquake Early Warning system to complete a production prototype
system, expand coverage, and beta-test alerts. The budget continues
funding of $3.0 million to repair and upgrade monitoring stations on
high-threat volcanoes. The budget includes funding to assume long-term
operations of the Central and Eastern United States Seismic Network
from the National Science Foundation and allows USGS to continue a 5-
year effort to deploy, install and improve the Global Seismic Network,
ensuring that the Network continues to provide global earthquake and
tsunami monitoring, nuclear treaty research and verification, and earth
science research.
The budget provides an increase of $18.4 million for science to
support sustainable water management, nearly doubling the investment
made in 2016. As climate models forecast increasingly frequent and more
intense droughts, improving water management science is a paramount
concern for land and water management agencies, states, local
governments, and tribes. The budget would improve water use information
and research, provide grants to state water resource agencies, and
create hydrologic models and databases for better decision support. The
budget also includes $3.9 million for drought science and $4.0 million
to develop methods to assess regional and national water use trends
during drought. Innovation is critical to address the severe threats to
water supply posed by drought and climate change.
The budget provides increases across several programs to advance
understanding of conventional and unconventional energy, critical
minerals such as rare earth elements, and the environmental health
effects of resource development. These investments include $3.6 million
to provide decision ready information to support safe and prudent
unconventional oil and gas development, $2.0 million to study the
environmental impacts of uranium mining in the Grand Canyon, and $1.0
million to identify and evaluate new sources of critical minerals and
continue criticality analysis for mineral commodities.
The USGS budget increases science investments for changing
landscapes, including $9.8 million in the Arctic, $3.0 million for the
vulnerable sagebrush habitats of the Intermountain West, and $3.9 to
improve coastal science that will help communities build resilient
coastal landscapes and improve post-storm contaminant monitoring
network along the Atlantic coast. The budget also establishes a Great
Lakes Climate Science Center to focus on the many natural resource
challenges in the distinct bio-geographic Great Lakes region. As with
the eight existing Climate Science Centers, the Great Lakes CSC will
help address regional concerns associated with climate change,
providing a pathway to resilience and supporting local community
priorities.
The budget includes increases of $2.1 million to address research
on pollinator health and expand the small group of USGS researchers
working on this critical component of agricultural and ecosystem
health, $1.4 million for tribal climate science partnerships, and $2.5
million for better tools to detect and control invasive species,
particularly new and emerging invasive species. The budget continues a
commitment to priority ecosystems including the Chesapeake Bay, the
Everglades, Puget Sound, the Upper Mississippi River, the California
Bay-Delta, and the Gulf Coast.
The USGS plays a pivotal role in providing research, analysis, and
decision support tools. The budget supports these efforts and includes
investments to extend the four-decade long Landsat satellite program
with the development of Landsat 9, and provide information to better
understand and respond to changes in the environment. The 2017 budget
provides an increase of $17.6 million for satellite operations, funding
the development of Landsat 9 ground systems and satellite operations
and an investment to retrieve and disseminate data from the European
Space Agency's Sentinel-2 earth observation satellite. The budget
provides an increase of $4.9 million to expand the three-dimensional
elevation program and leverage partnerships across the Nation,
accelerate Alaskan map modernization, and provide coastal imaging to
help communities make infrastructure resilience investments. The budget
also provides $3.0 million to develop the computing resources necessary
to produce and disseminate Landsat-based information products.
High-quality science depends on a strong science infrastructure.
The budget makes necessary investments to continue the USGS legacy of
reliable, valuable scientific information and monitoring. These
investments fund science support, facilities and equipment, including
laboratories, and the administrative support that is the backbone of
science production and delivery. The 2017 budget also includes program
increases to enhance the Mendenhall post-doctoral program, support
tribal science coordination, enhance science education, and engage
youth in underserved communities in earth and biological sciences
through outreach activities and science camps.

Fish and Wildlife Service--The 2017 budget for FWS includes current
appropriations of $1.6 billion, an increase of $54.5 million compared
to the 2016 enacted level.
The 2017 request for FWS includes $1.3 billion for FWS operations,
of which $506.6 million supports National Wildlife Refuge System
operations and maintenance. A feature of the 2017 FWS budget is support
to expand opportunities for all Americans to access public lands and
experience the great outdoors, regardless of where they live. With 80
percent of the U.S. population currently residing in urban communities
near more than 260 wildlife refuges, Interior is leveraging the
National Wildlife Refuge System to encourage urbanites to rediscover
the outdoors. The request includes $10.0 million for the Refuge
System's Urban Wildlife Conservation Partnerships to expand
opportunities for urban populations including an increase of $2.0
million for additional Refuge System law enforcement officers to ensure
the safety of visitors, natural and cultural resources, and Federal
employees and facilities. The budget includes $40.7 million for general
Refuge Law Enforcement operations.
The request also includes funding within Law Enforcement and
International Affairs to combat wildlife trafficking. The budget
provides $75.1 million for the law enforcement program to investigate
wildlife crimes, enforce the laws governing the Nation's wildlife
trade, and continue cooperative international efforts to prevent
poaching and trade in illegal wildlife products. The request includes
$15.8 million for the International Affairs Program, an increase of
$1.1 million above 2016. This includes increases of $500,000 to provide
technical support for international efforts to reduce illegal wildlife
trafficking and develop innovative conservation activities. Also within
International Affairs, is $550,000 to support the U.S. Chairmanship of
the Arctic Council.
The budget invests in resources for the Refuge System which has
lost more than 400 staff positions since 2010. The request for the
Refuge System is $506.6 million, an increase of $25.2 million above
2016. This includes increases of $1.0 million for pollinator
conservation, $3.7 million for wildlife and habitat inventory and
monitoring, $2.0 million to establish management capability across 418
million acres of submerged land and water within the Pacific Marine
National Monuments, and $4.4 million to begin rebuilding capacity
within the Refuge System to improve the condition of refuge system
facilities and resources, improve the visitor experience and manage
natural resources.
The budget emphasizes improving the resilience of communities and
wild landscapes, enabling them to better adapt to a rapidly changing
environment, and uses smart investments in conservation and landscape-
level planning to improve the Service's ability to facilitate economic
growth, while avoiding and mitigating the impacts on wildlife and
habitat.
Within the FWS main operating account, the request provides $252.3
million for Ecological Services to conserve, protect, and enhance
listed and at-risk species and their habitat, an increase of $18.3
million. Since 2008, FWS has downlisted or delisted 15 species, more
than in any other administration. The increases within Ecological
Services include $5.7 million to support conservation, restoration and
economic development across the Gulf Coast region and other parts of
the country.
The budget includes $152.8 million for Fish and Aquatic
Conservation, a program increase of $4.6 million. Within this request
is $53.8 million for operation of the National Fish Hatchery System and
$7.9 million to combat the spread of Asian carp in the Missouri, Ohio,
upper Mississippi Rivers, and other high priority watersheds. The
request also includes an increase of $1.5 million to support fish
passage while improving the resilience of communities to withstand
flooding.
The budget funds Cooperative Landscape Conservation at $17.8
million, an increase of $4.8 million above 2016. The approach employed
by Landscape Conservation Cooperatives to identify landscape scale
conservation solutions fosters collaboration across a wide variety of
partners and builds capabilities beyond the scale any single state,
tribe, Federal agency, or community could achieve alone. The requested
increase will support landscape planning and design, and partner
cooperation that will improve the condition of wildlife habitat and
enhance the resilience of communities.
The 2017 budget for Science Support is $20.6 million, an increase
of $3.6 million above 2016. The request includes an additional $1.0
million to expand application of Strategic Habitat Conservation, an
approach to conservation that, in cooperation with stakeholders,
identifies priority species and habitat, desired biological outcomes,
and develops conservation strategies to achieve these outcomes. This
approach supports the design of successful management strategies that
deliver measureable improvements to wildlife populations and habitats.
The FWS will use a program increase of $2.6 million to obtain high
priority data and scientific tools needed by on-the-ground resource
managers.
The FWS budget includes $137.6 million for LWCF Federal land
acquisition, composed of $58.7 million in current funding and $79.0
million in permanent funding. Within the request for current funding,
is $19.9 million for high priority acquisition projects focused on FWS
specific needs, including $16.0 million for collaborative projects in
coordination with partners and other Federal agencies, and $2.5 million
to support increased access to FWS lands for sportsmen and
recreationists. The FWS requests $2.5 million in discretionary funding
for the Everglades Headwaters National Wildlife Refuge and Conservation
Area, one of the great grassland and savanna landscapes of eastern
North America, to acquire nearly 1,000 acres to help protect high-
quality habitat for 278 Federal and state listed species. Acquisition
of this property would protect the headwaters, groundwater recharge,
and watershed of the Kissimmee Chain of Lakes, Kissimmee River, and
Lake Okeechobee region, and improve water quantity and quality in the
Everglades watershed, supporting the Comprehensive Everglades
Restoration Plan goals and protecting the water supply for millions of
people.
Supporting the Administration's America's Great Outdoors initiative
objectives is $106.0 million for grant programs administered by FWS.
The 2017 budget maintains 2016 funding levels for grants through the
Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund, North American
Wetlands Conservation Fund, Multinational Species Conservation Fund,
and the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Fund. Funding for the
State and Tribal Wildlife grant program on which many states and tribes
rely to fund non-game animal conservation, is an increase of $6.4
million.

National Park Service--The 2017 President's current budget request
for NPS of $3.1 billion is $250.2 million above the 2016 enacted level.
Highlights of the 2017 budget include $190.5 million in increases for
the NPS Centennial, as well as a focus on the stewardship of natural
and cultural resources, including a $20.0 million increase for the
Historic Preservation Fund grant programs to document and preserve
stories and sites related to the Civil Rights Movement.
The NPS budget request for operations is $2.5 billion, an increase
of $154.8 million from 2016. A $2.2 million programmatic reduction to
refocus operations funding partially offsets the following increases:
$49.2 million for additional repair and rehabilitation projects, $46.6
million for additional cyclic maintenance projects, $20.0 million for
the Every Kid in a Park initiative, $10.7 million for new parks and
responsibilities, $8.1 million for healthcare insurance for seasonal
employees, $3.0 million for climate change adaptation projects, $2.6
million for increased communications bandwidth at parks, $2.0 million
for the Vanishing Treasures program, $1.2 million to address energy
development near parks, $1.1 million for Arctic science and monitoring,
and $1.0 million for uranium mining studies in the Grand Canyon.
The 2017 budget provides a total of $35.0 million for the
Centennial Challenge matching program, an increase of $20.0 million.
These funds will provide a Federal match to leverage partner donations
for signature projects and programs at national parks into the NPS'
second century. All Federal funds must be matched on at least a 50:50
basis. In 2016, Congress appropriated $15 million for projects which
will be matched by almost $33 million from more than 90 park partners.
This program is bolstered by the Administration's legislative proposal
to fund an additional $100.0 million a year for 3 years for this
program as a permanent appropriation.
The 2017 request for the Historic Preservation Fund is $87.4
million, an increase of $22.0 million from 2016. Of this total, $46.9
million is requested for grants-in-aid to states and territories, which
is level with 2016. A total of $12.0 million is requested for grants-in
aid to tribes, an increase of $2.0 million. The remaining $20.0 million
increase is for grants to document and preserve the sites and stories
of the Civil Rights Movement; of which $17.0 million is for competitive
grants, and $3.0 million is for grants to Historically Black Colleges
and Universities.
The 2017 budget includes $54.4 million for National Recreation and
Preservation programs that support local community efforts to preserve
natural and cultural resources. This is a decrease of $8.2 million
compared to 2016. These changes consist of a program reduction of $10.4
million to Heritage Partnership Programs; and programmatic increases of
$0.9 million for modernization and digitization in the National
Register program, $0.8 million for the Preservation Technology and
Training grants program, $0.3 million for the Federal Lands to Parks
program, and fixed costs increases.
Construction funding totals $252.0 million, $59.1 million above
2016. This request provides funding critical to the implementation of
the Centennial initiative to make a meaningful impact on the NPS
deferred maintenance backlog. The budget includes $153.3 million for
line-item construction projects, a $37.1 million increase, which will
fund projects such as the $13.2 million rehabilitation of the Paradise
Inn Annex and snow bridge connection at Mount Rainier National Park in
Washington, and $13.9 million for the final phase of the rehabilitation
of the El Portal sanitary sewer to prevent raw sewage spills at
Yosemite National Park in California.
The 2017 current funding request for LWCF Land Acquisition and
State Assistance is $178.2 million, an increase of $4.6 million from
2016. This includes $110.0 million for State Assistance grants,
maintaining the increase provided in 2016. The budget requests $68.2
million for Federal Land Acquisition, an increase of $4.6 million. This
provides $26.6 for projects addressing NPS specific needs, $10.8
million for collaborative acquisition projects, $2.0 million for
projects to improve recreation access, and $10.0 million for American
Battlefield Protection Program acquisition grants. A high priority for
NPS, the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park is also part of the Island
Forests at Risk collaborative landscape proposal. An investment of $6.0
million would allow NPS to begin acquisition of a parcel which protects
the hawksbill and Green turtles, and island monk seal habitat, and
contains anchialine pond communities and coastal strands of endangered
plants. Significant archaeological sites, cultural landscapes,
petroglyphs and ancient trails are also present. Time is a concern as
the area faces potential rezoning from conservation to medium density
urban and resort development.

Indian Affairs--The 2017 President's budget for Indian Affairs is
$2.9 billion in current appropriations, $137.6 million above the 2016
level. Funding for the main operating account for Indian Affairs,
Operation of Indian Programs is $2.4 billion, $127.9 million above
2016. The 2017 request for Construction is $197.0 million, $3.0 million
above 2016.
The 2017 budget supports continuing efforts to advance self-
governance and self-determination, improve educational outcomes for
American Indian children, support human services activities, prudently
manage tribal natural resources, build stronger economies and self-
sufficiency, and maintain safer Indian communities.
Key to self-governance and self-determination is full funding for
Contract Support Costs. The 2017 request includes $278.0 million for
Contract Support Costs, $1.0 million above 2016, which will fully fund
these costs based on the most recent analysis. As in the 2016 enacted
bill, the budget requests funding for Contract Support Costs in a
separate dedicated current account. To further stabilize long-term
funding, the 2017 budget includes a legislative proposal to reclassify
these costs as permanent funding beginning in Fiscal Year 2018.
The Interior budget proposes a $1.1 billion investment in Indian
education and construction to continue to support the transformation of
the BIE to support tribes in educating their youth, and deliver an
improved and culturally appropriate education across Indian Country.
The budget includes $49.3 million in increases across a number of
programmatic areas in BIE related to the transformation.
The budget includes $138.3 million for Education Construction,
maintaining the $63.7 million increase provided in 2016. The request
will provide the funding stability necessary to develop an orderly
education construction pipeline and properly pace projects. The 2016
enacted appropriation will replace two remaining BIE school campuses on
the 2004 priority list--Little Singer Community School and Cove Day
School, both in Arizona--and support planning for the schools
identified on the new school replacement construction list nearing
finalization. The 2017 funding will be applied to construction costs
for projects chosen from the new list.
To further higher education, the budget includes increases of $9.4
million for scholarships, adult education and tribal colleges and
universities; and $3.6 million for Johnson O'Malley education grants to
provide additional resources to tribes and organizations to meet the
unique and specialized educational needs of American Indian and Alaska
Native students.
To foster public-private partnerships to improve the student
experience at BIE-funded schools, the 2017 budget again proposes
appropriations language enabling the Secretary to reactivate the
National Foundation for American Indian Education. The proposed bill
language will initiate a foundation focused on fundraising to create
opportunities for Indian students in and out of the classroom.
As part of the President's commitment to protect and promote the
development of prosperous tribal communities, Indian Affairs proposes
to expand the Tiwahe ``family'' initiative. This effort takes an
integrated approach to address the inter-related challenges impacting
the lives of youth, families, and communities in Indian Country--
including poverty, violence, and substance abuse. The Tiwahe approach
seeks to empower individuals and families through health promotion,
family stability, and strengthening communities as a whole.
The 2017 budget expands the Tiwahe initiative with increases
totaling $21.0 million for programs in social services, Indian Child
Welfare Act, housing, tribal courts, and job placement and training. To
better focus funding and evaluate outcomes in meeting social service
needs in Indian Country, the Department will evaluate social service
and community development needs in Indian Country in 2016. The
evaluation will inform programmatic design, assessments, management,
and budgeting.
The budget contains a number of increases to support tribal nation-
building and economic development. The budget includes $4.0 million for
a Native One-Stop Support Center to make it easier for tribes to find
and access hundreds of services available to tribes across the Federal
Government. The 2017 budget includes $1.0 million to help tribes adopt
uniform commercial codes which help build the legal infrastructure on
reservations to promote credit and other capital transactions. The
budget provides $12.0 million to enable Interior to work with American
Indian/Alaskan Native communities to improve Federal data quality and
availability, to create a reimbursable agreement with the Census Bureau
to address data gaps in Indian Country, and to create an Office of
Indian Affairs Policy, Program Evaluation, and Data to support
effective, data-driven, tribal policymaking and program implementation.
The budget also proposes $1.3 million increase for the Small and Needy
Tribes program to assist eligible tribes in expanding and sustaining
tribal governance.
The 2017 budget strongly supports sustainable stewardship of trust
lands, natural resources, and the environment in Indian Country. These
priorities include the protection and restoration of ecosystems and
important landscapes; stewardship of land, water, ocean, and energy
resources; resilience in the face of a changing climate; and clean and
sustainable energy development.
The budget provides a $15.1 million program increase over 2016
across eight natural resource programs to support tribes in developing
science, tools, training, planning, and implementation of actions to
build resilience into resource management, infrastructure, and
community development activities. Funding will be set-aside to support
Alaska Native Villages in the Arctic and other critically vulnerable
communities to evaluate options for the long-term resilience of their
communities. The budget also includes $2.0 million to address
subsistence management in Alaska to better prepare for the impacts of
climate change, as part of an ongoing commitment to improve the
Nation's resilience. In addition, the budget includes a total increase
of $8.7 million for trust real estate service activities to reinforce
the stewardship of trust resources. The expanded capacity will address
the probate backlog, land title and records processing, geospatial
support needs, and database management in addition to providing
expanded technical and legal support for authorized settlements
involving tribal water rights.
The 2017 budget request for Indian Land and Water Claim Settlements
is $55.2 million, a $5.7 million increase over the 2016 enacted level
for payments on enacted settlements.
The budget includes $25.0 million for the final payment to the
Aamodt settlement and $10.0 million in one-time funding to provide the
Yurok Tribe, located in Northern California, funds to acquire lands as
authorized in the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act. This acquisition supports
efforts by the Yurok Tribe, state of California, private foundations
and individual donors to conserve over 47,000 acres of the Klamath-
Siskiyou ecoregion to ensure the long-term health of temperate forests,
rare wildlife, and extraordinary runs of wild salmon. The land, to be
conserved as a salmon sanctuary and sustainable community forest, will
restore the Yurok Tribe's historic connection to the land, support the
Yurok economy through jobs in forestry and restoration, and provide
revenue to the tribe through sustainable timber and salmon harvests and
the sale of carbon credits. The budget also includes increases totaling
$12.9 million in the Operation of Indian Programs account to provide
expanded technical and legal support for tribal water rights settlement
negotiations and implementation. A reduction of $29.2 million in the
settlement account reflects completion of the Taos Pueblos water
settlement in 2016.
The 2017 budget request for the Indian Guaranteed Loan Program is
$7.8 million, the same as 2016, which will provide loan guarantee and
insurance authority for $106.0 million in loan principal to support
Indian economic development.

Departmental Offices--The 2017 budget request for Departmental
Operations is $278.4 million, a decrease of $443.4 million below the
2016 enacted level. The decrease reflects a reduction of $452.0 million
associated with the Payments in Lieu of Taxes program. In 2017, the
budget proposes to fund PILT as permanent funding not subject to
appropriation. State and local governments depend on PILT funding to
finance such vital services as firefighting and police protection,
construction of public schools and roads, and search and rescue
operations. Providing a mandatory source of funding will create greater
certainty that PILT investments will be available in future years. The
budget proposes mandatory PILT funding for 1 year, while a sustainable
long-term funding solution is developed for the program.
The budget proposes program increases of $1.5 million for work with
the National Invasive Species Council to develop an Early Detection
Rapid Response framework. Early detection and rapid response (EDRR) has
the potential to result in significant cost savings, as compared to
battling invasive species such as Asian carp, cheatgrass, and emerald
ash borer once established. The EDRR request support multiple pilot
projects to demonstrate early detection and rapid response approaches,
as well as conducting assessments to identify current capacities and
gaps in capacities to implement EDRR.
The budget includes $1.0 million for Native Hawaiian community
development through capacity building and technical assistance. This
request will allow the Department to provide support to Native
Hawaiians similar to the capacity building and technical assistance the
Department provides to other Native Americans, and the Insular areas
consistent with the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act and Hawaiian Homes
Land Recovery Act. The Department will work with the Native Hawaiian
community on a variety of economic, social, and cultural projects.
The 2017 Budget includes critical investments to ensure
effectiveness and compliance of Interior information technology
investments. The request includes $3.0 million to develop a Digital
Service Team responsible for driving the efficiency and effectiveness
of the Department's highest-impact digital services. Additional
information technology investments are proposed under the Working
Capital Fund appropriated account.
Within the request for Departmental Operations is $129.3 million
for Office of Natural Resources Revenue's receipts management programs,
$3.8 million above 2016. The increase includes $968,000 to fully fund
Osage Trust Accounting responsibilities in compliance with the Osage
settlement agreement; $1.0 million to expand Geospatial Information
Systems; and $1.2 million to strengthen ONRR's audit and compliance
mission activities.
The 2017 request for the Office of Insular Affairs is $102.7
million, $12.4 million above the 2016 level excluding Palau Compact
Extension funding of $13.1 million. The 2017 budget proposes $149.0
million in permanent funding to support enactment of a new Compact with
Palau. The appropriated funding request includes increases of $4.0
million for community, landscape and infrastructure adaptation and
resilience initiatives; $3.9 million to improve health and safety
conditions in insular school facilities; $2.0 million to implement
energy projects; $2.0 million for Coral Reef Initiative and Natural
Resources; $1.6 million for direct technical assistance grants; and
$1.0 million to support invasive species eradication efforts, including
the coconut rhinoceros beetle and little fire ant. Brown Treesnake
Control is funded at $3.0 million, a program decrease of $500,000,
reflecting completion of an automated aerial bait system in 2015. The
budget requests $3.3 million for Compact of Free Association, level
with 2016, excluding $13.1 million provided for Palau Compact Extension
in 2016.
The budget includes $69.4 million for the Office of the Solicitor,
$3.6 million above 2016 to support additional personnel and necessary
legal services for delivering the Department's mission. The Office of
the Solicitor's ability to provide early and continuous legal counsel
in new priority areas to ensure that developing programs are grounded
in established legal principles and precedents is absolutely vital. The
requested increase will allow the Office of the Solicitor to provide
the much needed preventive assistance that is lost to the demands of
non-discretionary litigation. The additional funding will also be used
to restart the Honors Program, where recent law graduates are hired at
the entry level and trained to assume senior positions. This program
will ensure DOI has experienced lawyers as many senior staff becomes
eligible for retirement.
The request for the Office of the Inspector General is $55.9
million, $5.9 million above 2016 to support audits concerning Offshore
Energy Oversight, Indian Country, and Cybersecurity, and Offshore
Energy Investigations.
The Office of the Special Trustee request is $140.4 million, $1.4
million above 2016. The budget includes increases of $1.5 million to
provide additional estate planning opportunities to Indian Trust
beneficiaries; $1.3 million for an appraiser training program to
address the shortage of qualified appraisers and the resulting delays
in completing appraisal evaluations; $1.5 million to enhance talent
management capabilities and systems automation; and less than $400,000
to modernize and improve business processes and enhance the Trust Funds
Accounting System. These increases are partially offset by a $3.4
million reduction in funding for Historical Trust Accounting based on
anticipated workload levels.

Department-wide Programs--The 2017 request for the Department's
Wildland Fire Management program is $824.6 million without the proposed
fire cap adjustment, and $1.1 billion including the adjustment. The
base budget includes $276.3 million for fire suppression, which is 70
percent of the 10-year suppression average spending. The cap adjustment
of $290.0 million covers the remaining 30 percent of the 10-year
average and provides a contingency. The cap adjustment would only be
used for the most severe fires, since it is 2 percent of the fires that
cause 30 percent of the costs. The new budget framework for Wildland
Fire Management eliminates the need for additional funds through the
FLAME Act.
The 2017 budget includes $179.1 million for Fuels Management and
Resilient Landscapes subactivities, $9.1 million above 2016 enacted. Of
this, $30.0 million is proposed in a new Resilient Landscapes
subactivity to build on resilient landscapes activities supported by
Congress in 2015 and 2016. This equates to a $20.0 million increase for
the program to take better advantage of the shared goals of bureau
resource management programs to treat large landscapes to achieve and
maintain fire-adapted ecosystems that both reduce the threat of
catastrophic wildfire and achieve restoration and other ecological
objectives. The increase for Resilient Landscapes is partially offset
with a program realignment of $21.7 million in the Fuels Management
program from 2016.
Other highlights in the Wildland Fire Management budget include an
increase of $6.9 million in Preparedness to maintain or strengthen
initial and extended attack capacity. Specific increases include $2.8
million to enhance the initial attack capability of rural fire
departments and rural fire protection associations. The budget includes
program increases of $1.6 million to purchase replacement vehicles for
the BIA fire program and $1.5 million to cover utility costs for the
Alaska Fire Service's leased space. The budget includes $20.4 million
for Burned Area Rehabilitation, a $1.5 million increase to address
greater post-fire rehabilitation needs caused by the 2015 and 2016 fire
seasons; and $10.0 million for Facilities Construction and Deferred
Maintenance, a $3.6 million increase to address the deferred
maintenance backlog.
The 2017 budget request for the Central Hazardous Materials Fund is
$13.5 million, $3.5 million above 2016, to fund the remedial design for
the Red Devil Mine cleanup in Alaska. The 2017 request for Natural
Resource Damage Assessment and Restoration is $9.2 million, $1.5
million above 2016 to increase restoration activities.
The 2017 budget proposes $111.5 million for the appropriated
portion of the Department's Working Capital Fund, $44.4 million above
2016. The majority of the increase, $24.7 million, continues
cybersecurity remediation in the wake of the serious cyber intrusions
experienced during 2015. Other increases include: $10.2 million to
support the Department's multi-year effort to implement requirements
identified under the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act, known
as the DATA Act, and monitor compliance; $5.2 million for the
Department's Office Consolidation Strategy; $2.6 million to fund
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act coordination and
reporting activities for the Department; $1.0 million for Cultural and
Scientific Collections; and $702,000 for Service First activities.

Legislative Proposals

The 2017 President's budget includes a suite of legislative and
offsetting collection proposals affecting spending, revenues, and
available budget authority that require action by the congressional
authorizing committees. These mandatory proposals address a range of
Administration priorities, from investing in high-priority conservation
and recreation programs to achieving a fair return to the American
taxpayer from the sale of Federal resources and reducing unnecessary
spending. The 2017 budget includes seven spending proposals with an
estimated $18.0 billion in outlays over the next decade. This spending
is partially offset by revenue and savings proposals to reduce outlays
from the Treasury by an estimated $4.5 billion over the next decade.

Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act and the Coastal Climate
Resilience Program--The Administration is committed to ensuring
American taxpayers receive a fair return from the sale of public
resources and taxpayers throughout the country benefit from the
development of offshore energy resources owned by all Americans. The
Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act of 2006 opened some additional areas
in the Gulf of Mexico for offshore oil and gas leasing, while
maintaining moratoria on activities east of the Military Mission Line
and within certain distances from the coastline of Florida. The Act
provides that 37.5 percent of Outer Continental Shelf revenues from
certain leases be distributed to just four coastal states--Alabama,
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas--and their local governments based on
a complex allocation formula. The Administration proposes to repeal
GOMESA revenue-sharing payments to these select states from Gulf of
Mexico oil and gas leases, which are set to expand substantially
starting in 2018.
More than half of the savings, $2.0 billion, from the repeal of
GOMESA revenue sharing payments to states will be redirected to a new
Coastal Climate Resilience Program to provide resources for at-risk
coastal states, local governments, and their communities to prepare for
and adapt to climate change. A portion of these program funds would be
set aside to cover the unique impacts of climate change in Alaska where
some native villages are so threatened by rising seas, coastal erosion,
and storm surges, that they must prepare for potential relocation.

Historic Preservation Fund--The budget includes a legislative
proposal to extend the authority to deposit $150.0 million in receipts
from offshore oil and gas revenues annually into the Historic
Preservation Fund.

Bureau of Indian Affairs Contract Support Costs--The budget
includes a legislative proposal to reclassify funding for the existing
Contract Support Costs program from discretionary to mandatory
beginning in Fiscal Year 2018. The budget proposes to adjust the
discretionary budget caps to reflect the reclassification to mandatory
funding. New contract support cost estimates will be provided on a 3-
year cycle as part of the reauthorization process.

POWER+ Accelerate AML Distribution for Mine Cleanup and Economic
Recovery--The budget proposes to allocate a portion of the remaining
unappropriated balance of the Abandoned Mine Lands Fund to target the
cleanup and redevelopment of AML sites and AML coal mine polluted
waters in a manner that facilitates sustainable revitalization in
economically depressed coalfield communities. The proposal will provide
$1.0 billion over 5 years to states based on AML program and economic
eligibility factors--such as the unemployment rate of coal mining
regions--and remaining priority coal problems, including abandoned mine
drainage, where reclamation linked to job creating economic development
strategies will help revitalize impacted communities.

United Mineworkers of America Pension Reform--The budget proposes
to better provide for retired coal miners and their families by
revising the formula for general fund payments to the 1993 UMWA Health
Benefit Plan. The new formula will consider all beneficiaries enrolled
in the plan as of enactment, as well as those retirees whose health
benefits were denied or reduced as the result of a bituminous coal
industry bankruptcy proceeding commenced in 2012. Additionally, the
proposal will transfer funds through the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation to the trustees of the 1974 UMWA Pension Plan to ensure the
plan's long-term solvency. The plan, which covers more than 100,000
mineworkers, is underfunded and approaching insolvency. The new formula
will provide an additional $375.0 million to the UMWA in 2017 and $4.2
billion over 10 years.

Land and Water Conservation Fund--The budget proposes $900.0
million in combined current and mandatory funding in 2017, and starting
in 2018, the budget proposes permanent authorization of $900.0 million
in mandatory funding for LWCF programs in the Departments of the
Interior and Agriculture. During a transition to mandatory funding in
2017, the budget proposes $425.0 million for mandatory funding and
$475.0 million for current funding, to be shared by Interior and
Agriculture.

National Parks Centennial Act--The budget proposes enactment of
legislation, the National Park Service Centennial Act, to honor the
Park Service's 100th anniversary. The Act specifically authorizes the
following: $100.0 million a year for 3 years for the Centennial
Challenge to leverage private donations; $300.0 million a year for 3
years for NPS deferred maintenance; and $100.0 million a year for 3
years for a Public Lands Centennial Fund, which will competitively
allocate funds for projects on public lands to enhance visitor services
and outdoor recreation opportunities, restore lands, repair facilities,
and increase energy and water efficiency. The availability of mandatory
funding to address deferred maintenance and other conservation projects
will allow NPS to plan ahead more efficiently to achieve significant
results. Stable and predictable funding streams will allow projects to
be appropriately scheduled and phased for more effective project
delivery and completion. The proposal includes the authority to collect
additional camping or lodging fees, and funds from purchases of the
lifetime pass for citizens 62 years of age or older. Receipts for this
Second Century Fund will be matched by donations in order to fund
visitor enhancement projects. The impact of this new revenue source is
estimated at $40.4 million in 2017. Also included is a proposal to
establish a program to allow a Visitor Services Management Authority to
award and manage contracts for the operation of commercial visitor
services programs and activities.

Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act--The budget proposes to
reauthorize this Act which expired on July 25, 2011, to allow lands
identified as suitable for disposal in recent land use plans to be sold
using this authority. The sales revenue will be used to fund the
acquisition of environmentally sensitive lands and administrative costs
associated with conducting the sales.

Recreation Fee Program--The budget proposes legislation to
permanently authorize the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act,
authorized through September 30, 2017. The program currently brings in
an estimated $335 million in recreation fees annually under this
authority that are used to enhance the visitor experience on Federal
land recreation sites.

Federal Oil and Gas Reforms--The budget includes a package of
legislative reforms to bolster administrative actions to reform
management of Interior's onshore and offshore oil and gas programs,
with a key focus on improving the return to taxpayers from the sale of
these Federal resources and on improving transparency and oversight.
Proposed statutory and administrative changes fall into three general
categories: advancing royalty reforms, encouraging diligent development
of oil and gas leases, and improving revenue collection processes.
Collectively, these reforms will generate roughly $1.7 billion in
revenue to the Treasury over 10 years, of which $1.2 billion will
result from statutory changes. Many states also will benefit from
higher Federal revenue sharing payments as a result of these reforms.

Palau Compact--On September 3, 2010, the United States and the
Republic of Palau successfully concluded the review of the Compact of
Free Association and signed a 15-year agreement that includes a package
of assistance. The budget assumes authorization of mandatory funding
for the Compact in 2017 to strengthen the foundations for economic
development in Palau by developing public infrastructure and improving
health care and education. The cost for this proposal for 2017-2024 is
$149.0 million.

Payments in Lieu of Taxes--The budget proposes to extend PILT
mandatory funding for an additional year with the current PILT payment
formula based on the amount of Federal land within an eligible unit of
local government, its population, and certain other Federal payments
the local government may receive. The cost of a 1-year extension of the
PILT program is estimated to be $480.0 million in 2017.

Reclamation of Abandoned Hardrock Mines--The budget proposes to
create an Abandoned Mine Lands Program for abandoned hardrock sites
financed through a new AML fee on hardrock production on both public
and private lands. The fee is estimated to generate $1.8 billion
through 2026 to reclaim the highest priority hardrock abandoned sites
on Federal, state, tribal, and private lands.

Reform Hardrock Mining on Federal Lands--The budget proposes to
institute a leasing program under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 for
certain hardrock minerals, including gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper,
uranium, and molybdenum, currently covered by the General Mining Law of
1872. Half of the receipts will be distributed to the states in which
the leases are located and the remaining half will be deposited in the
U.S. Treasury. The proposal is projected to generate revenues to the
U.S. Treasury of $80.0 million over 10 years, with larger revenues
estimated in following years.

Return Coal Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Fees to Historic
Levels--The budget proposes legislation to modify the 2006 amendments
to the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, which lowered the
per-ton coal fee companies pay into the AML Fund. The proposal would
return the current fee of 28 cents per ton of surface mined coal to 35
cents a ton, the same level companies paid prior to the 2006 fee
reduction. The additional revenue, estimated at $258 million over 10
years, will be used to reclaim high priority abandoned coal mines and
reduce a portion of the estimated $6.0 billion needed to address
remaining dangerous coal AML sites nationwide.

Termination of AML Payments to Certified States--The 2017 budget
proposes to discontinue unrestricted payments to states and tribes
certified for completing their coal reclamation work. This proposal
terminates all such payments with estimated savings of $520.0 million
over the next 10 years.

Termination of EPAct Geothermal Payments to Counties--The 2017
budget proposes to repeal Section 224(b) of the Energy Policy Act of
2005 to permanently discontinue payments to counties and restore the
disposition of Federal geothermal leasing revenues to the historical
formula of 50 percent to the states and 50 percent to the Treasury.
This results in estimated savings of $41.0 million over 10 years.

Bureau of Land Management Foundation--The budget proposes to
establish a congressionally chartered National BLM Foundation to
leverage private funding to support public lands, achieve shared
outcomes, and focus public support on the BLM mission.

National Foundation for American Indian Education--The budget
proposes appropriations language enabling the Secretary to reactivate a
foundation created by Congress in 2000 to generate private donations in
support of the mission of the Bureau of Indian Education. The proposal
will allow the foundation to start anew to obtain nonprofit tax exempt
status, with a new Board of Directors focused on making the foundation
a successful fund raising entity.

Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamp Act--Duck Stamp--The
budget includes a legislative proposal to provide limited authority to
increase the price of a Duck Stamp, with the approval of the Migratory
Bird Conservation Commission, to keep pace with inflation.

Wildland Fire Suppression Disaster Cap Adjustment--The budget
proposes to amend the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
to establish a new framework for funding Fire Suppression Operations to
provide stable funding, while minimizing the adverse impacts of fire
transfers on the budgets of other programs. Under this new framework,
the 2017 budget request covers 70 percent of the 10-year suppression
average within the domestic discretionary cap or $276.3 million for the
Department of the Interior. This base level ensures the cap adjustment
will only be used for the most severe fire activity as 2 percent of the
fires incur 30 percent of the costs. Only extreme fires that require
emergency response or are near urban areas or activities during
abnormally active fire seasons--which rightly should be considered
disasters--will be permitted to be funded through the adjustment to the
discretionary spending limits. For 2017, the request for the budget cap
adjustment for the Department is $290.0 million. The cap adjustment
does not increase overall spending, as the ceiling for the existing
disaster relief cap will be reduced by the same amount as the increase
required for fire suppression.

Offsetting Collections and Fees

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Risk Management Fee--The budget
proposes appropriations language for a new cost recovery fee to recoup
funds for services rendered by the Risk Management Program. The program
is critical to protecting the American taxpayer from becoming
financially responsible for liabilities associated with oil and gas and
renewable energy operations on the Outer Continental Shelf. This
proposed fee will generate an estimated $2.9 million annually, fully
offsetting the requested risk management programmatic increase in 2017.

Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Inspection Fee--The
budget includes appropriations language modifying and expanding the
enacted inspection fee language to clarify that facilities subject to
multiple inspections are subject to additional fees for each
inspection. The BSEE estimates the inspection fees will generate $65.0
million in 2017.

Fee for Onshore Oil and Gas Inspections--Through appropriations
language, Interior proposes to implement inspection fees in 2017 for
onshore oil and gas activities subject to inspection by BLM. The
proposed inspection fees are expected to generate $48.0 million in
2017, level with 2016. The fees are similar to those already in place
for offshore operations and will support Federal efforts to increase
production accountability, safety, and environmental protection.

Grazing Administrative Fee--The budget proposes a grazing
administrative fee to offset costs to administer the program. The
budget proposes to implement a fee of $2.50 per animal unit month
through appropriations language on a pilot basis. Interior estimates
the fee will generate $16.5 million in 2017 to support the Rangeland
Management program at the 2016 level. During the period of the pilot,
BLM will work to promulgate regulations to continue this cost recovery
fee administratively, once the pilot expires.

National Wildlife Refuge Damage Cost Recovery--The budget includes
appropriations language to authorize the Fish and Wildlife Service to
retain recoveries for the cost to restore or replace damaged habitat
from responsible parties.

Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's 2017
budget request for the Department of the Interior. This budget is
responsible, and proposes to maintain core capabilities with targeted
investments to advance the stewardship of lands and resources,
renewable energy, oil and gas development and reforms, water
conservation, youth employment and engagement, and improvements in the
quality of life in Indian communities. I thank you again for your
continued support of the Department's mission. I look forward to
answering questions about this budget. This concludes my written
statement.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Sally Jewell, Secretary,
Department of the Interior
Questions Submitted by Subcommittee on Federal Lands Staff
Question 1. How much collectively, are your agencies requesting to
address deferred maintenance? With that requested amount, will the
backlog go up, down, or stay the same? Why?

Answer. The Department of the Interior owns and operates over
110,000 buildings and structures, more than 100,000 miles of public
roads, and a wide variety of other constructed assets such as dams,
irrigation systems, and trails. These facilities serve nearly 500
million visitors annually, provide schooling for approximately 46,000
Native American children, and are a place of work for Interior
employees. The current replacement value of these assets exceeds $240
billion. As the steward of these assets, Interior is committed to
improving the condition of these existing facilities and making the
capital investments in facilities that are critical to its mission.
In the 2017 President's Budget, the Department requested a total of
over $1.4 billion in discretionary funding for maintenance needs across
Interior's bureaus and offices. The budget estimates that an additional
$133.2 million in recreation fees will be directed toward maintenance
in 2017.
Roughly half of the deferred maintenance backlog is attributable to
roads, bridges and tunnels--critical infrastructure that has been
historically funded through Interior's discretionary appropriation and
through Title 23 mandatory funding. The recently authorized Fixing
America's Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act) will provide this
mandatory funding from 2016 through 2020 for federally owned roads
through the Federal Lands Transportation Program. In 2017, this equates
to $276 million for the National Park Service, $30 million for the Fish
and Wildlife Service, and $22 million in competitively awarded funds
for other agencies, including the Bureaus of Land Management and
Reclamation. In addition, the Tribal Transportation Program, operated
jointly by the Federal Highway Administration and the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA), will provide $475 million for roads that provide access
to tribal lands or are owned by tribes or the BIA.
While these represent significant investments in maintenance
funding across the Department, the magnitude of the need is high as
well. At the beginning of FY 2015, deferred maintenance for all DOI
bureaus was reported as $15.6 billion. At the end of FY 2015, this had
grown to $16.1 billion. While Interior employs strategies such as a 5-
year capital planning process to ensure that funding is directed toward
the highest priority projects, we do not foresee a reduction in the
total amount of deferred maintenance in the near future.

Question 2. According to DOI, over the last 5 years 99 percent of
the Department's acquisitions were inholdings, already within existing
park or wildlife refuge units.

2a. What percentage of the total acquisitions over the last 5 years
using LWCF money have been inholdings, meaning a parcel that directly
abuts Federal land on at lease majority of its border?

Answer. Over the last 5 years, 99 percent of the Federal lands
acquired by with LWCF funds were inholdings, lands within the
authorized boundaries of a conservation unit, such as a national park
or wildlife refuge. Acquisition of inholdings can reduce maintenance
and management costs by decreasing boundary conflicts, simplifying
resource management activities, and facilitating access to and through
public lands. Since 2011, Congress has appropriated funding for four
projects where acquisitions did not lie completely within the boundary
of an existing conservation unit at the time of the appropriation, but
were adjacent to or bisected by the boundary (known as
``edgeholdings''). In all instances, acquisitions using LWCF funding
were authorized by the LWCF Act and by congressional appropriations.

2b. What percentage of the total acquisitions using LWCF money have
been used to acquire land that does not border existing Federal land at
all, but is within a Federal management area, like a Park Service Unit
or Wildlife Refuge?

Answer. As noted above, over the last 5 years, 99 percent of the
Federal lands acquired by with LWCF funds were inholdings, lands within
the authorized boundaries of a conservation unit, such as a national
park or wildlife refuge. Acquisition of inholdings can reduce
maintenance and management costs by decreasing boundary conflicts,
simplifying resource management activities, and facilitating access to
and through public lands. Since 2011, Congress has appropriated funding
for four projects where acquisitions did not lie completely within the
boundary of an existing conservation unit at the time of the
appropriation, but were adjacent to or bisected by the boundary (known
as ``edgeholdings''). In all instances, acquisitions using LWCF funding
were authorized by the LWCF Act and by congressional appropriations.
We also note that land within a conservation unit need not adjoin
existing Federal land to achieve resource protection goals. For
example, certain federally listed species occur only on specific sites,
and do not require large contiguous blocks of habitat. A FWS refuge's
acquisition boundary might contain 10 different sites that support
self-sustaining or potentially self-sustaining populations of a
federally listed species, and the FWS may want to acquire all of these
separate sites, in fee or easement. In such instances, it may not be
necessary or cost-effective to acquire even more land simply to connect
these sites to existing Federal land.

2c. If land, purchased with LWCF funding, is acquired by the
Federal Government for recreational purposes, does DOI commit to
building trailheads, infrastructure, and other recreational facilities
on that parcel?

Answer. If the Department purchases land for recreational purposes
using LWCF funds, there is an implicit commitment that we will develop
the appropriate infrastructure needed for public use and enjoyment of
the land. However, land purchased for passive recreational purposes may
not need much infrastructure. Locally developed management plans for
each park or refuge determine the future use of the acquired lands and
what, if any, visitor facilities should be placed on the land.

2d. Does DOI have any ability to account for and assure
recreational use of a parcel or easement after it has been acquired
using LWCF dollars? If no, how can you be sure that it is being used
for that purpose?

Answer. Yes. If land or an easement has been acquired for
recreational purposes, Department will manage the lands in accordance
with the local management plans of the BLM, FWS and NPS.
In fact, when considering a parcel for acquisition, FLPMA requires
that the acquisition be consistent with any approved land use plan and
the LWCF evaluation process seeks to build on recreational
opportunities for the public in the use and enjoyment of their public
lands. Through BLM's record notation system, LR2000 and Master Title
Plats, BLM flags parcels that are acquired with LWCF and therefore, not
available for disposal.
Similarly, when the FWS, with a mission to work with others to
conserve, protect, and enhance fish, wildlife, and plants and their
habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people, acquires
land in fee, the land becomes part of the fabric of the refuge, and is
managed in accordance with the refuge's overall Comprehensive
Conservation Plan. If the stated purpose of a refuge is compatible with
wildlife-dependent recreation, the refuge is typically open to the
public. While the vast majority of refuges are open to the public for
wildlife-dependent recreation, there are instances where portions of a
refuge or an entire refuge cannot be opened for recreation because
recreational activity would be unsafe or would jeopardize fragile
wildlife habitat. Furthermore, the FWS acquires the minimum interest
necessary to reach management objectives. Therefore, acquisition of
conservation easements may be the best option for the FWS and the
community. However, easements may not permit public recreation if
property owners do not wish to have people on their land, especially if
the landowners are still actively farming the land or using the land
for livestock.
And finally, the NPS provides for visitor enjoyment of the
resources located within each of the units of the National Park System.
If a national park unit includes lands that were purchased with LWCF
funds specifically for recreational purposes, the management plan would
reflect that. NPS maintains records of visitation for each unit.

2e. How much of DOI's deferred maintenance backlog can be
attributed to lands acquired using LWCF funding?

Answer. Acquisition of land utilizing LWCF funding does not
significantly contribute to the Department's deferred maintenance
backlog. For example in the FY 2016 NPS request, only 11 of the 40
line-item land acquisition requests anticipate costs for operations and
maintenance of the lands, while 9 project savings and 20 are neutral.
In the FY 2017 NPS request, 1 of the 32 requests has structures that
will be maintained. Furthermore, acquisition of inholdings can reduce
maintenance and management costs by decreasing boundary conflicts,
simplifying resource management activities, and facilitating access to
and through public lands.

2f. When DOI agencies purchase land using LWCF money, does it
commit to performing short- or long-term maintenance on that parcel?

Answer. When the Department's agencies acquire land by any means,
those agencies become responsible for the acquired lands. The
Department is committed to the long-term management of Federal lands.
We also note that BLM generally avoids acquisition of land encumbered
with facilities, and, more often than not, the parcels acquired within
specially designated areas require no additional maintenance and
provide the ability to more efficiently manage the landscape.
Similarly, when FWS acquires property in fee, it manages the property
as wildlife habitat and typically incurs no annual maintenance costs.
And, for the NPS, the need to protect and preserve the resources and
enhance visitor safety and satisfaction within units of the National
Park System will determine what, if any, maintenance will be performed.

2g. What percentage of lands and easements acquired with LWCF money
in the last 15 years was purchased from a land trust or other non-
governmental organization?

Answer. For the NPS, from January 1, 2000, through March, 2016,
9,690 tracts were acquired by all methods. Of that, 539 tracts (or 5.5
percent) were purchased from non-governmental organizations.
For the FWS, purchases from non-governmental organizations
represent approximately 30 percent of total acres (169,574 of 571,255
acres) and 39 percent ($241,272,046 of $620,329,745) of the LWCF
project funding over the last 15 years.

2h. What percentage of lands and easements acquired with LWCF money
in the last 15 years was purchased in tandem with funds provided by a
land trust or other non-governmental organization?
Answer. The Department does not separately track the percentage of
lands and easements acquired with LWCF that are purchased in tandem
with funds provided by a land trust or other non-governmental
organization. In many cases, non-governmental organizations purchase
lands that may otherwise be lost for conservation purposes and hold
those lands until Federal agencies secure appropriations to acquire the
land.

Question 3. The ESA requires the Secretary to conduct, at least
once every 5 years, a review of all species included on the list of
threatened and endangered species and determine whether any such
species should be delisted, downlisted, or uplisted.
How many status reviews has the Service budgeted for Fiscal Year
2017, and what is the estimated cost?

Answer. The Service conducts 5-year reviews in every fiscal year,
but the number of reviews completed varies based on workload and
priorities. Recovery planning, implementation, and monitoring, as well
as proposed and final downlisting and delisting rules are funded with
the same recovery subactivity in the budget; in some years, those
activities may take priority over 5-year reviews. We do not budget for
5-year reviews separately and thus have not developed an estimate of
the number of reviews or total cost for this particular activity.

Question 4. According to you, this Administration has delisted more
``recovered'' species than any other since the ESA was enacted.
According to the Fish & Wildlife Service's FY 2017 budget
justification, approximately 49 species have 5-year reviews that
recommend downlisting or delisting. Millions of dollars have been
allocated to the Service for conservation and restoration activities in
previous years, which covers de-listing and downlisting activities.

4a. Why haven't those de-listings and downlisting taken place?

Answer. One of the major goals of the Endangered Species Act is to
minimize or remove the threats that led to a species listing so that it
can be delisted or reclassified--or downlisted--from ``Endangered'' to
``Threatened.'' The development of a recovery plan is one of the first
steps toward meeting that goal. Recovery plans help guide and measure
the progress of the recovery process. The Endangered Species Act,
directs FWS to develop and facilitate implementation of recovery plans
for listed species, monitor the implementation and effectiveness of
recovery actions, review the status of each species at least every 5
years, develop rules for reclassification and delisting of species
whose status has improved, and evaluate and respond to petitions to
delist or reclassify species. All of these require close coordination
with our partners as well as sufficient time to monitor and implement
adaptive management. Given the growing number of listed species and the
resources available, the Recovery Program must make difficult trade-
offs among the activities identified above, all of which are important
for achieving recovery of listed species. The Service's FY 2017 budget
request would direct additional funds toward the proposed or final
rules based on the 5-year review recommendations.

4b. When will the Service take action on those 49 species?

Answer. The Service plans to pursue downlisting or delisting for
the 49 species as soon as possible within available resources and based
on the trade-offs among the varying priority recovery actions.

4c. How does the Service define the backlog of delistings and
downlistings? For instance, how much time has to pass before a
potential delisting or downlisting is considered backlogged?

Answer. ``Backlog'' is a term of art, not one derived from the
language of the Act. In this context, it refers to the species for
which a 5-year review has recommended that a delisting or downlisting
proposal is warranted, but for which the Service has yet to initiate
such a rulemaking.

Question 5. Your department recently finalized rules under the ESA
that would allow it to designate critical habitat in areas that are not
only unoccupied, but that never have been occupied, with the
supposition that you would designate them because they may be needed in
the future for the species based upon climate change related
expectations. The rule essentially allows the Service to designate
critical habitat in areas where a species has never lived. It appears
as if the rule asserts authority that is entirely untethered from the
authority granted by Congress in the Act itself.

5a. Do you believe Congress ever intended the Secretary to have the
authority to designate habitat where a species has never lived simply
because you may believe that at some future point that area might be
needed because of climate change or habitat adaptation?

Answer. The Act expressly allows for the consideration and
inclusion of unoccupied habitat in a critical habitat designation if
such habitat is determined to be essential for the conservation of the
species. The FWS determines whether unoccupied areas are essential for
the conservation of the species by considering the best available
scientific data regarding the life-history, status, and conservation
needs of the species.
There have been specific circumstances, as discussed in our final
rule, where data show or predict a shift in habitat availability or use
by a species in response to the effects of climate change. An example
might be a landward shift in tidal marsh habitat as a result of
predicted sea level rise. In cases where the best scientific data
available indicate that a species may be shifting habitats or habitat
use, it is permissible to include specific areas accommodating these
changes in a designation, provided that the Services can explain why
the areas meet the definition of ``critical habitat.'' The data and
rationale on which such a designation is based will be clearly
articulated in our proposed rule designating critical habitat.

5b. Do you believe that these rules will lead to a significant
increase in the amount of critical habitat designated by the Service?

Answer. No, the changes to the regulation are not expected to
significantly expand the areas included in any particular critical
habitat designation. We expect that the concurrent evaluation of
occupied and unoccupied areas for a critical habitat designation will
allow us to develop better designations that can serve as more
effective conservation tools, focusing conservation resources where
needed and minimizing regulatory burdens where not necessary.

5c. Does the Service have the resources to manage an upsurge in the
amount of overall critical habitat for listed species?

Answer. As stated above, we do not expect the changes to the
regulation to significantly expand the area included in any particular
critical habitat designation.

Question 6. Despite the fact that the Service has requested over
millions of dollars to acquire thousands of acres of land, the agency
has proposed to eliminate the discretionary portion the National
Wildlife Refuge Fund, which provides revenue sharing payments to
counties with National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS) lands. According
to the Service's budget justification, ``[r]efuges often generate tax
revenue for communities far in excess of that which was lost with
Federal acquisition of the land.''

6a. How much economic development is generated from NWRS lands per
acre?

Answer. The Service has not done a per acre analysis, however,
according to the Service's 2013 Banking on Nature Report, 47 million
people who visited refuges in 2012 contributed a total of $2.4 billion
of sales to nearby local economies.

6b. What is the return on investment of the NWRS, in terms of money
appropriated to manage the system and revenue generated?

Answer. The Service's 2013 Banking on Nature Report estimated that
refuge visitors generated $342.9 million in tax revenues and $2.4
billion of sales in 2012 in a year that the NWRS was appropriated
$485.7 million. This represents a [5:1] return on investment for every
Federal dollar expended. The 2016 appropriation to manage the National
Wildlife Refuge System was $481.4 million, but at this time, there is
no estimate of what the return on that investment will be.

Question 7. Currently, there are over 64,000 wild horse and burros
on Federal lands with nearly 50,000 in long-term holding facilities. In
FY 2015, the BLM spent $75.2 million on the horse and burro program.
Taxpayer dollars were used to remove a small number of horses from the
rangelands ($1.8 million), adopt out approximately 2,000 horses ($6.3
million), and care for horses and burro in long- and short-term holding
facilities ($49.4 million). Costs continue to increase every year, as
horse and burro populations continue to grow.

7a. Does the BLM have a plan to address the unsustainable horse and
burro program and return population levels to the appropriate
management level (AML) of 27,000 animals as established in law?

7b. Why is BLM not keeping up with required appropriate management
levels?

7c. Is BLM removing a sufficient number of animals from the range
to keep up?

7d. Does BLM have capacity at its short- and long-term holding
facilities?

7e. If so, why are more animals not being removed from the range
and placed in holding? BLM has received substantial funding level
increases in the last several years to do so.

Answer. BLM faces many challenges in managing wild horse and burro
populations on public rangelands, including a rapid population growth
rate and no natural predators. Costs also continue to increase, for
both pasture and holding facilities, and adoptions have steadily
declined since the early 2000s, increasing the number of animals in
off-range holding corrals.
BLM is now managing more than twice as many horses on the western
rangelands as is recommended for a healthy balance between horses,
wildlife, cattle, and other resources. Horses that are removed from the
range, but remain in the care of the agency at a cost to the American
taxpayer of nearly $50,000 per animal over the animal's lifetime; put
simply, the costs of this program are substantial and unsustainable.
On-range annual population increases are substantially greater than
the number that the BLM removes each year. The Program is currently
limiting removals to 3,500 per year, about the same number that leave
holding facilities annually through adoptions, sales, and mortality
attrition. Financial resources are not adequate to care for greater
numbers of animals than are currently in off-range facilities.
With more than 100,000 horses in BLM's care both on and off the
range, the agency is redoubling its efforts to reduce the number of
horses in holding facilities. The BLM aims to reduce that cost by
moving more animals from long-term corrals to contracted pasture
spaces, which are more cost effective and would reduce the lifetime
cost of caring for an unadopted animal. However, we recognize that this
is only part of the solution. The FY 2017 budget request supports new,
innovative efforts to secure safe and cost-effective placement for
unadopted animals, which will work in tandem with more proactive
efforts beginning in 2016 to better manage the overpopulation problem.
In addition to expanding use of contraceptives and spay and neuter
treatments, the BLM is proposing legislation to better facilitate the
transfer of animals to other public entities, including local, state,
and Federal Government agencies.

Question 8. Just a few weeks ago, the Federal grazing fee was
raised by the maximum 25 percent allowed by law in any given year.

8a. Please provide the data that was used to support this price
increase.

8b. How old is the livestock price, cost of livestock production,
and private leasing rate data used in the equation?

Answer. Grazing fees are set yearly under authority of the Public
Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978. The formula used for calculating
the fee has been continuously applied under a Presidential Executive
Order issued in 1986. The fee is computed by using a 1966 base value of
$1.23 per animal unit month/head month and is calculated according to
three market-driven factors--current private grazing land lease rates,
beef cattle prices, and the cost of livestock production. The fee
adjusts up or down based on market conditions.

Question 9. In this budget request, the Department has proposed a
$2.50 fee for grazing on Federal lands, which is in addition to the
annual grazing fee, according to the formula set by law. How did the
Administration come up with the $2.50 amount for this additional fee?

Answer. The goal of the fee is to recover some of the costs of
administering the permits and leases of the grazing program from
parties who benefit from the use of the public lands and resources. In
2017, the administrative fee would generate $16.5 million, which would
fully offset a reduction of $16.5 million in requested appropriations
for the Rangeland Management program.

Question 10. We understand that land management agencies are
working to refurbish the Federal Government's campsite booking Web
site, Recreation.gov, which hosts virtually all online booking for the
National Park Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of
Reclamation, and U.S. Forest Service campgrounds, and even many of the
Army Corps of Engineers facilities.

10a. What is the Department of the Interior doing to ensure that
any improvements to the online reservation system do not risk ending up
with missed deadlines and rollout delays caused by mismanagement and
untested products or custom created software?

Answer. The Recreation.gov contract is funded entirely by revenues
generated from the recreation fees and reservation fees charged to
visitors who make reservations. The current contract that provides the
reservation and trip planning service for Recreation.gov is nearing the
end of the period of performance. The current contract will be extended
as needed to ensure that there is no disruption of service.
The Recreation One-Stop (R1S) program has been conducting market
research for over 2 years in order to identify emerging technologies
and additional vendors who can provide the kind of service that meets
modern customer expectations.
The R1S program has adopted the tenets laid out in the U.S. Digital
Services Playbook in which we will employ `Agile' software development
principles and processes. Agile development is the new norm in the
private sector and, by following its best practices, we aim to provide
a superior service and user-friendly customer experience. This will
entail face-to-face meetings with the contractor's program management
and software development teams. We intend to work in short `sprints' to
write, test, and deploy usable code that will provide all of the tools
for trip planning, reservations, financial processing, reporting,
design and customer service. As sprints are completed, we will test
each portion of the code to ensure that it meets the government's needs
and public expectations. Code that does not pass testing will be
immediately returned to the backlog for correction. By using this
method, the R1S program will be involved at every step to ensure that
we do not end up with an unusable product when it is time to
transition. The public and many other stakeholders will be involved in
the development and testing throughout this process to ensure that we
are able to deliver what the public wants. The contract requirements
include the highest levels of information security, privacy protection,
secure financial processing, and compliance with all applicable laws
and regulations pertaining to government IT services.

10b. As a way to ensure data security indeed does meet the highest
standard, will you be using vendors who are Payment Card Industry Data
Security Standard (PCI) compliant?

Answer. Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI)
compliance is an absolute requirement in the new (and current)
contract. With the number of credit card transactions processed, the
contractor's system is required to meet the highest level of PCI
compliance. The contractor must also deliver security that ensures
compliance with Federal Risk and Authorization Program (FedRAMP),
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA), and the Privacy Act.

Question 11. While many land management agency units are available
as part of Recreation.gov, we know there are additional units that
could benefit from additional exposure. What are doing to make sure
more of your units are able to be part of the Recreation.gov system and
what are the time frames for bringing them online?

Answer. Recreation.gov currently hosts reservation services for
over 3,200 locations which include campgrounds, picnic shelters,
cabins, lookouts, yurts, tour ticketing, event lotteries, and a variety
of wilderness permits. More locations continue to be added every year.
When the system was launched in 2006, the primary focus was to provide
reservations for basic front country campgrounds. Since that time, the
R1S program recognized the need to expand the service to cover many
different types of facilities and activities. This was one of the
driving factors in moving to a more agile approach that affords the
agencies the flexibility to use the platform for a wide variety of
facilities and activities.
The R1S program expects that, upon launch of a new contract, the
service will be able to support many more operations; this should
facilitate the incorporation of reservation services more broadly. The
new contract also requires that the contractor proactively `market' the
service to all agencies where it is appropriate. This includes offering
Web services which can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
local operations.

Question 12. In September 2015 there was a paid ticketed for-profit
music event held on the National Mall called the Landmark Music
Festival. The event was marketed as an event to raise awareness and
revenue to support the restoration and preservation of the National
Mall. As noted in a Washington Post article, dated September 22, 2015,
questions were raised about how this for-profit event was developed and
structured. We know that the National Park Service is seeking to expand
its use of public-private partnerships to help reduce the deferred
maintenance backlog and supplement funding for the National Mall, which
is something we support. However, we also believe it is essential that
the Park Service creates those partnerships in a fair and transparent
manner that maximizes return to the Parks for the use of the National
Mall.

12a. As this was the first event of its kind, can you describe the
bidding process that occurred for this event?

12b. How many vendors competed to host the event?

12c. Who at the Park Service gave permission to hold a for-profit
event on the National Mall?

12d. How does the Park Service intend to manage these types of for-
profit events on the National Mall in the future?

Answer. The 2015 Landmark Music Festival was organized and
sponsored by the Trust for the National Mall (the Trust), the primary
philanthropic partner of the National Mall and Memorial Parks. While it
was a paid ticketed event, it was not a ``for-profit'' event. The
intent of the event was to connect a younger and diverse population to
national parks, and for the Trust to raise funds to support their
mission to preserve and revitalize the National Mall. As this event was
held by the Trust, the Trust retained responsibilities associated with
its implementation, including any bidding or competitive process to
organize or promote the event. The NPS was not involved in any of these
activities.
The Trust applied for and received a special event permit as
outlined in the process described by 36 C.F.R. Sec. 7.96(g) and NPS'
Management Policies 2006: A ticketed event may be permitted in
specially designated locations if the superintendent determines that
(1) there is a meaningful association between the park and the event,
and (2) the event will contribute to visitor understanding of the
significance of the park. In this case, it was determined by the park
superintendent that West Potomac Park could be used for a ticketed
music event because the event satisfied the above criteria. As the
primary partner responsible for raising awareness and funds for the
National Mall and Memorial Parks, the Trust was in a unique position to
satisfy these criteria.
While it was deemed appropriate in this instance for the concert to
occur in West Potomac Park, we believe that activities on the Mall and
within the memorial core must remain free and open to the public.
Future applications for special event permits will be reviewed against
the criteria listed above.

Question 13. The National Park Service and the Department of
Interior are in the process of planning for the 2017 Presidential
Inauguration. Unfortunately, there has been a lack of real progress on
a permanent installation of a distributed antenna system on the
National Mall to ensure cell phone connectivity during large events.
The Pope's recent visit to DC again highlighted the failure of the
telecommunications system on the National Mall and despite best efforts
by the wireless carriers to boost capacity by bringing in temporary
antennas, or Cell on Wheels, the National Mall continues to be a dead
zone during large events. The lack of cell coverage is more than merely
an inconvenience as most Americas now rely on cell connectivity to
communicate, download information and learn about their surroundings
and lack of coverage could be disastrous in an emergency situation. I
think we can all agree that Americans should be able to use their cell
phones in their Front Yard.

13a. As such, how is the Department of Interior and the National
Park Service planning to ensure cell connectivity during the 2017
Inauguration?

Answer. The NPS recognizes the complications with cellular service
that arose during the 2009 Presidential Inauguration. In an effort to
avoid lapses in service for park visitors, the NPS took additional
steps during the 2013 Inauguration as well as during the Pope's visit
in 2015 to ensure adequate cellular service coverage. The NPS will
continue to use strategic placement of COWs (Cell on Wheels) as an
interim strategy that can be used to serve park visitors until a
comprehensive Distributed Antenna System (DAS) can be permanently
installed.
In addition, the NPS is working with multiple partners to provide
free Wi-Fi service at several locations on the Mall, including the
World War II Memorial, the Korean War Veterans Memorial, and the
Washington Monument. The Wi-Fi systems provide less expansive coverage
and less bandwidth than a DAS system but they require less substantial
infrastructure and installation is virtually invisible. The first of
these systems should be functioning within a few months.

13b. What is the status of the Distributed Antenna System for the
National Mall?

Answer. The NPS issued a Request for Information (RFI) in 2014 so
that it might better understand the potential benefit of deploying a
Distributed Antenna System (DAS) and the likely impact of its
installation on the treasured landscape of the National Mall. The NPS
is reviewing the multiple responses to the RFI, and it is evident that
installation of a DAS will require an exacting design effort,
substantial environmental and historic preservation compliance, and
approvals from the Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital
Planning Commission.
In concert with the technical review of RFI submissions, the NPS is
working to address several critical issues for the installation of a
DAS, including determination of the appropriate method of authorization
(lease, concession, permit, or commercial use authorization), and
coordination with Mall ``neighbors'' (the Smithsonian Institution and
the Architect of the Capitol). A survey of potential equipment
locations on the Mall has been undertaken to assist in the
identification of feasible locations for equipment installation. The
NPS is also exploring cooperation with the District of Columbia
Government to leverage the District's existing and substantial fiber
optic infrastructure.
Questions Submitted by Subcommittee on Oversight & Investigations Staff
Question 14. The recent proposal to down list of the Florida
manatee from endangered to threatened creates the possibility for the
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) to use section 4(d) of the Endangered
Species Act to create a rule that would allow the taking of manatees.
Given that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) concluded that
the Clean Power Plan would not have any effect on the Florida manatee,
can you commit to not issuing a 4(d) rule that would allow for harming
or otherwise ``taking'' manatees under the ESA as a result of the loss
of warm water sanctuaries caused by the closure of coal-fired power
generation facilities?

Answer. It is correct that the ESA provides greater flexibility
when it comes to authorizing incidental take for threatened species.
Should the Service reclassify the West Indian manatee to threatened,
the agency currently has no plans to publish an accompanying 4(d) rule.

Question 15. On November 3, 2015 the President issued a memorandum
on mitigation of resource impacts related to development and
permitting. The memorandum instructs the Interior Department and other
agencies to issue new regulations emphasizing compensatory mitigation
as well as a new standard of a ``net benefit or at minimum, no net
loss'' for resources that are ``important, scarce, or sensitive'' or
possess ``irreplaceable character.'' The Administration has stated that
one goal of this policy is consistency across agencies regarding
mitigation. However, officials from the Council on Environmental
Quality and the Department of Interior told committee staff during a
recent briefing that each agency will define the parameters of terms
like ``important,'' ``scarce,'' ``sensitive,'' or ``irreplaceable'' in
each of their respective regulations and be allowed to define the terms
as they see fit.
Are you concerned that each agency writing its own parameters or
definitions could result in inconsistent parameters or definitions?

Answer. A main objective of updating mitigation policies is to
promote more consistency across and within the Department's bureaus as
to how the steps of the mitigation hierarchy are implemented and in the
development of mitigation recommendations and requirements. These
documents create consistency in how bureaus implement mitigation in a
number of important ways, including the use of a compensatory
mitigation goal; a clear and stated preference when selecting between
compensatory mitigation providers; use of standardized definitions and
terms; and adherence to a consistent set of standards to ensure
equivalency among compensatory mitigation providers.
One area where standardization was not intended is when determining
what resources require mitigation. The Department's bureaus are
responsible for managing different resources, for different uses, under
a range of specific authorities. The use of terms such as
``importance,'' ``scarcity,'' ``sensitivity,'' or ``irreplaceable'' are
meant as parameters to guide bureaus and offices in making similar
decisions about what types resources may require mitigation, not what
specific resources should be targeted. Where multiple bureaus and
offices have responsibility in managing a particular resource, the use
of a landscape-scale approach to planning and permitting allows for
more integrated and consistent management, including in the application
of mitigation.

Question 16. In 2012, the OIG issued a report highlighting critical
problems with BLM's management of its wind and solar programs,
specifically with regards to the adequacy and management of the bonds
BLM requires for those projects on Federal land. Three years later, GAO
looked at the same program and found that many of the same problems
still had not been addressed. Addressing findings in the GAO report, it
is sufficient to say that BLM is not ensuring that the bonds it
receives are adequate to cover reclamation costs if a renewable project
is abandoned, BLM is not reviewing bonds regularly, and BLM is not
responsibly tracking the bonds to make sure they're not lost--or
accidentally shredded, as GAO reported.
The Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee held a hearing when
the GAO report came out to shine a light on these problems and prompt
BLM to address them. However, over 6 months later, BLM still has not
fully implemented GAO's recommendations. Additionally, the same
official who was responsible for implementing the OIG's recommendations
back in 2012 is still in his post as BLM's Assistant Director for
Energy, Minerals, and Realty.
Why has the person responsible for fixing these problems not been
held accountable after almost 4 years and when will BLM fully comply
with GAO's recommendations on this issue?

Answer. As BLM has indicated to the subcommittee, the bureau has
made significant progress in ensuring that its bonding policies and
procedures are being followed. It has issued a series of instruction
memoranda to address GAO recommendations and initiated a field office
review of all solar and wind energy authorizations that require bonds
to ensure adequate bonds are in place to cover up-to-date reclamation
cost estimates. Moreover, finalization and implementation of the
competitive solar and wind leasing rule, anticipated to take place in
2016, will address the last of GAO's recommendations for the program.

Question 17. During a Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee
hearing in February, you were was asked about OSM's need to re-engage
states and local stakeholders in the rulemaking process for the Stream
Protection Rule. Your answer to this question was that ``OSM is
engaging with states at that point'', that ``states were engaged
early'', and that ``[the states'] input was taken.'' One hearing this
testimony would think nothing at all was the matter with OSM's
rulemaking process even though it has repeatedly excluded the states.
Last year, the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee held a
hearing on that very topic, where we heard from multiple states who had
attempted to participate in the draft EIS process. All of them were
extremely frustrated with the process and believed that OSM could do a
better job coordinating with them. This is in addition to the many
public letters the states sent to Director Pizarchik expressing their
complaints, and in some cases, terminating their MOUs as cooperating
agencies with OSM. They specifically complained about OSM's ``piecemeal
approach, lack of adequate time for review and comment, the overall
quality of the [draft EIS], major deficiencies, inconsistencies, and
missing reference material evidenced in the draft documents.''
The Director of the Alabama Surface Mining Commission testified
that ``the cooperating states have essentially been shut out of the
process and been relegated to the sidelines as OSMRE moved forward with
the EIS.''
How can you claim that OSM truly engaged with the states, when so
many of them felt it necessary to terminate their MOUs and revoke their
``cooperating agency'' status?

Answer. The Department has actively engaged, and continues to
engage, with states regarding the proposed stream protection rule. The
rulemaking process began with an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,
stakeholder outreach meetings, nine public scoping meetings and two
public comment periods on the scoping for the draft environmental
impact statement (DEIS), generating over 50,000 comments. A number of
state agencies, including state SMCRA regulatory authorities,
participated as cooperating agencies in the early development of the
DEIS, and provided meaningful input and numerous comments that were
used to prepare the DEIS.
The DEIS was also made available to cooperating agencies and the
public for review and comment during the public comment period, which
was extended to provide interested parties more time and opportunity to
review and comment on the document. Moreover, OSM conducted six public
hearings in Colorado, Kentucky, Missouri, Pennsylvania, Virginia and
West Virginia during the public comment period and received
approximately 95,000 comments, including hundreds of pages of comments
from state SMCRA regulatory authorities, on the DEIS and the proposed
stream protection rule. In October 2015 OSM also offered all former
cooperating state agencies the opportunity to reengage in the
development of the final EIS, and has continued to engage in
discussions with the states to better understand their comments on the
proposed rule.
Questions Submitted by Representative Jeff Denham
Question 18. In California's Statewide Proposition 48, the citizens
formally rejected the California Governor's and State Legislature's
approval of a Class III Indian gaming Compact between the North Fork
Rancheria of Mono Indians and the state of California that authorized
Class III gaming on lands that the North Fork Band acquired into trust
after 1988 in Madera, California. Are you prepared to recognize the
decision rendered by the California electorate in Proposition 48 and
the state's own interpretation of California State law? If not, why?

Answer. The Department must follow the compact review requirements
set out by Congress in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA). IGRA
sets out a process for the Department to follow when tribes and states
agree to a compact. IGRA also sets out a process the Department will
follow when a tribe and a state cannot agree on a compact. In reviewing
any submitted compact, the Department will adhere to IGRA's process.
However, as it pertains to this specific question, the Department
cannot comment on matters currently in litigation but as stated above,
will continue to adhere to IGRA.

Question 19. Are you prepared to refuse to approve a Class II
Gaming Compact submitted to you by North Fork or a mediator which
authorizes Class III gaming on this Madera site? If not, why not?

Answer. On April 26, 2016, the court-appointed mediator transmitted
the selected compact to the Department. The Department will adhere to
IGRA's requirements in reviewing the mediator's selected compact.
Questions Submitted by Representative Paul A. Gosar
Question 20. Are you aware that the Forest Service conducted a
comprehensive study in 2010 and released a Finding of No Significant
Impact for the bipartisan exchange signed into law in 2014 stating and
I quote, ``The selected action will not cause loss or destruction of
significant scientific, cultural or historical resources? ''

Answer. Yes, however, the listing is based on the documentation
included in the certified National Register Nomination form submitted
to the Keeper in 2015 by the Federal Preservation Office of the U.S.
Forest Service in accordance with the provisions of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended and the National Register
Program Regulations (36 CFR, Part 60). The documentation submitted to
the Keeper does not include or reference the ``comprehensive study in
2010'' cited in the question.

Question 21. Oak Flat has never been a sacred site, yet the Park
Service is intent on opposing this project and trying to list this
rundown campground as a historic site, potentially delaying the
creation of 3,700 new jobs and $60 billion in associated economic
impact that will come from the mine.
Did you know that a poll found that the majority of the San Carlos
Tribe actually supports the mine?

Answer. The Keeper listed the property in the National Register
based on the documentation provided and certified by the U.S. Forest
Service. The Keeper's decision did not support or oppose any specific
project; rather, it was based solely on the site's significance as a
Traditional Cultural Property. The Keeper found that the documentation,
much of which was derived through government-to-government
consultations with the San Carlos Apache and other tribes, justified
the listing of Chi' chil Bildagoteel (Oak Flat) in the Natural Register
for its significance as a Traditional Cultural Property. Based on this
finding, and in accordance with the provisions of the NHPA and 36 CFR,
Part 60, the Keeper had no legal alternative to listing the property.

Question 22. What would you like me to tell tribal members who are
in dire need of these jobs and have seen unemployment numbers as high
as 70 percent when they ask me why Secretary Jewell opposes this mine
project and good-paying jobs for their family?

Answer. The Secretary is committed to helping American Indian and
Alaska Native communities find opportunities that will enhance long-
term economic development and promote near-term economic opportunities.
The Keeper's decision to list Chi' chil Bildagoteel did not support or
oppose any specific project; rather, it was based solely on the site's
significance as a Traditional Cultural Property.

Question 23. The day before the House passed my Grand Canyon Bison
Management Act as part of the Sportsmen's Act, the Park Service ditched
a plan it had been doing environmental studies on for more than 2
years, in order to undermine my bipartisan bill.
Two years wasted and now the Park Service intends to pursue a
short-sighted and costly proposal for managing invasive bison within
Grand Canyon National Park that utilizes expensive sharpshooters.
Our bipartisan and bicameral bill meanwhile, puts state licensed
Arizona hunters to work accomplishing this important task for free.
What's the typical cost to the agency when utilizing sharp shooters
to reduce a big game heard by 400-600 animals?

Answer. The cost of culling operations depends on the environments
where they take place and the means through which they were contracted.
Here are a couple of examples:

Channel Islands National Park: Culling operations cost
approximately $519,000 ($1000/animal)

Catoctin Mountain Park: Culling operations cost
approximately $571,000 ($525/deer)

Question 24. How much money did the Park service spend on the long-
term EIS for bison management in the Grand Canyon before shifting gears
to the short-term EA?

Answer. The NPS has spent $125,762 on the contract for the long-
term EIS and EA to date. The total costs for the complete EIS was
expected to be $341,412. Much of the work associated with the EA is the
same as it would have been for the EIS; however, the NPS expects a
savings of approximately $13,500 by switching to an EA.

Question 25. A January 2, 2009 letter from more than 100
environmental and conservation groups reported that USDA and DOI spend
roughly $100 million on expensive sharpshooters each year.
To make matters worse when sharpshooters have been used to kill big
game previously, your agency has left these carcasses rotting in the
park so natures other critters can feed on them. Do you believe leaving
a big game carcass rotting in a National Park is the most humane and
efficient way to dispose of this meat?

Answer. Only in rare occasions has the NPS left carcasses in the
field. In over 90 percent of ungulate culling situations in NPS units,
the NPS requires the use of non-lead ammunition for safe meat
consumption. Carcasses are removed and donated to various entities
including local food banks, citizen volunteers, tribal members, or
other groups. When carcasses are left in the field, it is for
logistical reasons; for example, in some very remote locations it can
be very costly to remove carcasses. In addition, when implemented, this
practice supplements natural scavenging for wildlife.

Question 26. On June 10, 2015, Victor Know stated, ``The NPS has
typically used professional sharp shooters to cull whitetail deer in
parks in the eastern United States, including at Rock Creek Park in
Washington, DC, and Catoctin Mountain Park in Maryland. Professional
sharp shooters were also used at Channel Island National Park in
California to cull elk on Santa Rosa Island. In other cases, including
Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado and Theodore Roosevelt
National Park in South Dakota, skilled volunteers have been used to
cull elk.''
What were the total costs to the Park Service for each of these
efforts?

Answer. It should be noted that the following examples vary greatly
in the type of activities that were conducted, in the environments
where they took place, and in the means through which they were
contracted. Therefore, they should not be seen as representative of how
the NPS funds or conducts culling operations across the National Park
System.

Catoctin Mountain Park: NPS used USDA/Wildlife Service (WS) as the
contractor. The total cost (includes the contract and costs to
administer the program) for the past 6 years (2010-2015) has been
approximately $571,000 ($525/deer).

Rock Creek Park: NPS used USDA/WS as the contractor. The total cost
for the past 3 years (2013-2015) has been approximately $52,500 ($290/
deer). Rock Creek Park is located wholly within Washington, DC, and is
surrounded by densely populated urban areas.

Channel Islands National Park: The situation at Channel Islands
differs from the above examples because it was not a culling operation
to reduce populations, but a total elimination of non-native ungulates.
These types of operations tend to be more expensive as the costs go up
as the populations go down. In addition, the logistics of conducting
this program on an island also raised costs significantly. NPS used a
non-profit organization as the contractor at a cost of approximately
$519,000 ($1,000/animal).

Rocky Mountain National Park and Theodore Roosevelt National Park:
In these parks, skilled volunteers were used to cull the elk herds. In
Rocky Mountain National Park, 52 elk were removed from 2009-2011 at a
cost of approximately $4,700/elk. In Theodore Roosevelt National Park,
868 elk were removed from 2010-2011 at a cost of approximately $1,450/
elk.

Question 27. How many carcasses were left within the Park for each
of these efforts?

Answer. During the elk culling operations at Rocky Mountain and
Theodore Roosevelt National Parks, over 98 percent of the animals
culled were removed from the field and donated. All of these operations
utilized nonlead ammunition, so the NPS could donate the meat. Over 95
percent of the animals at Rock Creek Park and Catoctin Mountain Park
were removed from the field and donated. At Channel Islands National
Park, animals culled in the first phase of the operation were removed
and donated; however, due to lack of interest in the remaining
carcasses and the cost and logistics associated with removing them from
the islands, most of the animals from the second phase were left in the
field for eagle and other scavengers to feed upon.

Question 28. Last time you were before the committee you were
answering questions about your Department's flawed report on EPA's mine
spill. At that time I asked you about Good Samaritan cleanups as you
failed to say anything substantive about Good Sam in your testimony.
Shockingly, you told me you were not familiar with Good Samaritan
cleanups. Did you take some time after that hearing to familiarize
yourself with Good Samaritan cleanups?

Answer. The Department stands by the Bureau of Reclamation's
technical review and assessment of the factors that led to the
incident. The incident highlights the significant and costly problem of
abandoned mine lands, which are a threat on private, state, and Federal
lands. As mentioned in the Department's statement and discussed at the
hearing, we stand ready to work with the committee and Congress to
address this issue in a meaningful way.

Question 29. Do you think today that Good Samaritan cleanups should
be an important part of the solution for cleaning up old abandoned
mines?

Answer. Addressing the reclamation and remediation of abandoned
hardrock mine lands is a costly problem and one that requires a long-
term funding source. To better address the hardrock abandoned mine land
problem and to ensure that an equitable share of the costs of
reclamation of these abandoned mine lands (AML) sites are not solely
borne by the taxpayer, the Administration has proposed legislation that
would hold the hardrock mining industry responsible for the remediation
of abandoned hardrock mines, just as the coal industry is responsible
for remediating abandoned coal sites. The proposal would levy an AML
fee on uranium and metallic mines on both public and private lands, and
the receipts would be split between Federal and non-Federal lands. The
proposed hardrock AML fee and reclamation program will operate in
parallel with the existing coal AML reclamation program as part of a
larger effort to ensure the most dangerous abandoned coal and hardrock
AML sites are addressed by the responsible industries. The Department
stands ready to work with the committee and Congress to take meaningful
actions to address this issue, including consideration of authority to
carry out Good Samaritan activities on public lands.

Question 30. Your budget request asks for $195 million for new
Federal land acquisition. The Department of Interior and the multiple
agencies within cannot even manage the lands they currently own. Just
last March, the Park Service said it has an estimated $11.5 billion
maintenance backlog. Only 17 percent of land is privately held in
Arizona and it is even worse in Nevada. The Federal Government already
owns more than 650 million acres.

Question 31. The Congressional Research Service has informed my
office that they could only find one BLM report from 1997 entitled
``Lands Potentially Available for Disposal.'' And that report was
authored because of direction from Congress. How much land does DOI
currently own that is potentially available for disposal?

Answer to Questions 30 and 31. Congress has long recognized the
national interest in preserving and conserving the public lands for
present and future generations of Americans. Although the National Park
Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service do not have land
disposal authority, Section 203 of the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act allows BLM to identify lands as potentially available
for sale through the land use planning process, provided they meet one
or more of the following criteria:

Lands consisting of scattered, isolated tracts that are
difficult or uneconomic to manage;

Lands that were acquired for a specific purpose and are no
longer needed for that purpose; and

Lands that could serve important public objectives, such
as community expansion and economic development, which
outweigh other public objectives and values that could be
served by retaining the land in Federal ownership.

BLM oversees the public lands through approximately 160 Resource
Management Plans (RMPs). Each RMP is unique and typically identifies
lands as potentially available for disposal through sale, exchange, or
for conveyance under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act (R&PP) for
purposes such as schools, fire stations, and community parks. Lands
identified for potential disposal may be available for any or all of
these purposes. BLM may only dispose of lands identified for disposal
in the appropriate land use plan, unless directed by Congress.
Even when lands are identified for disposal in RMPs, there may be
substantial impediments to disposal. The process of identifying these
lands as potentially available for disposal typically does not include
site-specific identification of impediments to disposal, like the
presence of threatened or endangered species, cultural or historic
resources, mining claims, mineral leases, rights-of-way, and grazing
permits, or the need for an appraisal to establish market value or a
specific survey of the lands. Furthermore, lands identified as
potentially available for disposal at one point in time may be found
later to be unsuitable because of new circumstances such as oil and gas
leasing, the listing of threatened and endangered species, the
establishment of rights-of-way, or other encumbrances.
The BLM is making information regarding lands that have been
identified as potentially available for disposal more accessible to the
public through the recent launch a new page on its Web site to provide
information in one central location. http: // www.blm.gov /wo / st /en
/ prog / planning / planning_overview / lands_potentially 0.html.

Question 32. On November 3, 2015 the President issued a new
memorandum on mitigation of resource impacts related to development and
permitting. The memorandum instructs the Interior Department and other
agencies to issue new regulations emphasizing compensatory mitigation
as well as a new standard of a ``net benefit or at minimum, no net
loss'' for resources that are ``important, scarce, or sensitive'' or
possess ``irreplaceable character.'' The Administration has stated that
one goal of this policy is consistency across agencies regarding
mitigation.
However, officials from the Council on Environmental Quality and
the Department of Interior told committee staff during a recent
briefing that each agency will define the parameters of terms like
``important,'' ``scarce,'' ``sensitive,'' or ``irreplaceable'' in each
of their respective regulations be allowed to define the terms as they
see fit. Are you concerned that each agency writing its own parameters
or definitions could result in inconsistent parameters or definitions?
Does the Department's budget request include an estimate of the
additional funds and FTEs that will be required to carry out the
directives of the mitigation memorandum?

Answer. A main objective of updating mitigation policies is to
promote more consistency across and within the Department's bureaus as
to how the steps of the mitigation hierarchy are implemented and in the
development of mitigation recommendations and requirements. These
documents create consistency in how bureaus implement mitigation in a
number of important ways, including the use of a compensatory
mitigation goal; a clear and stated preference when selecting between
compensatory mitigation providers; use of standardized definitions and
terms; and adherence to a consistent set of standards to ensure
equivalency among compensatory mitigation providers.
The Department does not intend rigidity in determining what
resources require mitigation. The Department's bureaus are responsible
for managing different resources, for different uses, under a range of
specific authorities. The use of terms such as ``importance,''
``scarcity,'' ``sensitivity,'' or ``irreplaceable'' are meant as
parameters to guide bureaus and offices in making similar decisions
about what types resources may require mitigation, not what specific
resources should be targeted. Where multiple bureaus and offices have
responsibility in managing a particular resource, the use of a
landscape-scale approach to planning and permitting allows for more
integrated and consistent management, including in the application of
mitigation.
As a general matter, additional resources are not required by the
Department to specifically carry out the directives of the Presidential
Memorandum. The BLM's 2017 budget request does however include $641,000
(+4 FTE) to develop a National Mitigation Team.
This team would be located in BLM state offices and at the
Washington Office and would provide expertise necessary to support
field staff, work with BLM partners to develop local and regional
mitigation strategies, develop an all-lands program of work, oversee
mitigation funds, interact with mitigation banks and exchanges, and
integrate other restoration activities. Absent these funds, the BLM
would likely have to curtail other important activities in order to
fulfill the commitments made in the Western Solar Plan and the GRSG
Conservation Strategy.

Question 33. During the hearing, you answered one of my questions
by noting that the designation of National Monuments is ``entirely up
to the President of the United States,'' and that the President has not
given you any detailed information about what, if any, areas he may be
considering to designate for the rest of the year. You also noted that
you have received requests from any number of outside organizations
encouraging the designation of specific areas.
Again, you made it clear in your response that the ultimate
decisionmaking authority rests with the President, but have you, your
staff, or any representative of any of the agencies you oversee made
recommendations to act on any of the National Monument requests you
have received from outside organizations to the President, his staff,
CEQ or other officials in the Administration?

Question 34. And, if so, what areas have you recommended should be
designated as National Monuments, and which did you recommend not be
designated?

Answer to Questions 33 and 34. The Administration consistently
strives to take into account the interests of a wide range of
stakeholders both to protect America's public lands and to provide for
economic development in a manner that is consistent with applicable
laws and sound public policy. The Department participates in this
consultation. Officials from the Department have attended many
community meetings across the Nation, and have heard from stakeholders
interested in protecting the places that they care about. These
officials have also heard from stakeholders concerned with the impacts
of any such designation.

Question 35. What is the total estimated travel budget for the
Department of Interior for Fiscal Year 2017?

Answer. The Department has responsibilities across the Nation and
travel is necessary to carry out our mission. The Department does not
specifically budget for travel separately. However, the Department does
monitor travel expenditures closely. In FY 2015, the Department spent
$175 million on travel activities (including relocation costs), which
represents less than 1 percent of the total FY 2015 expenditure
activity of nearly $18 billion.

Question 36. How much did the Department spend on total travel
expenses in Fiscal Year 2016?

Answer. FY 2016 is not yet complete but is on track for a level
consistent with FY 2015 ($37 million as of 12/31/2015).

Question 37. What is the total estimated budget that the Department
of Interior will spend on conferences in Fiscal Year 2017 and how many
conferences does the Department plan to hold this year?

Answer. The Department does not specifically budget for conference
activity and does not have an estimate for FY 2017.

Question 38. How does this compare to last year?

Answer. In FY 2015, the most recent year of completed execution,
the Department spent $16 million ($16,001,465) on hosting or attending
197 conferences. For FY 2016, which is not yet complete, as of 12/31/15
Department personnel attended 41 conferences totaling $4.8 million
($4,830,239). This includes amounts to be reimbursed to the Department
from hosted conferences, so actual expenditures will be less.

Question 39. Specifically, how many conferences did the Department
hold in Fiscal Year 2016 and what were total conference expenditures
for Fiscal Year 2016?

Answer. In FY 2015, the most recent year of completed execution,
the Department held 87 conferences and spent $6 million ($6,072,294).

Question 40. How much money did the Department spend on bonuses for
employee personnel in Fiscal Year 2016?

Answer. At the end of FY 2015, the most current year of completed
execution, the Department spent $61.2 million on awards and bonuses;
when compared against 63,517 Full Time Equivalents (FTE) used in FY
2015, this averages about $964 per FTE.

Question 41. How much does the department estimate it will spend in
Fiscal Year 2017?

Answer. We do not have estimates at this time for FY 2016 and FY
2017 as amounts will be determined by staffing levels and performance
achieved.

Question 42. How much money does the Department plan to spend in
Fiscal Year 2016 on climate change policies?

Answer. As part of the Administration's effort to better understand
and prepare for the impacts of a changing climate, the budget includes
$156.9 million for basic science related to climate and on-the-ground
adaptive management efforts.
Questions Submitted by Representative Raul M. Grijalva
Question 43. Secretary Jewell, I am concerned about the National
Park Service's deferred maintenance backlog. $12 billion is an
intimidating number. For the nonroads half of the backlog, can you
please outline what the total level is for the backlog for the most
critical projects, how NPS determines what those projects are, and some
examples throughout the country of projects that are most critical
awaiting funds to be addressed? If possible, can you provide a full
list of the most critical projects throughout the country outlining, at
a minimum, the park, the project, and the cost?

Answer. The National Park Service's $11.9 billion maintenance
backlog is made up of $6.2 billion in transportation-related deferred
maintenance (DM) and $5.7 billion in non-transportation DM. That $5.7
billion consists of 7,186 non-transportation assets which are
considered high priority resources. Of those, 4,300 need repairs which
have been deferred; the deferred maintenance backlog on these assets is
a total cost of $2.38 billion.
The National Park Service uses the NPS Capital Investment Strategy
(CIS) which is consistent with Departmental guidance to prioritize
projects. The CIS focuses capital investments on the subset of NPS
facilities that represent the highest priority needs with a commitment
to long-term maintenance. The CIS helps to accomplish four objectives:
protect cultural and natural resources and promote environmental
sustainability; provide rewarding visitor experiences; protect health
and safety of visitors and employees; and achieve a financially
sustainable portfolio of constructed assets.
Two cornerstones of the NPS Asset Management Plan are the Facility
Condition Index (FCI) and the Asset Priority Index (API). An industry
standard metric, the FCI indicates an NPS asset's condition. It is
calculated by dividing a facility's deferred maintenance needs by the
same facility's current replacement value. The API is an NPS calculated
value that represents an asset's relative mission importance within the
park unit's total asset portfolio. Improving or even maintaining the
FCI for the entire NPS asset portfolio is difficult given current
budgetary constraints. However, the FCI, in conjunction with the API of
each asset, provides sufficient detail to prioritize the maintenance
efforts and target the most critical assets in the portfolio, allowing
the NPS to focus its capital strategically.
The NPS, and all DOI bureaus, use the Departmental scoring method
to score construction and maintenance projects, which works in
conjunction with the Capital Investment Strategy. This score
incorporates four categories: API vs. FCI; Scope of Benefits (SB);
Investment Strategy (IS); and Consequences of Failure to Act (CFA).

API/FCI--Emphasizes projects that involved mission
critical assets in unacceptable condition with less
emphasis on non-mission critical assets. Weighted at 40
percent.

SB--Emphasizes projects that are clearly aligned with DOI,
bureau, office and program missions, initiatives, and
strategic goals. Weighted at 20 percent.

IS--Emphasizes projects that can clearly define a position
return on investment, leverage outside interests, or reduce
operation and maintenance costs. This element is structured
to de-emphasize projects that increase DOI operation and
maintenance costs. Weighted at 20 percent.

CFA--Emphasizes projects that have unacceptable risk
levels should the project not be completed. Weighted at 20
percent.

The top scoring Line Item Construction project in FY 2017 is to
replace the roof on the Lincoln Memorial, an extremely high priority
asset. Other examples of high priority line item construction projects
include rehabilitating the Paradise Inn Annex and connection snow
bridge at Mount Rainier NP and completing the project to repair the
historic Kennecott Mine structures and utilities at Wrangell-St. Elias
NP&Pres in Alaska.
Some of the highest scoring projects on the FY 2017 Repair and
Rehabilitation project list include rehabilitating the doors on the
visitor center at Tumacacori NM and making, roof repairs at parks
including War in the Pacific NHP and Moores Creek NB, trail
rehabilitation and improvements at parks such as Great Smoky Mountains
NP and Mammoth Cave NP, and water system repairs and improvements at
parks including Gateway NRA and Acadia NP.
Other fund sources also contribute to addressing the DM backlog.
Recreation fees and cyclic maintenance funding are essential fund
sources for keeping those assets in good condition once improvements
are made. And investments made in cyclic maintenance funding prevents
deferred maintenance and therefore future additions to the backlog.
Questions Submitted by Representative Tom McClintock
Question 44. Under the Solicitor of the Interior's 2011 M-Opinion,
a holder of a right-of-way granted under the General Railroad Act of
1875 may authorize third parties activities within its ROW over public
lands without BLM approval if the activity in question furthers, at
least in part, a railroad purpose. Contrary to existing law and the
controlling M-Opinion, in October 2015, BLM made a determination that
found that any use in an 1875 Act ROW will now require Federal
permitting and environmental review even if the use in question
furthers a railroad purpose if the origin of the activity does not
derive from a railroad purpose. BLM's erroneous determination will
negatively impact the ability of railroads to authorize the use of
their respective rights-of-way to third parties for critical
infrastructure, such as water pipelines, power lines, and
telecommunication lines.
To complicate matters even further, BLM issued a 2014 Instruction
Memorandum (IM), purporting to provide guidance on how to implement the
2011 M-Opinion.
The IM indicates that it will be publishing a Federal Register
notice formally requesting information about all activities that are
located in 1875 Act ROWs. Once it receives the requested information,
it will make a determination whether each activity is in the scope of
the ROW. Note, It is my understanding that there are currently 3,500
plus individual instances of third-party uses of RR ROW over Federal
lands.
Under the IM, BLM must also be notified of all proposed new
activities located within 1875 Act ROW's and will determine whether
they are in the scope of the ROW before the activities may proceed. If
BLM determines that the activities are not within the scope of the ROW,
the proponent of the activity must receive BLM authorization.
Is this accurate? Will BLM be reviewing all new and existing
activities within 1875 Act ROWs to determine whether a BLM ROW is
required?
If so, how will BLM staff and pay for such reviews? When will these
reviews take place?

Answer. The November 2011 Solicitor's M-Opinion (M-37025) partially
withdrew a prior 1989 Solicitor's Opinion (M-36964) concerning the
scope of a railroad's authority to authorize activities within a
railroad right-of-way granted under the Act of March 3, 1975 (1875
Act). Opinion M-37025 concluded that a railroad's authority to
undertake or authorize others to undertake activities within an 1875
Act railroad right-of-way is limited to those activities that derive
from or further a railroad purpose. The changes articulated in Opinion
M-37025 were driven by the fact that the conclusions in the 1989
Opinion were not consistent with the terms of the 1875 Act, its
legislative history, or applicable judicial decisions interpreting the
act.
Based on the 2011 Opinion, BLM issued an instruction memorandum
(IM) in August 2014 to describe how it will evaluate and authorize new
and existing activities within those rights-of-way across BLM-managed
public lands, including a process for determining whether such
activities derive from or further a railroad purpose. If BLM determines
the activity does not derive from or further a railroad purpose a
project proponent must receive BLM authorization for the activity. The
process outlined in BLM's IM applies to both new and existing
facilities.
BLM will use existing staff and appropriations to perform reviews
of new and existing activities within 1875 Act railroad rights-of-way.
Temporary staff may be added in instances where Master Agreements exist
with large customers. In cases where project proponents apply for a BLM
authorization, BLM will largely rely on cost recovery fees for
processing and monitoring the authorization in accordance with existing
regulations. BLM expects any necessary reviews to proceed based on an
assessment of each BLM field office's overall workload priorities.
Questions Submitted by Representative Alexander X. Mooney
Question 45. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016, enacted
on December 18, 2015, includes language directing OSM to re-engage
states in a meaningful manner before finalizing any Stream Protection
Rule.

45a. What is your schedule for supplying the states with the
information listed in the Appropriations Act?

45b. In a recent budget hearing in the Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee, Michael Conner, Deputy Secretary of the Interior,
said the documents specified in the report language would be ready for
the states ``in a few weeks.'' What is your plan for meeting with
states after they have had time to review the information you are
required to provide them?

45c. Presumably the states will be raising various concerns with
the content of the proposal. How will you address those concerns?

45d. When do you anticipate reopening the comment period so the
public is place on notice of potential changes to the proposal so they
can comment on those changes?

Answer. OSM began responding to state requests for documents and
information on March 2, 2016, and continues to engage with the states
on the proposed rule. The Department is committed to meeting with the
states as review of comments submitted on the proposed rule moves
forward. The Department's Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals
Management, the Director of OSM, and other OSM officials remain
available for engagement and discussion with the states and have
continued to meet with representatives of states since the close of the
comment period. Department of the Interior and OSM representatives have
either met with or held telephone or video conferences with Wyoming on
November 20, 2015, and January 8, 2016; Ohio and Maryland on December
2, 2015; Oklahoma on December 3, 2015; Indiana and Pennsylvania on
December 10, 2015; Virginia on December 11, 2015; Illinois on December
16, 2015; Utah and Montana on December 17, 2015; Alaska on January 14
and May 18-22, 2016; West Virginia on February 10, 2016; Colorado on
April 11-14, 2016; and North Dakota on December 17 and May 2-4, 2016.
In addition, OSM held six technical meetings in its regional offices
during the month of April, which were attended by state regulatory
authorities. There are no plans to reopen the comment period on the
proposed rule.
Questions Submitted by Representative Grace F. Napolitano
Question 46. Many water agencies in the arid West are looking
toward recycled water projects as the most cost effective solution to
drought management; do you believe we should start to refocus our
investments toward recycled water?

46a. What does President Obama's budget do to support recycled
water projects?

46b. How can an increase in funding impact the amount of water
projects that can be introduced in the drought-stricken West?

46c. Do you have the average cost effectiveness of dam projects
versus water recycling projects?

Answer. The Department's FY 2017 budget request includes $21.5
million for the Title XVI program, reflecting the Department's
recognition that water reuse is an essential tool in stretching limited
water supplies in the West and the need to prioritize limited budget
resources. Federal investments in Title XVI projects, including all
projects funded since 1992, made available an estimated 369,000 acre-
feet of water in 2015. An increase in funding would expedite the
completion of authorized recycled water projects; however, it would not
lead to an increase in the number of water projects in the West, as
congressional authorization would be necessary to build any additional
Title XVI projects.
With regard to a comparison of cost effectiveness, it is difficult
to isolate the variables that factor into the wide range of local
conditions that affect cost. For example, in the state of California,
the California Recycled Water Task Force (2003) estimated that water
recycling projects would cost between $300 and $1,300 per acre-foot.
Cost estimates for potential surface storage alternatives vary
extensively by region and specific project design, depending on the
cost-share among project beneficiaries; state or Federal cost-share
component; and the anticipated project uses, such as new water supply,
hydropower, flood management and water quality.

Question 47. What does President Obama's budget do to address the
ongoing drought in the West? Specifically Southern California?

Answer. The President's Climate Action Plan, ``Preparing the United
States for the Impacts of Climate Change,'' released in June 2013,
highlights drought preparedness as a priority. As part of the
Administration's broader drought response, the Department continues a
proactive approach by emphasizing mitigation and planning to increase
resilience to drought in advance of a crisis.
A few highlights of the Department's budget pertaining to drought
include an increase of $18.4 million in the USGS budget for science to
support sustainable water management, nearly doubling the investment
made in 2016. The USGS budget request includes $3.9 million for USGS to
conduct drought science to quantify water availability, better
understand how snowmelt factors into the hydrologic cycle, and
investigate drought effects on reproduction and survival of species. In
addition, $4 million is requested to develop methods to assess regional
and national water use trends during drought periods that will lead to
a near real-time assessment of water use during drought.
The budget request for Reclamation emphasizes the need to develop
new technologies and disseminate scientific information, including $5.8
million for the Desalination and Water Purification Research program;
$22.8 million for the Science and Technology program, of which $8.5
million would fund a technology prize competition focused on next
generation advanced water treatment technologies; and $2 million to
support Reclamation's open water initiative to make important water
information available to support innovation across the country.
Specifically as it relates to Southern California, Reclamation
released a spending plan for the additional $100 million provided by
Congress in FY 2016 for western drought response, which includes $22.6
million for WaterSMART Grants, Title XVI projects, Drought Response and
Comprehensive Drought Planning, and the Cooperative Watershed
Management Program. Funding was also directed toward the Lower Colorado
River Basin Drought Response Action Plan ($11.5 million), the Salton
Sea Research Project ($3 million) and the Colorado River Basin System
Conservation Pilot Program ($5 million).
The Department's FY 2017 budget request also includes $61.5 million
for the Department's WaterSMART initiative, with $23.4 million for
WaterSMART Grants, $5.2 million for the Basin Study Program, $21.5
million for the Title XVI program, and $4 million for the Drought
Response program.

Question 48. In 2013, American Indians and Alaska Natives had the
second highest overall suicide rate at 11.7 per 100,000 (American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention). The White House Council on Native
American Affairs released its ``Blueprint for Reform'' which is
designed to restructure and redesign the Bureau of Indian Education.
Does this redesign include the delivery on-site behavioral health
services and inclusion of mental health services in general?

Answer. Yes. The Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) reorganization
has established a school health advisor position in Washington, DC that
will address behavioral and mental health issues in BIE-funded schools.
The school health advisor will work with the Associate Deputy Directors
(ADDs), school staff, and the Indian Health Service (IHS) and
Department of Health and Human Services to establish on the ground
programs that address student issues, such as suicide.
Currently, except for the smaller rural schools, BIE schools and
dormitories have student support teams and refer students to outside
organizations (e.g., Indian Health Service and Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration), if they do not have a
behavioral health or mental health employee on staff. When a student is
identified as having ``suicidal ideation'' the school contacts their
local health agency, assists with transporting the student to such an
agency, contacts parents/guardians, and at the family's discretion
stays apprised of the student's status. In the case of a student that
has attempted suicide, after the student has returned to the school,
and if the local health agency provides direction for support services
to the school, then the school supplies such services. Unfortunately,
due to the Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountability Act,
oftentimes the school is not informed of the needs of the student and,
therefore, the support services the student may need when they return
to their community are often times not fully met.
The Department recently executed a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the BIE and IHS which allows IHS mental health
professionals to meet with students within BIE facilities on the Pine
Ridge reservation. These professionals will visit schools on a regular
rotation to better serve at-risk youth. The Department is interested in
expanding this MOU to all interested tribes.
In addition, since the Fiscal Year 2017 Native Youth Priorities
guidance memo was issued in 2015, the White House Council on Native
American Affairs and the Office of Management and Budget have been
working with agencies to establish metrics around Native youth. As part
of this effort, HHS is working to develop Native youth suicide metrics.
Identifying these metrics and collecting data are critical to ensure
that Federal investments in Indian Country are improving the lives of
and opportunities for Native youth.

Questions Submitted by Representative Dan Newhouse
Question 49. A recent study by the U.S. Forest Service indicated
that there may be significant positive fuel reduction benefits from the
responsible harvest of salvage logs after wildfires. Unfortunately
because of an increasing wildfire trend, we are likely to see even more
blackened forests. Can you discuss the role salvage logging and
reforestation could play in better preparing Federal, tribal, and
private lands for catastrophic wildfires? What benefits does this
practice provide, what are your thoughts on moving forward with
responsibly planned logging and what steps is Interior taking to ensure
the timely salvage logging on Federal lands?

Answer. Salvage logging and reforestation are two important tools
used by the Department to ensure the recovery and future sustainability
of forests impacted by wildfire. Wildfires that burn through untreated,
post-fire landscapes can exhibit increased fire intensity compared to
treated landscapes. Increased fire intensity can severely impact
recovering soils and vegetation. Intense fires also hamper suppression
efforts by creating hazardous conditions for firefighters. Salvage
logging may be used as a tool to reduce long-term fuel buildup through
the removal of dead trees on the landscape. However, in some cases, it
is more beneficial to treat the post-fire landscape without salvage
logging, leaving the burned trees in place to preserve snag habitat and
stabilize watersheds. Responsibly planned salvage logging balances the
need for hazardous fuels reduction with the need to maintain valuable
wildlife habitat features that are unique to the post-fire landscape.
BLM uses the Forest Ecosystem Health and Recovery Fund to enable a
rapid response to identified salvage and reforestation projects after
disturbances. This fund is also used for planning and implementing
proactive treatments such as timber sales, stewardship contracts, and
hazardous fuel reduction projects that increase forest resiliency to
wildfires. In 2014 and 2015, BLM used these funds to implement over
12,000 acres of treatments to increase forest resiliency and/or harvest
salvage timber, which yielded approximately 139 million board feet of
timber valued at $18 million.

Question 50. Western tribes have asked for $55 million for post-
fire rehabilitation over 5 years, to salvage some value from the fires.
However, only 6 percent of this request is being funded by the
Department's Burned Area Recovery program. The Colville Reservation, in
particular, did not have enough staff or funding allocated to allow for
the quick response necessary to take advantage of value of the dead
trees. These fires have cost lives, and destroyed homes. The tribe lost
almost a quarter of its forests--that's almost $1 billion of dead trees
still standing--and I am deeply concerned that funds for the recovery
of the areas that were burned on the Colville Reservation have been
insufficient given the enormity of the restoration task ahead. The
Administration is proposing a substantial increase in the Department of
the Interior's Burned Area Recovery Program--a 17 percent increase. I
assume that increase was proposed because of the shortfall we
experienced last year?

Answer. The FY 2017 budget request proposes an increase for the
Burned Area Rehabilitation program of $1.5 million above the 2016
enacted budget. Funding is intended to address greater post-fire
rehabilitation needs caused by the 2015 and 2016 fire seasons. The
additional funds will enable treatments to commence more quickly after
damage occurs. This can help reduce project costs, as post-wildfire
conditions can degrade, and are therefore more expensive to treat, the
longer treatment initiation is delayed.

Question 51. Additionally, I know the Burned Area Recovery program
helps communities the first couple years after they experience a
wildfire. Would some of that proposed increase be made available to
help places that burned in last year's fires, like the Colville
Reservation?

Answer. The 2015 fire season created $55 million dollars of post-
wildfire rehabilitation need throughout the Northwest, including the
Colville Reservation. Approximately 63 percent of the total $55 million
dollar request would help the Colville Tribe with rehabilitation tasks
such as preparing and administering timber salvage operations, growing
and planting trees, repairing roads, repairing fire damaged fences,
restoring burned wildlife habitat and anadromous fisheries, and
controlling noxious weeds that come in after wildfires.
The BIA-Division of Forestry and Wildland Fire Management has been
working with the Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) on this issue since the
end of the 2015 fire season, and BIA allocates Burned Area
Rehabilitation funding it receives from OWF, $3.6M in FY 2016, to
impacted tribes, including to the Colville Tribe. The FY 2016 post-
wildfire recovery funding will support tree seed collection and
seedling growing operations. The FY 2017 budget request also proposes
additional funding for tribal firefighting vehicles.

Question 52. The National Indian Forests Resources Management Act
(NIFRMA) requires the Secretary to manage Indian forest land with
specific management objectives. Do you believe the requested amount
fulfills the Department's trust responsibility for tribal forests?

Question 53. The Department of the Interior is working on a ``Risk-
Based Wildland Fire Management Model.'' Do you believe the model
treat's tribes fairly and recognizes the fiduciary obligations for
protection of the lands held in trust for Indians?

Answer to Questions 52 and 53. The National Indian Forest
Management Act of 1990 directs the Secretary of the Interior to
undertake forest management activities which ``. . . develop, maintain,
and enhance Indian forest land in a perpetually productive state in
accordance with the principles of sustained yield.'' To fulfill this
trust responsibility for tribal forests, the Department ensures that
tribal assets are protected and improved. The FY 2017 budget request
for the NIFRMA reflects the priorities of the Department and the BIA,
which include the sale of timber and the protection of habitats through
thinning and replanting of understocked areas. The Department continues
to evaluate the needs and make changes where necessary to improve
management effectiveness.
The OWF conducted both formal consultation and informal engagement
with tribes on the risk-based approach, including:

Formal Consultation October 14, 2014-January 9, 2015;
teleconference on November 14, 2014

Formal Consultation July 20-August 3, 2015; field meetings
in Albuquerque, NM--July 21, 2015; Spokane, WA--July 23,
2015; Webinar--August 13, 2015

Informal updates on quarterly calls with Intertribal
Timber Council Fire Subcommittee (November 14, December 9--
2014; February 10, April 21, September 15, December 8--
2015)

Day-long session at National Indian Timber Symposium (June
8, 2015)

Comments from the consultations were summarized and responses to
commenting tribes were provided and posted on BIA's Web site.
Additional background information about Risk-Based Wildland Fire
Management was also made available on the same Web site, which can be
accessed here: https://www.doi.gov/wildlandfire/government-government-
consultations.
The Department remains committed to recognizing tribal sovereignty,
promoting tribal self-determination, and fulfilling its Federal trust
responsibility, and will continue to consult with tribes as its moves
forward, including on development of the Risk-Based Wildland Fire
Management Model.

Question 54. The President's FY 2017 Budget does not include any
funding for the ``wolf-livestock loss demonstration program,'' which
assists livestock producers in undertaking proactive, non-lethal
activities to reduce the risk of livestock loss from predation by
wolves, and compensate producers for resulting livestock losses. The
program received $1 million from Congress in the FY 2016 Omnibus bill
and the grants it provides are critically important to Washington
State. Why wasn't funding provided for this management program in the
proposed FY 2017 budget?

Answer. The goal of the Recovery Program is to minimize or remove
the threats that led to a species listing so that it can be delisted or
downlisted. In 2013, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service determined the
gray wolf to be biologically recovered. The continued use of limited
recovery funding on the Wolf Livestock Loss Demonstration Program to
manage a recovered species is not a priority. The Service proposes to
discontinue funding in FY 2017 for the Wolf Livestock Loss
Demonstration Program within the Recovery subactivity because there are
other programs that are better suited to deliver this funding and the
wolf is biologically recovered.
The 2014 Farm Bill makes the Livestock Indemnity Payments (LIP) a
permanent program and provides retroactive authority to cover eligible
livestock losses back to Oct. 1, 2011. LIP provides compensation to
eligible livestock producers who have suffered livestock death losses
in excess of normal mortality due to adverse weather and attacks by
animals reintroduced into the wild by the Federal Government or
protected by Federal law, including wolves and avian predators. Funding
for recovery of listed species is limited and the Service is focused on
preventing extinction and improving the status of species through on
the ground conservation actions.

Question 55. What statistics and information does the Bureau of
Land Management keep on the ``back burning'' on BLM-administered lands?
Can you tell me how many acres are burned on average each year?

Answer. Backburns or backfires--as distinguished from prescribed
fire--are commonly used tools to establish or reinforce containment
lines to enable firefighters to more safely and effectively stop the
advance of a rapidly spreading wildfire. Due to the common use of this
tool, the BLM does not maintain statistics on the number of acres
involved. When used, backburns are done only with consideration to
safety, property, resource values, and coordination with others in the
area. Backburns are not used when they would endanger lives, livestock,
or property.
The BLM does keep statistics on the more general method of
controlled or prescribed fires, which are used to meet land management
objectives, including wildfire management. BLM has completed an average
of approximately 110,000 acres of prescribed fire per year for the past
5 years (2011-2015), as reported in the National Fire Plan Operations
Reporting System.
Questions Submitted by Representative Jared Polis
Question 56. Madam Secretary, I am proud to have introduced and co-
sponsored amendments and written letters fighting for full and
permanent funding of the Land and Water Conservation Fund. As you know,
The Land and Water Conservation Fund has had an unparalleled impact on
our Nation's ability to recognize, protect and preserve its greatest
natural treasures. For the past 50 years, the LWCF has been enormously
successful in acquiring parcels of land and bodies of water. Not only
has this enabled the protection of environmental health and the
restoration of critical ecosystems nationally, it has secured
recreational opportunities and access for hunters, fishermen, hikers,
bikers and skiers nationwide. The LWCF is a smart investment--for every
LWCF dollar spent, 4 dollars of economic value is generated from
natural resource goods and services. Can you please speak to the
importance of adequate and full funding of LWCF on the lands and waters
you oversee, and whether you support a permanent reauthorization?

Answer. The Administration proposes full, permanent, and mandatory
funding of $900 million for the Fund's programs beginning in 2018.
Mandatory funding will increase the financial certainty needed to build
and enhance local and community conservation partnerships and optimize
valuable investments by leveraging other Federal and non-Federal funds.
It will enable efficiencies in managing LWCF programs and facilitate a
more predictable, transparent, and inclusive process. Mandatory funding
will also finally achieve the original intent of the LWCF Act: to use
the benefits from the depletion of one natural resource for the
protection and conservation of another--our public lands and waters--
for the enjoyment and benefit of all Americans, now and in the future.
The LWCF enjoys widespread popularity, with more willing sellers
than available funding; however, it is constrained by uncertainty about
annual appropriations. Unpredictable funding allocations prevent
Federal, state, and local partners from engaging in the multi-year
planning that large-scale conservation and effective collaboration with
local communities need to be successful. These challenges also impact
partners who work with bureaus to protect critically important habitat
and recreation areas. Chronic uncertainty and underfunding have made it
increasingly challenging for local, state and Federal managers to use
this tool to support vibrant outdoor economies, provide community
recreation opportunities, and preserve American history.

Question 57. Outdoor recreation is a vital use of our public lands
that helps connect people with nature and results in benefits for the
economy, public health, and overall awareness of public lands.
Opportunities for outdoor recreation are one of the greatest resources
that our public lands offer.

57a. What is the return on investment that the American public gets
for funds devoted to recreation-related spending on public lands
managed by the Department of the Interior?

Answer. In FY 2014, Interior's lands hosted an estimated 423
million visits. The net economic value of a visit to Interior lands
varies depending on the activity. For FY 2014, visitation to Interior
sites provided an estimated $24 billion in value added, $42 billion in
economic output, and supported about 375,000 jobs.

57b. Could we be doing more to invest in outdoor recreation?

Answer. The Department looks forward to working with Congress on a
number of proposals to further invest in outdoor recreation. In 2016,
the NPS will celebrate 100 years as the steward of the Nation's most
cherished natural and cultural resources. The Administration's proposed
National Park Service Centennial Act would provide new sources of
funding and strengthen the ability of the National Park Service to
manage and operate the national parks and programs that provide so many
important natural, cultural, and recreational benefits to the Nation.
The Administration has also proposed full, permanent, and mandatory
funding of $900 million for the Land and Water Conservation Fund's
programs beginning in 2018. Mandatory funding will increase the
financial certainty needed to build and enhance local and community
conservation partnerships and optimize valuable investments by
leveraging other Federal and non-Federal funds.
Finally we encourage Congress to provide a permanent
reauthorization of the Federal Land Recreation Enhancement Act. The
authority is scheduled to sunset September 30, 2017. A potential lapse
in this authority will detrimentally impact the agencies' ability to
support projects that improve visitor safety, experiences, and
opportunities.

57c. It is crucial to make sure that all Americans--including
diverse populations, underserved communities, and youth--have
opportunities to experience nature and to get out on our public lands.
What is DOI doing to help connect people, especially diverse and
underserved populations, with the outdoors and with our public lands?

Answer. America's public lands and waters offer space to get
outside and get active, and provide living classrooms with hands-on
opportunities to build skills. The Administration launched the Every
Kid in a Park Initiative to inspire the next generation to discover all
America's public lands and waters have to offer. Starting with the
2015-2016 school year, all fourth grade students and their families are
able to receive free admission to all national parks and other Federal
lands for a full year. Studies have shown that the fourth grade is the
opportune time to impress upon children the importance of our natural
resources and outdoor recreation. Now is a crucial time to inspire the
next generation of conservationists. The National Park Service budget
for 2017 includes $20 million for Every Kid in a Park to introduce at
least 1 million fourth grade students from elementary schools serving
disadvantaged students in urban areas to nearby national parks and
provide park programs tailored for young people and their families,
especially at high visitation and urban parks.
Further, the NPS, in partnership with the National Park Foundation,
has launched a campaign to engage the next generation and new audiences
in life-enhancing and sometimes life-changing experiences at national
parks. These efforts will draw new visitors, especially millennials and
young families, to experience the national parks.

57d. Madam Secretary, the President's budget includes a proposal
similar to the bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, of which I am
a co-sponsor. This common-sense legislation would allow us to budget
for wildfire suppression the same way we budget for every other natural
disaster. Do you believe that restructuring would benefit the Interior
Department, and how would the department prioritize funding for
programs which would mitigate the cost and severity of future
wildfires?

Answer. Yes, restructuring the Wildland Fire Management budget to
fund a portion of suppression costs through a cap adjustment would
benefit the Department of the Interior by better assuring the
availability of sufficient suppression funding in even the most severe
fire seasons, thereby eliminating or reducing the potential need for
reprogramming or transferring funds from other fire program budgets or
non-fire accounts to cover suppression costs. If funds are borrowed
from other programs within the Wildland Fire Management account in
order to pay suppression costs, it can result in the bureaus having
fewer resources available for hazardous fuels management and burned
area rehabilitation projects, proven efforts for improving overall
forest and rangeland health and reducing the risk of catastrophic
wildland fires, and helping these areas recover from wildfire damage.
Transfers from non-fire programs disrupt work in those programs
notwithstanding supplemental appropriations to repay the transferred
amount. The Administration's proposed cap adjustment allows for
increased investments in priority programs in the 2017 DOI Wildland
Fire Management budget, such as Preparedness, Resilient Landscapes, and
Burned Area Rehabilitation, which will mitigate the cost and severity
of future wildfires.

Question 58. Madam Secretary, the agency is in charge of
monitoring, inspecting and enforcing oil and gas safety standards on
public lands. Reports have recently shown that the Department has not
kept up with the pace necessary to ensure that public lands are
protected from unintended consequences. What is the agency going to do
to improve in this area?

Answer. The BLM's FY 2017 budget request reflects the need to
modernize BLM's oil and gas program to keep pace with development,
technological advances, and evolving industry standards. The request
includes $13.1 million to implement and administer recently promulgated
and pending updates to BLM's rules governing onshore oil and gas
production activities. These regulatory updates ensure that BLM's
rules, which have not received a comprehensive update in over 25 years,
reflect modern drilling technologies, practices, and standards.
With respect to inspection and enforcement activities, the FY 2017
budget request reiterates requests made in prior years to establish a
new fee schedule to fund inspection and enforcement activities. The
BLM's fee proposal is analogous to authority provided by Congress in
the offshore oil and gas context. The funds such a fee generates would
offset proposed reductions in appropriated funding.
Finally, in order to increase efficiency and transparency of the
leasing and permitting process, the BLM is working to automate many
leasing functions through the development of the National Fluids Lease
Sale System. It is also working to deploy updates to its Application
for Permit to Drill processing system.

Question 59. In an effort to reduce barriers for youth access,
costs and regulatory requirements for many outfitters serving families
have increased. For example, the latest National Park Service operating
plan requirements for Dinosaur Monument require outfitters offering
whitewater rafting trips to ``to ensure a safe and risk-free employee
and client environment.'' (Exhibit B, Operating Plan, page 15).
Concessioners are also required to collect medical and prescription
drug information on their guests. While this may sound good, absolute
standards such as the requirement to ``ensure a safe and risk-free
employee and client environment'' is not feasible or possible on
adventure trips in the backcountry. One of major insurance providers
believes such a requirement could create unnecessary liability for the
concessioner and result in higher insurance premiums. Will you apply
similar standards to groups serving youth or will such standards be
made more reasonable for all operating guiding and outfitting services
on our public lands, and will there be an acknowledgement that the
commercial groups are often important employers in gateway communities,
providing safe and memorable experiences for Americans and
international tourists in America's Great Outdoors?

Answer. The National Park Service appreciates the important role
guide and outfitters play in providing park visitors the ability to
experience adventure in our parks as well as the key role these
operators play in local communities. The NPS is actively engaged with
the guide and outfitter community to share information and address
industry concerns as they arise. For example, representatives of the
NPS attend and participate in industry meetings including the annual
America Outdoors Conference and the Wilderness Risk Management
Conference and are represented on the Federal Interagency Council on
Outdoor Recreation. Both of the issues you raised were identified
through this collaboration and the NPS has already begun to take action
on each.
The NPS recognizes the inherent risk associated with backcountry
activities such as whitewater rafting and that it is not reasonable to
expect concessioners ``to ensure a safe and risk-free employee and
client environment.''
The NPS is working with the Park to amend the Operating Plan for
Dinosaur National Monument. The Operating Plan will be revised to state
that the ``Concessioner will develop and implement a Risk Management
plan to comply with all applicable laws and to help provide for a safe
and healthy environment for employees and visitors to the extent
reasonably possible.'' This change will also be reflected in a template
Operating Plan currently under development for use by all parks.
The NPS is currently working with NPS concession management and NPS
emergency response personnel as well as NPS concession guide and
outfitters, to evaluate current contractual requirements and industry
practices associated with visitor medical screening and collection of
visitor medical and medication data for backcountry activities. Through
this effort we are assessing how to facilitate a safe experience for
visitors and provide the ability to effectively respond to visitor
medical emergencies, while protecting the privacy of visitors and
avoiding inappropriate liability for concessioners. The NPS will revise
the Dinosaur National Monument Operating Plan regarding requirements
for collection of medical information as appropriate based on the
findings of this assessment.
Questions Submitted by Representative Glenn Thompson
Question 60. I am interested in learning more about the status of
the cleanup of the Folcroft Landfill, a Pennsylvania property on the
Superfund National Priorities List which is owned by the U.S.
Department of Interior. According to the CERCLIS database, this is the
only Superfund site in the state of Pennsylvania that is owned by the
U.S. Department of Interior.
Interior purchased this property in 1980, and it became part of the
John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge under legislative authority
provided by Congress. Congress initially provided $11 million for the
development of the Refuge, and then increased funding to $19.5 million
for expansion, including acquisition of the Folcroft property (PL 96-
315). The legislative history of the Refuge indicates that Congress
intended for some of the authorized funds to be directed toward
investigation of the Folcroft Landfill (PL 99-191). The record also
indicates that DOI understood that by acquiring the property, the
Agency was accepting an obligation to study and develop a remedy for
pollution in the Folcroft Landfill. I am concerned that now almost 40
years after acquisition of this property, little progress has been
made. I believe it is important for us to understand what happened
here, and I would appreciate your response to the following questions:

60a. DOI testified before Congress that when the Folcroft property
was acquired from a private property owner, the Landfill had been
properly closed and capped, and no pollution was emanating from the
property. What procedures and measures were put in place by DOI after
the purchase of the property to preserve and maintain the cap and
prevent erosion? What funds were spent on this effort? What reports
were prepared by DOI for the period 1980-2015 documenting these
procedures and measures?

60b. The statute incorporating the Folcroft property into the
Refuge (PL 96-315) directed FWS to work with EPA to ``investigate
potential environmental health hazards resulting from the Folcroft
Landfill . . . and to develop alternative recommendations as to how
such hazards, if any, might best be addressed in order to protect the
refuge and the general public.'' What investigations were conducted,
and what was the cost of these investigations? What recommendations
were developed based on this investigation? How were these
recommendations implemented? What was the cost and timeline to
implement these recommendations? What reports were prepared by DOI or
EPA to document these investigations?

60c. In 1983, the Folcroft property experienced a fire caused by a
FWS vehicle parked on dry brush. Did the fire result in soil or
groundwater contamination or otherwise cause damage to the refuge? What
measures were taken to address any contamination or damage resulting
from the fire? What was the cost and timeline of these measures? What
testing was done afterwards to ensure that these efforts were
sufficient to prevent the migration of contaminants or damage to the
cap? What reports were prepared by FWS documenting the incident, the
cause of the incident, the contamination or other damage caused by the
incident, and the measures taken to prevent the migration of
contaminants and/or to repair the cap?

60d. The Folcroft property was added to the Superfund National
Priorities List in 2001. As a property owned by the U.S. Department of
Interior, the Folcroft property is subject to special rules and
timelines under CERCLA Section 120 governing Superfund remediation on
Federal facilities. Section 120 requires a Remedial Investigation/
Feasibility Study to commence within 6 months of listing. Was this
deadline met and why/why not? Section 120 also calls for a timetable
and deadlines for expeditious completion of the Remedial Investigation
to be published. Was this information published? Is the Remedial
Investigation being completed consistent with this timetable? What role
has DOI played in the effort to complete the Remedial Investigation and
Feasibility Study in an expeditious manner? What interaction does DOI
have with EPA on this matter? What interaction does DOI have with the
group of private parties that have been completing the Remedial
Investigation and Feasibility Study?

60e. What do you estimate it will cost to complete remediation of
the Folcroft site? How is this liability reported on the DOI's
financial reports? What appropriations have DOI requested for the
Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study and/or the Remedial
Action?

Answer. Much of the information you are seeking relative to the
Folcroft Landfill dates back over 35 years and would require
considerable time to compile. Additionally, the EPA is the lead Federal
agency for the cleanup of the Folcroft Landfill under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA)
and therefore, best suited to respond to many of your specific
questions. In an effort to provide you with a timely response, cleanup
activities at the property and the role of the FWS in this process are
summarized here.
The Department, through the FWS, has been working closely with the
EPA to manage the Folcroft Landfill since Congress added the property
to the National Wildlife Refuge System in 1980. Congress directed EPA
to investigate and make recommendations regarding any environmental
health hazards caused by the Folcroft Landfill.
EPA has a legal agreement with a group of potentially responsible
parties (PRPs) requiring them to perform the Remedial Investigation and
Feasibility Study (RI/FS) to determine the nature and extent of
contamination. An updated RI is currently being developed. The role of
the FWS in this process is limited to project oversight and land
management activities, such as reviewing and commenting on project
submittals and evaluating the appropriateness and effectiveness of
recommendations made for any potential remedial actions.
As per the MOU, the FWS employs a full-time Project Coordinator
with responsibilities at the Folcroft Landfill and three other sites in
New Jersey. This employee is the FWS's liaison with the EPA on all
aspects of the CERCLA process.
The Department and the FWS are committed to working with the EPA
through the CERCLA process to implement a remedy that will clean up the
site and make it suitable for fish, wildlife and public use.
Questions Submitted by Representative Robert J. Wittman
Question 61. As the Department begins to develop a final offshore
leasing program for the 2017-2022 Five Year Plan, will you commit to
taking into consideration the continued broad bipartisan support for
offshore energy production in the Atlantic Ocean?

Answer. The Department is committed to considering all comments
from stakeholders in the development of a Five Year Oil and Gas Leasing
Program. It was after an extensive public input process that the sale
proposed in the Draft Proposed Program in the Mid- and South Atlantic
area was removed from the Proposed Program. Many factors were
considered in the decision to remove this sale from the 2017-2022
Program including significant potential conflicts with other ocean uses
such as the Department of Defense and commercial interests; current
market dynamics; national energy needs; and opposition from many
coastal communities. As noted at the time the Proposed Program was
announced on March 15 of this year, ``We heard from many corners that
now is not the time to offer oil and gas leasing off the Atlantic
coast. When you factor in conflicts with national defense, economic
activities such as fishing and tourism, and opposition from many local
communities, it simply does not make sense to move forward with any
lease sales in the coming 5 years.'' Specific to the 2017-2022 Program,
proposed leasing in the Atlantic will not be included in the Final
Program since it was removed from the Proposed Program.

Question 62. I asked last year when do you expect permits to be
granted so seismic acquisition can begin and so far I do not believe a
permit has been issued? I continue to believe that it is paramount that
we get this new information and premature for the Department of
Interior to make any decisions until new information has been received.
Once permits are granted, how will this new resource information feed
into the Five Year leasing process?

Answer. BOEM has worked extensively with the permit applicants, the
public, states and other Federal agencies as it reviews the proposed
Atlantic seismic permits. Prior to BOEM making a final decision on the
seismic permits, which last 1 year, companies first need to receive
individual Incidental Harassment Authorizations from the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). Once a permittee receives the
necessary approvals from NMFS, BOEM will complete its review of the
permits.
The seismic permit and Five Year Program processes are separate.
New data and information will help in the analysis of resource
estimates and geological characteristics, both of which are considered
as part of the eight factors specified in Section 18 of the Outer
Continental Shelf Lands Act. This information is important to BOEM to
inform potential leasing decisions during the development of any Five
Year Oil and Gas Leasing Program, now and in the future.
Questions Submitted by Representative Ryan K. Zinke
Question 63. Secretary Jewell, you allowed the Royalty Policy
Committee's charter to lapse before embarking on changes to coal oil
and gas royalty and leading policy, thereby ensuring the states had no
input to policy. Do you believe it was appropriate to make such changes
without input from the states and tribes affected? Will you re-
establish the committee as previously constituted? If not, why?

Answer. Through the State and Tribal Royalty Audit Committee and
the U.S. Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Advisory
Committee, a FACA committee chartered in 2014, the Department engages
with states and tribes and receives input on mineral revenue
collections; compliance work; and the Department's royalty management
activities, policies, and procedures. Participants in these committees
include states and tribes, the extractive industry, civil society
organizations, government agencies, and tribal government and
individual Indian mineral owner representatives. Coordination through
these entities helps the Department to ensure the full and fair return
to the American people for the utilization of public resources.

Question 64. I would again like to address the question of your
assertion that reform of the coal leasing program is required. Last
year, at about this same time, you told me that changes to royalty
valuation policy, to coal royalties, and to coal leasing were called
for by the GAO and IG reports. My staff and I met with GAO shortly
thereafter; when I asked if the GAO Report you referenced made such
recommendations, he said no. Madame Secretary, one of you is being
dishonest. Are you calling the Comptroller General of the United States
a liar or would you like to rephrase your remarks about the GAO Report?

Answer. As indicated in the recently issued Secretarial Order 3338
and BLM's Notice of Intent, numerous parties have voiced concerns about
the Federal coal program, including the Government Accountability
Office, the Department's Inspector General, Members of Congress, and
interested stakeholders. The concerns raised by GAO (Coal Leasing: BLM
Could Enhance Appraisal Process, More Explicitly Consider Coal Exports,
and Provide More Public Information, GAO 14-140 (Dec. 2013)) and the
OIG (Coal Management Program, U.S. Department of the Interior, Report
No. CR-EV-BLM-0001-2012 (June 2013)) center on whether taxpayers are
receiving fair market value from the sale of Federal coal. This issue,
along with concern that the coal program conflicts with the
Administration's climate policy and national climate goals and concerns
about the structure of the program in light of current market
conditions, was one of the aspects of the coal program that received
the most attention during public listening sessions carried out across
the country, including in Billings, Montana. As a result, the
Department is carrying out this review, through preparation of a
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement, which will identify,
evaluate, and potentially recommend reforms to the coal program.

Question 65. You have referred several times to the Headwaters
Study as a justification for your actions against the Federal coal
leasing program. This study was done by an NGO in my state funded
almost entirely by environmental groups and foundations with close ties
to the Democratic Party. Nevertheless, you have referenced this study
as a basis for your actions. Are you then aware of the Energy Ventures
Analysis peer review of the Headwaters Study, which concluded the study
was based on flawed data and designed to reach predetermined
conclusions? It has been sent to you by several people, entered into
the official record of this committee by Representative Lamborn, and
filed by several parties in official comments to the ``listening
sessions'' on the Federal coal leasing program. Are familiar with the
Energy Ventures Analysis peer review? If so, can you please expand upon
the conclusions that were reached that discredit the Headwaters Study?

Answer. The review of the coal program is not based solely on any
one document and is being carried out instead following concerns about
the Federal coal program voiced by a number of parties, including the
Government Accountability Office, the Department's Inspector General,
Members of Congress, and interested stakeholders.

Question 66. Madame Secretary, none of the reports or studies that
you have mentioned to this committee demand the changes to the Federal
coal leasing program that you have initiated. Can you point to any
credible reports or studies not initiated by private special interest
groups or organizations tied directly to the Democratic Party that
justify the changes to royalty valuations that you have pursued? Please
provide exact information about these reports and studies.

Answer. As indicated in response to a previous question, the
programmatic review will identify, evaluate, and potentially recommend
reforms to the coal program. A programmatic review of the coal program
has not been undertaken in more than 30 years. As articulated in
Secretarial Order 3338 and BLM's Notice of Intent, numerous parties
have voiced concerns about the Federal coal program, including the
Government Accountability Office, the Department's Inspector General,
Members of Congress, and interested stakeholders. The concerns raised
by GAO (Coal Leasing: BLM Could Enhance Appraisal Process, More
Explicitly Consider Coal Exports, and Provide More Public Information,
GAO 14-140 (Dec. 2013)) and the OIG (Coal Management Program, U.S.
Department of the Interior, Report No. CR-EV-BLM-0001-2012 (June 2013))
center on whether taxpayers are receiving fair market value from the
sale of Federal coal. This issue, along with concern that the coal
program conflicts with the Administration's climate policy and national
climate goals and concerns about the structure of the program in light
of current market conditions, was one of the aspects of the coal
program that received the most attention during public listening
sessions.

Question 67. In your time as Secretary, the agency has initiated
several activities that impact coal, oil, and gas produced on Federal
lands--activities which provide significant revenues and fair returns
to the Federal Treasury and to states like my state of Montana.
Specifically, the Agency is considering changes to the Federal Coal
Leasing Program with regard to valuation and royalty rates, and now the
Agency has instituted a moratorium on Federal coal leases while a
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement and comprehensive review,
to analyze fiscal and environmental considerations, is completed in
approximately 3 years. You told Senator Daines from Montana that you
could not commit to a 3-year timeline because you will only be in
office for another 11 months. I would say that your actions,
specifically as they relate to the moratorium and PEIS are
irresponsible and shortsighted. You put a 3-year moratorium in place,
subject to the completion of a PEIS that could take more than 3 years
when you will only be in office for less than a third of that time. To
me, that's like a pilot parachuting out of a plane after takeoff and
telling the passengers they should be fine. You mentioned that you
hoped to complete an interim report by the time you are out of office.
Will you commit that you will brief this committee on the contents of
the interim report once it is ready?

Answer. The Department is happy to provide the committee with a
briefing on appropriate information after release of the interim
report.

Question 68. Why after having communicated that the PEIS and
moratorium on Federal coal leasing would take 3 years did you refuse to
commit to that time period in Testimony before the Senate last week?
Why can you not commit to the time period that you yourself said was
required to complete the study?

Answer. The Department expects the review to take approximately 3
years to complete, but it is impossible to know what factors or how a
subsequent administration may impact the timing of that review.
Regardless, the Department expects to release an interim report by the
end of this year containing conclusions from the public scoping
sessions and other, additional, information.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much. We will now turn to the
Members for questions. I would remind them we have 5 minutes
for questions.
And also, one other thing. The Secretary is the only one
who is down there answering all the questions. We get a chance
to wait, gear up for it, and then go on the offensive. But I
want you to be respectful of the time she has, which means if
you want to ask a question, give her enough time left to answer
the question or don't ask it in the first place.
And because I want to go though everyone, I am going to cut
it off at 5 minutes. So if I am cutting you off at 5 minutes, I
may cut her off at 5 minutes, too. But we have to get everyone
through here. So please be respectful of that.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry. We
will cut our questions short, as long as she cuts her answers
short.
The Chairman. All right, you can argue that one with her as
time goes on. I am only concerned about the total time. As soon
as it goes to zero, that is it.
And, unlike other traditions, I am going to start off with
the first questions, if I could. And I will cut myself off at 5
minutes, as well.
I noted earlier in the opening statement that we received
documents that were subpoenaed from the Gold King Mine
disaster. As we review those documents, we are going to await
your full response. But I do want to address at least one item
that is up there.
When you testified last December, you said the Gold King
Mine disaster was an accident. Specifically, you stated, ``We
do not see any deliberate intent to breach a mine.'' Before we
go into that, do you want to amend that statement or retract it
at all?
Secretary Jewell. No, I completely agree with that. It was
an accident.
[Slide]
The Chairman. Then look at the email that we have up on the
screen. I want you to look at it. The email is dated August 7,
2015. That is 2 days after the spill. The email was sent by the
BLM's abandoned mine program lead in Colorado, who is working
with the EPA on the Gold King Mine project. He sent the email
to senior leadership within the BLM Colorado State staff. He
wrote the email after talking to the EPA's on-scene
coordinator.
So, less than 48 hours after the blow-out, your employee in
Colorado talks to the EPA official in charge, and then emails
all senior leadership at BLM, and basically says EPA was
deliberately removing a small portion of the plug to relieve
pressure in the mine when the blow-out occurred. There was
nothing unintentional about EPA's actions with regard to
breaching the mine; they fully intended to dig out the plug and
breach it. It was a major mistake and a lack of engineering
planning, but it was done on purpose.
So, once again, do you want to do anything about that
before I go on?
Secretary Jewell. The EPA work was preparation, as I
testified when I was before this committee, and I stand behind
that testimony and the conclusions of the Bureau of Reclamation
study.
The Chairman. Which don't actually go with this document or
any others. And one of the most frustrating parts, when we
actually subpoenaed documents, you gave us 6,000 pages, much of
it redacted, of information. But this particular document we
only got on the day we actually submitted the report from this
committee that we had to go through and ferret our ourselves.
This is one of the key emails that should have been there, and
part of the information that was given to us, and one of the
reasons why we eventually had to subpoena more.
I am sorry. This we should have had well before the first
hearing that we ever had. This should have been part of the
information that was given to us, and it was not. I am sorry,
your Department sat on it past the December hearing, until we
actually gave it out. That is the first day we actually
received this document, is the day we submitted our report.
That is unacceptable.
Let me move on. In the last 5 years, your Department said
that 99 percent of the Department's acquisitions have been
inholdings within existing parks and refuges. I doubt that. But
what I would really like to know is what percentage of the
total acquisitions using LWCF monies actually abut Federal
lands on at least a majority of the borders, which should be a
definition of inholdings. What percent of those come from LWCF
funds?
Secretary Jewell. I do not have that percentage. Kris, do
you have it handy?
Ms. Sarri. As we have mentioned, 99 percent of the
properties are inholdings, and that includes what is in the
National Park Services, BLM, and the Fish and Wildlife Service
refuge boundaries.
The Chairman. That is not what I am asking--we have a
different definition of inholdings. I am asking how many of
those LWCF lands are actually abutted by Federal lands on a
majority of their sides?
Ms. Sarri. That is something we will have to get back to
you on.
The Chairman. Well, I wish you would, because that is the
key definition of an inholding. Anything else, we are spinning
it again in something else.
What percentage of land easements acquired by LWCF money
were already owned by a land trust that had the land or land in
easement?
Ms. Sarri. Again, that is something that we will have to
get back to you on. But it is very valid often to protect these
lands via non-profit organizations or other stakeholders as we
wait on funding to help with acquisition.
The Chairman. Yes, but that does not help us in our efforts
to try and figure out what our policy ought to be. If the
definition of what an inholding is is different--and it is,
from what you are saying--to what reality is, then we have a
problem.
I would like to know how many of these funds are actually
going to lands that are already owned and protected by some
other agency before we buy it. And then, how can we guarantee
recreational opportunities on these lands, once you get hold of
them?
Let me say one last thing. In every monument--you knew this
was coming, didn't you? In every national monument, you have at
least had somebody in the local delegation dumb enough to
support it. If you were doing something in Bears Ears, I want
it very clear there is nobody in the Utah Delegation, the
Senate or the House, who supports it. There is no one in the
state administration who supports it. You cannot find a state
legislator who represents that area who supports it.
You cannot even find a commissioner who supports it, even
though the only elected Navajo we have on a state or county
level is in that particular county, and she is opposed to it.
The chapters that live in that area are opposed to it. I am
going to say there is going to be a different standard. If
there is something that is done in Bears Ears in Utah, you do
not have the same kind of local support as you do in other
places.
Mr. Grijalva, you are recognized.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much. Let me start off, Madam
Secretary, with an easy question. A newspaper recently reported
that the illegal occupation of the national wildlife refuge in
Oregon has already cost the taxpayers $3.3 million in state and
Federal law enforcement expenditures. While we have not seen an
official estimate of costs incurred by the Fish and Wildlife
Service, I understand that the costs will be significant,
potentially in the tens of millions of dollars, once
restoration of the refuge is complete.
When can we expect a full estimate of those costs, Madam
Secretary? And what can Congress do to ensure that the law
breakers, not the taxpayers, bear these costs?
Secretary Jewell. Thank you, Ranking Member Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. That was the easy question.
Secretary Jewell. Well, yes, the answer is we are only now
just getting back into the refuge after the criminal sweep has
been completed by the FBI, so I do not actually have a number
for you yet, or a time frame. It is something that we are
estimating right now, but it has cost a significant amount of
money. We do not know the damage yet to the cultural resources
or the natural resources.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Madam Secretary, is the
Environmental Protection Agency in the Department of the
Interior?
Secretary Jewell. No, sir, it is not.
Mr. Grijalva. OK. Some in the Majority seem to be a little
confused about that when you were here a few months ago. Since
EPA is not in the Interior Department, do you have any
authority to compel documents from them?
Secretary Jewell. No, sir, I don't.
Mr. Grijalva. And, as you are aware, EPA was working at the
Gold King Mine when they released 3 million gallons of
wastewater. Of course, this is nothing compared to the 330
million gallons of acid mine drainage the mines in the area
leak almost every year, which is what EPA was trying to fix.
But it is still something worth trying to understand.
To my knowledge, is there anyone investigating what
happened at the Gold King Mine that does have the authority to
compel documents from them?
Secretary Jewell. I believe that the EPA's own Inspector
General is doing an assessment of the decisions made by the
EPA. But the limitation of our review was strictly technical in
nature and that was done by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Mr. Grijalva. OK. If unaddressed, climate change will
continue to make the American West dryer and hotter. Can you
discuss the steps the Department is taking to address the
threat of climate change as it relates to the West's water
supplies?
Secretary Jewell. Thank you. I am going to ask my
colleague, Mike Connor, to take that question.
Mr. Connor. Thank you for the question, Congressman. We are
taking action on a number of different levels with respect to
trying to build resiliency in our water systems to address
ongoing droughts, as well as climate change for the long term.
We are investing significant dollars through this budget and
the previous year's budget in our WaterSMART program. We have,
through that WaterSMART program, developed conservation
actions, invested in water reuse opportunities, and overall
have created or otherwise conserved almost 1 million acre-feet
over the last 7 years.
In addition to that, we continue to work with many
different communities through our basin studies programs to
identify integrated plans to look forward and evaluate supply
and demand imbalance in individual river basins, work with
stakeholders to develop long-term action plans that would, from
a balance standpoint, look at environmental needs as well as
water supply needs. The Yakima River Basin is an example of one
of those integrated plans, in addition to the Colorado River.
Those are just a sampling of the activities that we are
looking at across the board, from a water supply, environmental
storage, and conservation perspective.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. The Land and Water Conservation
Fund is an important tool from your perspective, Madam
Secretary. What do we need to ensure that remains a successful
tool well into the future?
Secretary Jewell. I don't think there are very many pieces
of legislation that have been as successful and important to
the American people as the Land and Water Conservation Fund. It
funded over 40,000 projects, in nearly every single county in
the United States of America, from local ball fields to
inholdings like some we are trying to put together in Grand
Teton National Park right now that Congresswoman Lummis is well
aware of. There are willing sellers and there is a desire of
people to have easements for sportsmen's access, for hunting
and fishing. LWCF has been a critical part----
Mr. Grijalva. Madam Secretary, the designation of
monuments, whether it is Bears Ears, Grand Canyon, or other
areas that are being talked about, I would hope that that does
not slow down at all.
The Chairman. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
regarding the ONRR's proposed coal valuation rulemaking, the
BLM's evaluation of royalty rate increases, and the coal
leasing moratorium that was initiated by your agency, you are
destroying my state's economy, and I am not exaggerating.
Wyoming has the smallest population in the Nation, by far.
Half of our state is controlled by the Department of the
Interior. You initiated policies with regard to jacking up
coal, oil, gas royalties and proposed to increase them, at a
time when coal companies are going bankrupt, railroad workers
are being laid off, and coal miners are being laid off. In the
year just passed, there were coal mine jobs lost every single
month.
In the face of the desire of this Administration to
literally destroy coal, oil, and gas industries, how is it
consistent with getting a fair return on the value of Federal
lands? Because no leasing means no financial return. That is my
first question.
Secretary Jewell. Congresswoman Lummis, Wyoming is blessed
with many natural resources. They also are tied to worldwide
commodity prices. Oil, gas, and coal are tied to commodity
prices. You also have a situation in the case of coal where
natural gas has become a competitor to coal for electricity
generation.
There is no question that coal has been an important part
of our energy past, and will continue to be an important part
of our energy future. But the prices for coal and how it
interplays with natural gas and other sources of energy are
based on worldwide commodity prices.
Second, there is a 20-year supply of coal under lease
currently on public lands right now. We are taking a look at a
coal program that has not been looked at for many, many years.
We are putting a pause until a programmatic EIS is done.
Mrs. Lummis. Madame Secretary, I am going to interrupt you,
because that pause does not allow companies to plan. And there
are no limits on how long these programmatic EISs are going to
take.
Let me switch directions. Why did you let the Royalty
Policy Committee's charter lapse in 2014?
Secretary Jewell. I am not familiar with that.
Mrs. Lummis. The Royalty Policy Committee was specifically
tasked with providing advice to you on royalty management
issues and other mineral-related policies. I know because I
used to sit on that committee, and I don't think the committee
met during the entirety of President Obama's administration.
And regarding these six BLM listening sessions that were held
around the country, if you would have listened to what was said
in the listening sessions, you never would have put the
moratorium on coal in the first place.
So the policies of this Administration are absolutely
geared toward killing coal, limiting oil and gas production on
Federal lands, and diminishing the revenues available from
those lands, which hurts my state more than any other state.
The manner in which this Administration has treated my state is
absolutely deplorable.
I love Yellowstone National Park, I love Grand Teton
National Park. I love Devils Tower. I love the Shoshone
National Forest. I live right next to the Bridger National
Forest. I have a farm that abuts the Bridger National Forest. I
love those spaces. That is only part of our state. The things
that are being done at the national parks are fabulous and
incredible, and I applaud you. But what is happening elsewhere
in the vast majority of my state are destructive policies that
are destroying my state, families, jobs, and the ability to
earn an income. Our population will decline again as a result
of Department of the Interior policies.
I want to tell you I am grossly offended by what this
Administration has done to my state. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Secretary Jewell. Mr. Chairman, may I have a quick
response?
The Chairman. You have 9 seconds. No, you don't, I am
sorry.
Mr. Young. Not much time left.
The Chairman. I will come back.
Mr. Young. You have 9 seconds.
The Chairman. We will come back. Actually, be careful, your
farm may be an inholding.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Ms. Bordallo, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, Madam
Secretary, it is good to see you again. I am sorry that I was
unable to be at the IGIA meeting. I was in the Pacific.
I appreciate this year's budget request. It maintains
compact impact discretionary funding of $3 million. With budget
constraints, mandatory funding for compact impact is only a
fraction, approximately one-fifth of what GAO estimates the
jurisdictions need for providing social services to COFA
migrants.
I understand that Interior's budget proposal does not
include a request for Palau compact assistance. Instead, you
are anticipating passage of the Administration's legislative
proposal, which includes appropriations through 2024. Palau is
an important Pacific ally, and I am concerned about any lapse
in assistance. Should there be a lapse, how does Interior plan
on continuing assistance?
Additionally, can you comment on the impact that not
passing the Palau compact will have on U.S. leadership in the
region?
Secretary Jewell. I completely agree with you,
Congresswoman Bordallo, about the importance of Palau and the
importance of a long-term fix. Rather than a discretionary,
year-by-year portion of our obligation to Palau, we believe we
need to step up and provide the full amount.
We did have a recommendation to do that with an offset. It
was the helium fund, which was used for other purposes. We
would welcome opportunities to work on a permanent solution. I
would say if we are not able to secure that, we are going to
continue to have to provide the annual amounts. Palau is
strategically very important, and has been a very, very
important ally of the United States since World War II.
Ms. Bordallo. Right. Well, I certainly hope that we will be
able to continue assistance if it does not come through on the
administrative proposal.
Secretary, I appreciate OIA's focus on sustainable energy,
coral reef management and invasive species control, amongst
many other important matters. I understand that there is an
overwhelming need for funding from the Technical Assistant
Grant Program, or TAP. Could you explain how the request of $21
million for TAP measures up to the needs of the territories, as
expressed in the grant proposals that OIA receives annually?
Secretary Jewell. I do not have with me the total amount
they have received, but I will say that the grant program is a
small fraction of the requests that we receive. And having been
to Guam, and spent a lot of time with representatives from all
of the insular areas, I would say it is much, much smaller than
the identified need that we have seen in all of these places.
Ms. Bordallo. Secretary, as you know, we have a problem
with invasive species like the brown tree snake and coconut
rhinoceros beetle. As a co-chair of the NISC, in developing the
regional biosecurity plan for Micronesia and Hawaii, the RBP is
meant to assess and provide a path forward on addressing
invasive species' risks to the Pacific area. So please
elaborate on how the Interior budget request addresses
Interior's role in implementing RBP's recommendations. In
particular, how does the budget address the challenges of
invasive species?
Secretary Jewell. I am going to ask Kris Sarri to respond.
Kris?
Ms. Sarri. Thank you, Congresswoman. As you mentioned,
invasive species are an extraordinary threat to natural
ecosystems and to the economy. One of the best things we can do
is try to do early detection and rapid response when an
invasive species is spreading.
So, the budget actually requests $1.5 million to help with
early detection and rapid response. That can be particularly
helpful in the Pacific region. There are also investments in
USGS to look at rapidly emerging invasive species and to try to
help communities with that.
Ms. Bordallo. All right. I have just a minute left. So,
once again on compact impact, could you discuss how OIA's
budget request this year internally addresses some of the
needed measures, such as a unified metric across jurisdictions
that will more accurately represent compact impact costs?
Secretary Jewell. I can say that we, as you know, have put
one-stop centers in both Guam and Hawaii to try and streamline
the process of compact impact. I will have to specifically look
into the latter part of your question.
We have a small amount, $30 million in the budget. The
impact on Guam is $144 million a year in unreimbursed costs. In
Hawaii, it is $163 million a year. It pales in comparison, but
we will get back to you on the specific question.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thankfully, this is the
last time we have Ms. Jewell before us.
Ms. Jewell, you say you only increased your budget 1
percent. Is that correct?
Secretary Jewell. It is a half a percent, sir.
Mr. Young. Half. OK. What was the enacted budget of 2016?
Secretary Jewell. Kris, you have the total budget for 2016?
Ms. Sarri. It is $13.3 billion.
Mr. Young. No, it was $18.53 billion.
Secretary Jewell. We are talking about the discretionary
funds.
Mr. Young. That was what was enacted. When you say it is 1
percent, you actually have an 11 percent increase, $2 billion
over last year's budget, requested by this Administration.
The Fish and Wildlife proposed rules in the state of Alaska
that take away our authority to manage fish and game. The Park
Service has done that and your agencies assert their actions
are allowed by the National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement
Act. I am an original sponsor of that Act, and I know the law
securely states ANILCA takes priority in any conflicts
regarding refugees in Alaska.
Now, why is Fish and Wildlife doing this? You want us to go
to court?
Secretary Jewell. The Alaska Department of Fish and Game
manages wildlife. The Fish and Wildlife Service and the Park
Service also are charged with managing wildlife, consistent
with its rules.
Mr. Young. Under ANILCA it is very clear. Read the law. And
you have not done that. The law makes it very clear that the
state of Alaska has authority to manage fish and game on the
preserves, primarily, and on refuges. That is the law.
Now, I suggest you get your legal beagle, because we will
go to court. I already passed it in the House to take away that
authority. You are going against the Act of this Congress. I
suggest respectfully to do that. You do not mess with the state
by regulation. Of course, this Administration does. Taking away
a right of this Congress that passed it for the state.
Second thing I would like to know, we have an area called
ACEC, special management areas designated by the BLM to protect
significant historic, cultural and scientific values, fish and
wildlife resources, or natural systems. And three of them have
popped up in the state: two are in the 40-mile mining district,
700,000 acres set aside with restrictions against mining; the
other one is in front of the Diamond gas line corridor so the
mine can be developed.
Where did those restrictions come from and what were they
based on?
Secretary Jewell. The ACEC stands for Areas of Critical
Environment Concern.
Mr. Young. OK. What were they based on?
Secretary Jewell. They are based on an assessment that the
BLM does.
Mr. Young. Do you have the assessment before you? Are you
aware of it?
Secretary Jewell. I do not have the assessment before me,
and I will have to get back to you for the record.
Mr. Young. Both of these areas are minerally rich. One is a
gold mine. It needs a gas line. And all of a sudden the ACEC
pops up, ladies and gentlemen, so we cannot get the gas to the
mine. Now, what is the reason?
Secretary Jewell. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Young. What was the reason?
Secretary Jewell. The BLM is updating its resource
management plan.
Mr. Young. Is it the Fish and Wildlife?
Secretary Jewell. I believe the resource management plan
you are talking about in the Fortymile situation is BLM.
Mr. Young. I am talking about the Diamond mine right now.
Secretary Jewell. I am sorry, I don't know.
Mr. Young. You don't know?
Secretary Jewell. I am happy to get back to you for the
record.
Mr. Young. And yet you are the Secretary. When you set
aside 175,000 acres of habitat for polar bears in the Arctic,
did you consult with any of the Native groups up there?
Secretary Jewell. The work on the polar bears was largely
done at the end of the prior administration.
Mr. Young. No, you set this land aside recently, Fish and
Wildlife did it. Was there any consultation with the Native
groups along the coastal plain?
Secretary Jewell. Are you talking about in the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge, sir?
Mr. Young. No, no, the whole thing. You set aside over
175,000 acres of habitat for the polar bear. Was there any
consultation taking place with the Native organizations up
there?
Secretary Jewell. What the Fish and Wildlife Service does
is----
Mr. Young. Did you have any consultation? Did you have any
consultation?
Secretary Jewell. It is based on science and work with the
people.
Mr. Young. That is not my question, Madam Secretary. Did
you consult with the people it directly affected? They have the
right to take subsistence to take those bears, and yet they
cannot do it under your recommendation with Fish and Wildlife.
Secretary Jewell. The Fish and Wildlife Service office is
located in Kaktovik. They speak----
Mr. Young. They did not consult with the people. That is an
example of this Administration.
The Chairman. Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member. I have some issues with regards to both the National
Park Service and the Bureau of Land Management, but I will
confine those and submit them later, Madam Secretary. Most of
my focus will be on the devastating drought that has impacted
the West, and California, in particular. I suspect the Under
Secretary will be the default to answer the questions that I
have.
Clearly, as we all know, this has impacted farm
communities, farm workers, and farmers. Last year, over 600,000
acres went unplanted. The current drought has demonstrated the
devastating impact that the combination of 5 dry years have
had, and no one expects you to control the weather. Clearly,
the climate is continuing to change.
But the regulatory impact, combined with those 5 dry years
has been, I think, a double whammy, in terms of the impact to
people. During the 5-year drought, and let me give you a
comparative analogy from 1987 to 1992, the Central Valley
Project agricultural services water supply allocations were 100
percent, 100 percent, 50 percent, 25 percent, and 25 percent.
In the 20 years since that drought, numerous state and
Federal regulations have been imposed, rededicating the
existing water supplies to various other purposes, including
the environment for management, and limiting operational
capacity of the Central Valley Project.
This effort has focused on readdressing the use of the
water. Little or no effort has been used for invasive species
or predator fish, which was the topic of an earlier
subcommittee hearing last week, a significant cause of the
decline of the fisheries.
The result has been a stark review when we recently look at
the Central Valley Project and the Ag. service allocations
which, beginning in the ninth wettest year on record, 2011,
your allocations in a comparative analysis from the late 1980s
and 1990s to 2011 were an 80 percent allocation. We had 180
percent of normal water that year; 40 percent the following
year in 2012; 20 percent in 2013; 0 percent in 2014; 0 percent
in 2015; and likely an expected zero allocation this year, as
well.
And it is that devastation, combined with 5 continuous dry
years, plus this regulatory scheme that has been so devastating
to the people I represent. It seems clear that regulatory
reform is essential to providing the Central Valley Project the
ability to meet contractual obligations.
Mr. Under Secretary, can you explain to me why, even in
years like 2011, the ninth wettest year in our over-100-year
historical record, the Central Valley Project was only capable
of providing 80 percent of its contractual obligation?
Mr. Connor. I can provide a general overview as to why I
think that happened. We have basically been in drought for the
last 8 years, as you know----
Mr. Costa. No, no, we all get that.
Mr. Connor [continuing]. In the Central Valley of
California. So we were in drought until about 2011. The rains
and the precipitation came late in the year, which was part of
the reason why the allocation was late.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Under Secretary, and Madam Secretary, I
respect all your good work, but I do not have a lot of time.
For over 20 years, we have had an increasing layer of
regulatory requirements that have reduced the water supply from
90 percent to 40 percent. That is just the bottom line. And I
guess I would feel better about it if, at the same time the
water reliability had significantly decreased, that we were
increasing the populations of listed species that have declined
by all measures and are at the lowest level that have been
recorded. I am talking about the native species, not the non-
native species. It is very clear that the current regulatory
controls are not achieving their intended purpose for species
recovery. I mean those are just the facts.
So, Mr. Under Secretary, do you believe that in Fiscal Year
2017 your budget provides the agencies under your jurisdiction
the necessary tools to implement measures that will result in
goals of increased water reliability for California's and
species recovery?
Mr. Connor. I think we are investing in both areas of water
supply reliability, as well as species recovery.
The drought has taken a devastating impact, not just on
water supply, which I fully agree with you, but also with
respect to Fish and Wildlife populations.
There are metrics that NOAA Fisheries has provided that
indicate in the first few years of the biological opinions for
the salmon species that they were doing better. The replacement
rate from salmon was improving during that course of time.
Mr. Costa. I have 10 seconds left. What do you think the
allocation is going to be this year for the Central Valley
Project?
Mr. Connor. At this point in time the allocation, and you
are probably talking about water service contractors, is
probably going to be at a zero, from where we are at right now.
Mr. Costa. I am sorry, did you say zero?
Mr. Connor. Zero for water service contracts south of the
Delta.
Mr. Costa. I will submit my other questions. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Secretary Jewell, for being here.
Representative Lummis already brought up the coal moratorium,
where you are even preventing the completion of pending lease
applications.
In that order you note that there have been two previous
moratoriums on coal lease sales that were in response to
legislative action by Congress: the enactment of NEPA in 1970
and the Fiscal Year 1984 Interior Appropriations Act. In your
order you do generally cite various existing statutes, but
there has not been any specific legislation that would
authorize a similar moratorium today.
What is the specific legal justification for your order?
Secretary Jewell. We will provide a solicitor's opinion if
that is helpful.
We went through this in detail. We looked at the historic
record. We looked at what had been done in the prior two times
that there had been a review of the coal program under the
Reagan administration and the Nixon administration, and applied
the same tools that Congress had used on the pause.
Mr. Lamborn. But without the direction from Congress in
this case.
Secretary Jewell. Well, we followed the lead of what
Congress did last time.
Mr. Lamborn. Which we did not do this time.
Secretary Jewell. We are doing a pause on the program
because it has not had a review in 30 years, sir, and we felt
it needed it.
Mr. Lamborn. But Congress did not ask for this.
Secretary Jewell. No, but we did listening sessions around
the country. We did listen, contrary to what was heard before,
and we felt a review was necessary.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, this will be sorted out in the courts.
Changing the subject, according to the Energy Information
Administration, marketed natural gas production has increased
by 35 percent from 2005 to 2013. Everyone knows it is
increasing. But at the same time, EPA data shows that methane
emissions have been decreasing.
Now, in light of that, and in light of the fact that the
EPA is continuing its efforts to reduce methane emissions from
industry sources, why has BLM jumped into this, promulgating
its own methane regulations, which sometimes overlaps with
EPA's rules?
Secretary Jewell. The BLM oversees the oil and gas activity
on Federal and tribal lands, only. It is a different authority
than the EPA. It is our responsibility to both collect revenues
on behalf of all American people, and when methane is vented or
flared no royalty is paid to the American people on that; and
second, to do energy development in a safe and responsible way,
which means environmentally responsible.
Our venting and flaring rules, which we have done in
consultation with states, including your own in Colorado, which
is somewhat ahead of the game, have been to bring those into
alignment, recognizing that venting and flaring natural gas is
not getting taxpayers or tribes the royalties that they
deserve, while also wasting valuable energy that is impacting
the environment.
Mr. Lamborn. There are those who are saying that the BLM-
proposed regulation and EPA's regulations overlap and even
conflict. In light of that, are you open to extending the
comment period, so that people can talk about the conflicts
that are being caused by two agencies, which looks like they
had not consulted with each other?
Secretary Jewell. We have been consulting consistently with
the EPA throughout this process. In some cases, we will allow
an extension. In other cases, we believe there has been
adequate time. I will have to look specifically at that one. We
always entertain that, but if comment periods have closed, we
also do take comments as people raise them throughout the
process.
So, we are intending to keep the venting and flaring
efforts on track and believe that there has been sufficient
time to comment. I can reassure you we have been consulting
with the EPA throughout to make sure that we are not in
conflict.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I would ask you to extend that period.
Because the BLM venting and flaring rule will impose new
costs on Federal oil and gas production, it is going to drive
out marginal plays, it will drive out small players who do not
have the resources to retrofit new techniques and equipment.
Isn't this counterproductive to the Obama administration's
policies? I mean, there is a war on coal.
Secretary Jewell. There is not a war on coal.
Mr. Lamborn. That goes without arguing. So that means a
shift to natural gas. But this reduces natural gas. So isn't
that counterproductive?
Secretary Jewell. First, let me say there is no war on
coal. Those are your words.
Second, I do not think it is counterproductive. I do not
think it is OK for an oil play to vent and flare natural gas
into the atmosphere without any efforts to collect it. That is
allowing a resource that belongs to all Americans to go up in
smoke or to go up into the atmosphere. We believe it should be
collected.
It does cost money. I am sure there is also money to be
gained from the production of this natural gas associated with
oil.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Sablan.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, I want to first thank you for your
continuing commitment to the exploration of the potential of
geothermal energy in the Northern Marianas, particularly on the
island of Saipan.
I have some other questions that I will probably submit for
the record. But for now, the Close Up Program brings island
students to Washington each year to learn how their government
works, a government that they do not have direct participation
in. We do not vote for a president, their Delegate does not
have a vote. But it is a valuable use of Federal grant funds.
In fact, several of my colleagues in the Northern Marianas
Congressional Office got interested in government through Close
Up.
Your Office of Insular Affairs had recognized that Close Up
is a program that is ``necessary on an ongoing basis for the
insular areas,'' and ``because there was no other source of
funds in the Federal budget.'' That is a quote from the OIA
budget justification for 2016, 2015, 2014, and 2013. Close Up
had a specific line item of $1.1 million in your Fiscal Year
2016 proposal. But for Fiscal Year 2017, OIA has dropped any
reference to Close Up, and I am not sure what to make of that.
It is troubling.
So, I would like to receive assurance today, Madam
Secretary, that even though there is no specific mention in
your budget documents, the Office of Insular Affairs will
continue to use technical assistance funds to support Close Up
in Fiscal Year 2017 at the level that the program needs. My
colleagues that represent American Samoa, Guam, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and the Northern Marianas actually wrote the Assistant
Secretary asking for the commitment. We have received no
response, so I am going to ask you today.
Secretary Jewell. I believe we have $1 million in the
budget for the Close Up Program, but I will have to check with
Esther Kia'aina to provide more specifics on that.
Mr. Sablan. She has not responded to our letter. If she had
responded, I would not be asking.
Secretary Jewell. OK.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you.
Secretary Jewell. We will follow up, thank you.
Mr. Sablan. Madam Secretary, on another issue, the fiscal
year omnibus appropriation authorized a special resource study
on the island of Rota to see if it would be feasible to have a
national park there. This is something I worked to achieve
since my very first year in Congress. I would like to hear from
you that the study has begun as scheduled, and that you have
the money you need in your Fiscal Year 2017 proposal to keep
the Rota park study moving forward and on schedule.
Secretary Jewell. I don't have an answer to that, either. I
am sorry, I will have to look into that specifically for Rota.
I have not seen whether it is specifically in the budget or
just contained within the National Park Service broadly. We
will get back to you.
Mr. Sablan. OK. I have very little time left. We have in
the Northern Marianas the American Memorial Park, dedicated to
the war on Saipan and the Northern Marianas. We recently had a
devastating typhoon last August. Electricity and water services
are restored, schools are in session, life is really getting
back to normal.
I have been on two visits. I am hearing from constituents
that the American Memorial Park, which the Park Service
manages, has been slow to clean up debris, repair damage, and
get the park fully open to the public. I would like to ask what
is the problem? Is it a money issue? Is it because the park is
supervised from Guam, and that means an extra layer of
decisionmaking? What can we do to speed things up, Madam
Secretary?
Secretary Jewell. We will follow up with the Park Service
directly. We are constrained for resources, but I was not aware
of that until you just brought it up.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you. On the Interagency Group on Insular
Affairs, IGIA, which met last week. I was traveling and not
able to attend. I think the concept of a White House-led
response to the needs of the insular areas is great, I really
do. But I am concerned about results.
I have never seen a report on what the outcome of these
IGIA meetings has been. Are the problems the island governors
raised being addressed? Are the governors satisfied with the
results? Is the IGIA process working? I don't know.
So I would like to ask if your office could provide me with
a report on the problems the governors have raised at IGIA over
the last 7 years, and what the outcomes have been. Have we
gotten results? Would that be possible, Madam Secretary?
Secretary Jewell. I will be happy to ask Insular Affairs to
do that. I was at the last IGIA meeting and I do believe we are
making progress on a number of the areas that were raised.
Mr. Sablan. I am out of time, Madam, but thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, under Executive Order 13132, no agency
shall promulgate any regulation that has federalism
implications, that imposes substantial direct compliance costs
on state and local governments, and that is not required by
statute, unless the agency, in a separately identified portion
of the preamble to the regulation, as it is to be issued in the
Federal Register, provides to the Director of the OMB a
federalism summary impact statement.
Madam Secretary, yes or no, did the BLM prepare a
federalism assessment for the hydraulic fracturing rule?
Secretary Jewell. I believe we followed all of the
appropriate regulatory standards.
Dr. Fleming. That, again, is a yes-or-no question. We seem
to have this problem each time we speak. I am just asking you,
did you or did you not do this?
Secretary Jewell. I am sure we followed all of the
appropriate rules.
Dr. Fleming. Well, apparently you did not, because it did
not happen.
BLM believes that there will be no financial impacts to
states as a result of this rule. That came from your
Department.
Well, it appears that your agency was quite wrong in this
assessment. Several states sued the Department of the Interior,
alleging that irreparable harm from this regulation will occur.
And, as you know, a Federal judge has now found that there
exists a ``credible threat'' of irreparable harm in the way of
lost revenue. This finding was on the basis of the four states
claiming in their briefs and arguments that there would be lost
revenue. North Dakota specified there would be a conservative
estimate of lost revenue totaling over $300 million per year.
Secretary Jewell, in light of the states' statements, do
you believe your agency was correct in not providing a
federalism assessment?
Secretary Jewell. Sir, because this is a matter of
litigation, I do not think it is appropriate for me to comment.
Dr. Fleming. Well, I have to say the American people are so
angry at Washington, and they have a right to be. I mean, this
is absurd. You passed regulations without laws coming through
Congress, you just simply roll them out there. They have
negative impacts on states at a very critical time in history
when it comes to the economies of our states. And you are not
even willing to comment on the actions that you take. I just
see that as very sad.
Secretary Jewell. I stand behind the need for fracking
regulations.
Dr. Fleming. In the limited time that I have, I have
another question. This is regarding the National Ocean Policy,
and I will quote from it, as well. ``The order shall prepare
and make publicly available an annual report, including a
concise description of actions taken by the agency.''
Now, President Obama signed the Executive Order 13547 in
July 2010 to create the National Ocean Policy. What steps has
the Department of the Interior and its agencies taken to
implement the National Ocean Policy?
Ms. Sarri. The intention of the National Ocean Policy was
to facilitate interagency coordination on cross-cutting ocean
issues, and also to work closely with states. It is something
that we actually integrate into our work, whether we are
talking about science or looking at different uses.
Dr. Fleming. OK. But what I am specifically wanting to know
is about this annual report. Have you been providing this
annual report?
Ms. Sarri. That is something that I would actually have to
talk to the Council on Environmental Quality about, as they are
the lead coordinator for this for the Administration.
Dr. Fleming. Well, I can give you the answer right here.
No, you have not done any annual reports, even though it is
required.
But what is interesting is this: in the order it says, ``It
shall be consistent with applicable international law,
including customary international law such as that reflected in
the Law of the Sea Convention.'' Are we a party to that
convention, that treaty?
Ms. Sarri. No, we are not a party to it.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Then why is it that the Administration
fails to comply with laws that have been enacted, but intends
to comply with laws that have not been agreed to?
Again, the American people are tremendously angry at
Washington, because we have a President and those who work for
the President who insist on creating their own laws and not
complying with the laws of the land, even though we all take
the oath to faithfully execute all the laws of the land.
With that, I will yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Jewell, for appearing before the committee today and
for your service at the Department of the Interior.
I, for one, appreciate your work on behalf of the multi-use
mandate, which is inherent in the Department of the Interior's
management of Federal lands and the Department's critical role
in protecting these lands for future generations. This is,
obviously, not without its challenges, as we are hearing today.
But it is important that we keep in mind that these lands
belong to all Americans, that they are part of our national
heritage, and that we have to keep this in mind as many
difficult decisions are being made.
I want to focus on the national parks, and I want to
especially thank you for coming to visit my district this past
fall as part of my River Day. I know that I am not the only
Member of Congress who you have made a point to come visit and
see the remarkable national parks that we call home.
One of the real highlights of that visit was the
opportunity to hand out an Every Kid in a Park pass to local
fourth-graders. Some of them had come from a nearby city where
there was not a resident national park, in fact, I don't think
any of them had really ever been to a national park. So, I
think it is such an important initiative that you are taking,
especially as you seek to engage diverse populations for the
future. It is so important to the long-term health and
understanding of the important role that our national parks
play in protecting our great heritage.
In that vein, I really see some great numbers reflecting
the significant visitation and recreational use of our national
parks, and I wanted to give you a chance to simply highlight
that. It was great to hear Congresswoman Lummis speak so highly
of the national parks in her district, as well.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you for the comments and
appreciation for the national parks. We had record visitation
last year: 307 million visitors to the national parks. This is
the Centennial year, 2016. I am quite confident we will see an
increase on that number. It drives tremendous revenues to local
economies, billions of dollars. The outdoor recreation industry
estimates, in total, $646 billion, a big chunk of that is
through national parks.
Kris or Mike, do you have the specific numbers for our
latest national park study?
We will provide that to you, as opposed to scrambling
through the paperwork here.
But as you know from the park in your state, as the
Chairman knows from the national parks in Utah, and our other
national parks, these are big drivers of revenue, tourism, and
jobs across our country.
Ms. Tsongas. I actually have the numbers in front of me. In
2015 alone, the National Park Service confirmed a record 307.2
million visits, which was a 4.9 increase over the previous
record-setting year in 2014 of 292.8 million visits. I wish we
could get more of those visits to Lowell. Minuteman does a
great job. Eleven parks had more than 5 million recreation
visits in 2015, and overnight stays in park campgrounds and
back-country were up over 2014. So I think, obviously, there is
broad recognition across this country of the unique
opportunities that our national parks present.
But yet, despite widespread public support for the National
Park Service, its budget has been decreasing. In just the past
10 years, the Park Service has had its budget decreased by 22
percent, compromising its ability to ensure the long-term
protection of this great heritage.
In my own district, Lowell National Historical Park has had
a 15 percent reduction in full-time staff from Fiscal Year 2010
to 2015, and a 22 percent reduction in the park's base budget.
Similarly, at Minuteman National Park, which commemorates the
beginnings of the American Revolution, there has been a 27
percent decrease in staff time, which is so important to
fulfilling the mission of the park, and an 8 percent reduction
in the base budget.
Despite all that, you all are doing a remarkable job, and I
think the visitation numbers reflect that. With that, I yield
back the balance of my time.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Jewell,
welcome.
In the 1970s Congress passed laws such as NEPA and ESA that
have been abused to drastically restrict our ability to manage
our forests. As a result, we have seen an 80 percent decline in
timber harvested out of the Federal forests, and we have seen a
concomitant increase in the acreage destroyed by catastrophic
wildfire in the same period, just proving the maxim that excess
timber will come out of the forest, one way or another. It is
either carried out or it is burned out, but it comes out.
Trees that once had room to grow now fight for their lives
against other trees that are trying to occupy the same ground,
making them susceptible to pestilence, disease, and ultimately,
catastrophic fire.
After 40 years of such laws and policies that all promised
to improve our forest environment, I think we are entitled to
ask how are our forests doing, environmentally, these days?
Secretary Jewell. We welcome the bipartisan recommendations
on a fix to how we budget for wildland fires and how we budget
for healthy forests fuels removals and working closely with
communities----
Mr. McClintock. You are not answering the question, Madam
Secretary. Would you say that the environmental health of our
forests has improved or deteriorated over the past decade?
Secretary Jewell. I would say it has deteriorated, largely
because we have not been able to do the work we could do.
Mr. McClintock. I would say so, too. And I think that we
need to look at the policies that are in place that are causing
that deterioration.
Mr. Connor boasted that programs such as WaterSMART, at
enormous expense, have conserved a million acre-feet of water
over the last 7 years. And yet, in the last 7 weeks in the
Sacramento Delta, we have lost a half-million acre-feet of
water to the Pacific Ocean, due to the Delta smelt biological
opinion. The Water, Power and Oceans Subcommittee was told at
last week's hearing that none of that water was used for any
other purpose than for Delta smelt releases. It was all water
that went to the ocean.
I wonder what moral authority has the government to demand
Draconian conservation measures from citizens when their own
government thinks nothing of squandering water on a massive
scale to adjust water temperatures for the fish, as was done in
the releases last year, or in this case to save one Delta
smelt.
Mr. Connor. Congressman, the conservation measures that we
are taking are not Draconian.
Mr. McClintock. You shut down pumps, cost us a half-million
acre-feet of water because one Delta smelt was caught in the
pumps, and you don't call that Draconian?
Mr. Connor. I said our conservation measures are not
Draconian.
Mr. McClintock. Do you understand how that sounds to the
American people, or the people in my region who have stretched
every drop of water in their homes, have watched their lawns
die, have lost their prize gardens, all in the interest of
conservation. They are watching this kind of squandering, and
you do not even call that Draconian?
Mr. Connor. I said the conservation measures through our
WaterSMART program are not Draconian.
To get to your question about the pumps, it is true that we
have regulatory restrictions that are in place because of the
status of endangered species. Having said that, we are working
as best we can to maximize pumping.
Mr. McClintock. We just received testimony that endangered
species are declining, despite all of these policies. So,
obviously, they are not working, but they are causing enormous
economic harm in the West.
Mr. Connor. The drought takes a toll on all, yes.
Mr. McClintock. Let me get on to a question of our national
parks. Tourists do not go where they are not welcome. The
number of overnight stays at the national parks has declined
rather dramatically from their highs. Yosemite, in my district,
has just changed management. This is the first day of the new
management, and they have just announced they are banning
bottled water from sale anywhere in the park.
How does this encourage Americans to enjoy our national
parks, when you are systematically removing the amenities that
make their stays pleasant?
Secretary Jewell. We certainly have no intention of
removing amenities that make stays pleasant. I would say
garbage has been a huge problem for us in parks, and bottles,
in particular. This was the genesis behind the policy trying to
reduce that.
Mr. McClintock. And yet there are no bans on canned soda.
And, in fact, they are replacing the bottled water with boxed
water. How does that reduce the garbage situation?
Secretary Jewell. When people can refill their water
bottles and reuse water bottles, you have----
Mr. McClintock. But you are selling boxed water.
Secretary Jewell. I don't know what you are talking about
with boxed water, sir. We will have to look into that.
Mr. McClintock. Well, let me ask you one other question.
At peak tourist season, we have lines over a mile long at
Yosemite. You have instituted in certain parts a pilot project
that makes scanning of passes available so that people can gain
instant entry. Are you planning to bring this to other parks,
like Yosemite? And, if so, when?
The Chairman. Answer that in the next round.
Secretary Jewell. OK.
The Chairman. Besides, you are never going to get people to
come until you get Dr. Pepper in there. Forget about the water
and the Gatorade.
Mr. Ruiz.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, you are holding your own with strength and
dignity, despite the disrespectful, patronizing, paternalistic
bullying, demeaning Washington politics tone of this partisan,
gotcha line of questioning.
I want to say thank you for your pursuits in helping
Southern California prevent the catastrophe of the receding
Salton Sea, and for the funding to create the wetlands, which
is very much appreciated. I want to get your ideas of what we
can do to further prevent the decaying of the Salton Sea.
Secretary Jewell. Mike?
Mr. Connor. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question. The Salton Sea has been very encouraging. Recently
the state has stepped up to take a leadership role in looking
at how the Salton Sea restoration plan can be revitalized. We
are full partners in that effort. We just announced through
Reclamation an additional $3 million investment in the research
program.
So, I think we collectively need to stay through that
process to develop the appropriate restoration plan that will
build upon the restoration plan that Fish and Wildlife Service
financed. I think that concept of restored managed wetlands and
a smaller sea is the way that we can manage the public health
issues that exist there, as well as look for water supply
benefits.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you. I understand that the Desert Renewable
Energy Conservation Plan is in its final stages of development,
and I want to thank you for the work the Department has done to
see this plan to completion, so that there may be a guide for
future clean energy development across Southern California,
while ensuring our pristine desert landscapes remain protected.
I understand that there are a number of acres in the DRECP
broadly labeled as unallocated, much of which lie under the
Salton Sea. What plan do you have in place to review these
lands over the next several years?
Mr. Connor. Congressman, there are unallocated lands as
part of the DRECP, as it has been developed. We will have to
look into the ones that are allocated under the Salton Sea
itself.
I do know that we have worked very closely with Imperial
County as we have developed the DRECP, and I believe we have
consistency with the DRC plan.
Dr. Ruiz. And I would encourage you to come up with a plan
for those unallocated acres.
My last question, but certainly not least, I want to thank
you for making many significant investments in Indian Country,
from the focus to Native children and their health, security,
and family stability to providing critically needed staff for
the Bureau of Indian Education.
I look forward to discussing these matters in greater
details with someone from the Department later this month.
However, what are your priorities for Indian Country and tribal
policy, moving forward this year?
Secretary Jewell. Thank you for the question and for your
support. Indian education is critically important. We have a
third of our schools that are in poor condition. Getting
ourselves on a pathway to replace schools, which this budget
begins to do with restructures for Indian education. And we
appreciate the reprogramming support we got from both the House
and the Senate to do that.
Looking at the whole family through our Tiwahe Initiative
to address issues like suicide in Indian Country, which is
really in epidemic proportions. We have to work together. We
are doing that, in fact, across the whole Federal family,
through the White House Council on Native American Affairs.
So, from the Tiwahe Initiative, to education, to law
enforcement, and providing opportunities for economic
development, all of these are part of our budget and the
significant increase of 5 percent that we are asking for in
2017.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you very much. Can you elaborate on the
work to prevent suicide within Native American areas?
Secretary Jewell. Yes. I would say it is multi-faceted, and
it is also with HHS, in particular, through SAMHSA and the
Indian Health Service.
When we dissect the issue of suicide in Indian Country, so
much of it ties to very deep and persistent issues in the
family structure. Schools are a safe place where people can
come. We are looking at pilots to use schools as places for
training of parents and for counseling. There are a number of
youth programs out there and, unfortunately, youth are the
first line of defense against suicide. But in many cases, that
is the safest place that kids feel that they can go.
We are working on all those programs with a pilot right now
at Pine Ridge, but looking at learning from that and taking it
throughout Indian Country.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you very much.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
Dr. Ruiz. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thank you for being here. Let me jump
right into my questions about Northern long-eared bats. I am
pleased that the Fish and Wildlife Service has recognized the
white-nose syndrome was the driver behind the decline of the
Northern long-eared bats, and has ensured that the final 4(d)
rule allows for activities to continue that are not impacting
the bat.
However, it appears as if the Sierra Club and the Center
for Biological Diversity intend to file suit, regardless. So
can you provide the committee with a sense of how you intend to
defend the Service's use of its 4(d) authority?
Secretary Jewell. I would say that lawsuits are not
uncommon, from all points in this job. I believe the Fish and
Wildlife Service has a defensible position, recognizing the
primary threat is white-nose syndrome, but also recognizing the
importance to the remaining bats of having a habitat that is
conducive. The 4(d) rule specifically looks at that and we
believe that is legally defensible. But, of course, we will
have to determine that if we are sued through the court
process.
Mr. Thompson. Will you commit to battle that in the courts
if the suit is filed--and I hope it is not, but like you said,
it commonly occurs--versus what has happened in the past, which
appears to be some back-room deal or compromise to the
Endangered Species Act. I just want to assure that you are
going to do your best to use the resources you have to defeat
that effort.
Secretary Jewell. I am not familiar with the lawsuit in
specific, if it has been filed. But I know that we regularly
defend our 4(d) rules and the actions that we take in the Fish
and Wildlife Service. I would suspect that is the case here,
too, but until I look at the specifics, it is hard to know.
Mr. Thompson. I appreciate it. I look forward to staying in
contact with you over the issue.
Part of the budget request was a 350 percent increase for
Federal land acquisition. According to the Congressional
Research Service, the deferred maintenance backlog facing
Federal agencies is almost $19 billion. How much of this
backlog can be attributed to lands that were acquired using
Land and Water Conservation Fund funding?
Secretary Jewell. I don't know. We will have to get back to
you with that for the record.
Mr. Thompson. OK. When the Department of the Interior
agencies purchase land using Land and Water Conservation Fund
monies, is a part of the process committing to performing
short- or long-term maintenance on that parcel?
Secretary Jewell. Let me just say that the conflation of
deferred maintenance and Land and Water Conservation Fund, I
don't think is accurate. In many cases, when we make
acquisitions, they might be for inholdings where we might
reduce our costs because we do not have to provide access. They
may be for conservation easements across private property.
There are a wide variety of uses and I do not think it is
appropriate to conflate the two.
Kris, did you want to say something?
Ms. Sarri. Yes, I just wanted to follow up. Often the
acquisition can ease the management costs and operation costs
on our public lands, and we actually do take a look at that as
part of the acquisition process.
But also in terms of some of the backlog issues, a
significant part, 50 percent of our backlog, is due to
transportation issues. So, that is not directly related to land
acquisitions.
Mr. Thompson. But I want to deal with that percentage that
is not, which is significant, with the amount of money that we
are talking about and the amount of acreage that the Federal
Government owns today and has taken off the tax rolls and put
into the public sector from the private sector.
Is there a consideration of affordability when that
decision is made? For example, there is a plan of 42
acquisition projects, according to the President's budget, that
had been projected; a 350 percent increase for Federal land
acquisition. When whoever put that pen to paper or finger to
keyboard and put that plan together--was there a consideration
of affordability? Not just on whether you can get the monies
for acquisition, but the maintenance, and making sure that
those lands are managed in a way that is best for the public.
We see a lot of our public lands that are not today. My
colleague talked a lot about the wildfire situation. There are
invasive species. I mean creating problems that spread beyond
the public lands, that I think many times are inappropriately
acquired and poorly maintained, and bleed out into the private
sector. Those flames and invasive species do not honor
boundaries. Is that affordability considered?
Secretary Jewell. We do take into account----
Mr. Thompson. How much weight is put behind the
affordability issue?
Secretary Jewell. I don't know specifically the weight.
There is a complicated process that each department goes
through to prioritize.
Mr. Thompson. Could you put it in congressional terms? Make
it simple, and forward it my way, or to the committee. I would
appreciate it.
The Chairman. Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
witnesses.
Madam Secretary, you and your team have maintained your
composure and professionalism, despite a difficult tone that
was set at the outset of this hearing, and continued through
some of the questioning. It is hard to have a civil discourse
when you are greeted with an aggressive partisan gauntlet at
the very outset. We heard every manner of attack and insult. I
was half expecting to hear a call to arms for people to head to
their local wildlife refuge, but, thankfully, some restraint
was shown and I am grateful for that.
But I cannot help contrasting the low regard that the
American people have for this Congress with the very high
regard they have for your agency, and the National Park
Service, in particular. I know we are celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the National Park Service. And a recent poll, a
poll from 2014, gave the Park Service 84 percent approval among
western voters. And this was the case in every single western
state. Strong majorities everywhere, from Wyoming to Nevada,
that not only support your good work, but they oppose these
proposals that we keep hearing to give our public lands from
the Federal Government over to the state.
And if we needed an even more recent ratification of your
work, we got it in the Nevada caucuses recently, where none
other than Donald Trump opposed that crazy idea. His opponents,
of course, were very much pounding that tired old narrative,
that we need to hand our public lands back over to the states,
but he said that he thought that would be a bad idea.
And I don't often quote Donald Trump or give him props, but
he said, ``I don't like the idea because I want to keep the
lands great, and you don't know what the state is going to do.
We have to be great stewards of this land. This is magnificent
land.'' I am going to stop there with the nice statements about
Donald Trump, but I found it interesting that he trounced his
opponents despite taking that position.
Given the bipartisan support that we have historically had
for keeping our public lands great, I want to ask you how your
budget addresses threats to our lands from extremists, like
those who recently occupied the Malheur National Wildlife
Refuge in Oregon. And specifically, I would like to know, and I
think many Americans want to know, how are you going to ensure
that the cost to the public, in terms of the damages to
property and the desecration of sacred sites, is properly
compensated.
Secretary Jewell. Well, thank you for your comments,
broadly and specifically, around that. There is no question the
safety and security of the public and our employees is of
paramount importance, and the situation that happened at
Malheur was very frightening. We actually had people that had
to pull their children out of school and leave town that were
being followed around the neighborhoods, in stores, being
accosted by people that did not live in their home community.
And I don't think you get over that quickly.
I have met with a county judge and elected county
commissioners from that region and they want to get back to
normal.
For the most part, we have a thin law enforcement presence
in our public land management agencies. They will be patrolling
more in twos than singly, as they did before. We will do
everything we can to make sure that they are kept safe. We are
very gratified for the support we received from the FBI in that
stand-off. I would say that while the safety and security of
people will be of paramount importance, it is going to be
difficult to do with the budget that we have.
Mr. Huffman. What about the costs that we incurred, which
must have been very significant during the period of this
siege, and the damages that occurred to public property during
that time? I think Americans want to know that those that were
responsible, the law breakers, are going to reimburse us, and
that the taxpayers are not going to pick up the tab for this
joy ride that these criminals took with public property.
Secretary Jewell. I think it is fair to say that, right
now, the taxpayers are picking up the tab. Fortunately, there
are a number of people that have been indicted, and I hope that
restitution will be a part of that. But whether there is
actually any money collected will be a long time into the
future.
Mike, did you want to say something?
Mr. Connor. Could I just quickly add that our budget
proposal does include a proposal for the Fish and Wildlife
Service to have cost recovery authority, similar to the
National Park Service and similar to NOAA for marine
sanctuaries. So, that is part of our budget proposal and we
think it is applicable now.
Mr. Huffman. In the couple seconds that I have left, we
continue to hear this narrative about 500,000 acre-feet in the
West being lost to the Delta smelt. Secretary Connor, that does
not jive with my understanding of how the system has operated.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Connor. I think it is correct. I don't know what the
assumptions are there. It looks to be about 60,000, 70,000
acre-feet.
The Chairman. Thank you, you are over. And I appreciate
your application for your job in the Trump administration. Way
to go, Huffman.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Mr. Benishek.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here. And, contrary to what Mr. Huffman
said, I want to say something nice. I applaud the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service delisting the gray wolf in the Great Lakes
states and Wyoming. And, unfortunately, we are dealing with a
lawsuit there and a judge has reinstated the listing. But I
appreciate your agency actually delisting a species that has
recovered.
We just passed legislation here in the House this past week
to rectify what we think is a bad decision by the court and
affirm the position of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in
that instance. So there you go, I said something nice.
[Applause.]
Dr. Benishek. I do have a question, though.
The Chairman. If you say anything nice again, their
applause will take away your time.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Benishek. OK. I think that there is a position here
that we do not understand why we are acquiring more land when
we have a backlog of just maintaining the land? I think that is
a theme that has been presented here fairly accurately.
The answer of just buying inholdings does not ring true to
me, to tell you the truth, because it is a 350 percent increase
in the funding there. And especially in my district, we have
several National Park Service facilities, the National Pictured
Rocks, Sleeping Bear Dunes, and Isle Royale National Park.
I am looking at some of the critical infrastructure issues
that are there. Somebody mentioned the $19 billion backlog in
total. In my district, for example, at Sleeping Bear Dunes,
there is a $19 million backlog of maintenance, with $4 million
of critical systems deferred maintenance, according to this NPS
asset inventory summary. I am reading over these documents,
trying to figure out what is the solution here. There is a huge
backlog.
But then I also noticed that in a note here it says, ``The
parameters used to calculate the data in the report do not
match the Federal real property profile parameters or the
Federal Account Standards Advisory Board parameters.'' So this
is, apparently, the standard way the Federal Government
evaluates land and values, but they are not used in this
report. Do you know why that is the case?
Secretary Jewell. I will need the specific language in what
you are talking about. I am not sure what that refers to. But
can you clarify this 350 percent increase that you and Mr.
Thompson referenced?
Dr. Benishek. That is a BLM number here that we have. The
proposed budget includes $88 million for BLM land acquisition,
including $44 million in current appropriations and $44 million
in permanent funding. This is $68 million or 350 percent more
than the $19 million enacted in Fiscal Year 2015.
Secretary Jewell. So this is specific to BLM?
Dr. Benishek. That is the proposed budget.
Secretary Jewell. Yes, because the increase for the Land
and Water Conservation Fund is not nearly what you are
suggesting. So, I think I just need to coordinate on numbers.
But let me say this, again, that maintenance backlog is an
issue. Our budget proposes a methodical way of reducing the
maintenance backlog, particularly in the National Park Service,
where it is most acute. It is $12 billion, of which about half
is transportation.
Dr. Benishek. By transportation you mean roads?
Secretary Jewell. Roads, yes, typically paid for out of the
Highway Trust Fund.
Dr. Benishek. So why wouldn't you use the standard
accounting techniques that the rest of the Federal Government
used in developing these numbers?
Secretary Jewell. Kris, do you know what he is talking
about with that?
Dr. Benishek. Is this number too high? Too low? Why don't
you use the same numbers as everybody else?
Ms. Sarri. I am actually not familiar with this. So I would
be happy to get back to you on the record on that one.
Dr. Benishek. I am just reading a National Park Service
asset inventory summary published by the National Park Service.
These are numbers that Congress looks for. There is $19 million
in backlog in my district. But it also says these do not comply
with the standard way that the Federal Government measures
things.
Secretary Jewell. We will have to look back into that for
you. I don't know.
Dr. Benishek. I would just like to know why we are not
using the standard way, and how does it affect the numbers? Is
the number too high? Too low? How could I judge what to do if
we are not getting accurate numbers and you are not using the
standard way that the Federal Government reports numbers? That
does not make sense to me.
Secretary Jewell. We will have to get back to you.
Dr. Benishek. I applaud you with the wolf thing, but in
order to make a judgment as to how to proceed on my level, we
would like to get standard numbers. I would appreciate a
response in writing. I am out of time.
The Chairman. I am sorry, I was so enthralled and lost the
list. Who comes next? Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Jewell, for appearing here today to discuss the
President's 2017 budget.
Secretary Jewell, I would like to discuss the abandoned
mine lands and also the POWER Plus programs to see what we can
do to help clean up these old sites and provide economic
development opportunities to rebuild our historic coal mining
communities. For the people of Pennsylvania, especially those
in my district, the problem of abandoned mines is one that we
have lived with for decades. In fact, there are 575 abandoned
mines in my district alone, creating 382 miles of acid drainage
affecting streams.
Many communities in my district and across the region live
with the environmental legacy of the coal industry and live in
communities struggling to recover from the decline of the coal
industry. With coal production lessening across the Nation and
major coal companies recently declaring bankruptcy, and in
light of the U.S. Geological Survey's recent revelation that
coal reserves are not as abundant as we had once thought, this
problem will only worsen nationally.
I have introduced my own legislation to close loopholes in
the coal royalties program to provide more funds for AML
cleanup. I have offered amendments on the Floor to direct
funding to the regions that need the money the most. I am the
lead Democrat on a bipartisan bill to direct unexpended AML
funds toward cleanup projects that provide economic benefits.
Now, I know the Administration has been pushing to use
these unexpended AML funds to clean up our abandoned mines and
also to create jobs. I look forward to continuing to work with
you toward that laudable goal.
My first question is, Madam Secretary, do you know
approximately what the AML balance is right now? And how much
is expended every year, as opposed to what is brought into the
fund every year?
Secretary Jewell. The total, I believe, is $11 billion.
While we are continuing your line of questioning, we will see
if we can get the answers to the rest of your questions. If
not, we will respond for the record. But there is a lot that is
accumulating that, with POWER Plus, we would like to accelerate
to put people to work on reclamation projects. And the
recommendation is $200 million a year, a billion total over 5
years, be accelerated to address this issue right now.
Mr. Cartwright. I don't mean this as a pop quiz. If you
want to get back to my office later, I would be obliged.
Secretary Jewell. OK, great.
Mr. Cartwright. Second, is there a scarcity of good
projects? And how large is the problem? Or some reason to delay
funding the projects? What is the total impact of these mines
on public health and the environment?
Secretary Jewell. The impact is probably beyond measure,
when you look at the water quality; the sinkholes, particularly
in your own state, which I have seen firsthand; the inability
for people to develop on these landscapes because of the
poorest nature of the underground mining that took place
before.
The situation that was referenced earlier with the Gold
King Mine spill, which is not coal, but that is indicative of
abandoned mine land problems across the entire United States,
both hard rock and coal. We would welcome an opportunity to
work with you on a long-term solution on abandoned mine lands,
and certainly taking this money that has been set aside by the
coal industry for this purpose, to actually put people to work
addressing it right now.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I thank you, Madam Secretary, and I
yield back my time.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Jewell, when can we expect the next 5-year plan
for oil and gas lease sales to come out?
Secretary Jewell. We have submitted the draft proposed
plan. This spring, potentially even this month, we will have
the proposed plan, which will have taken input from the draft
proposed plan. We hope to finalize the proposed plan by the end
of 2016. There will be an opportunity to take additional
comment on the proposed plan, which will be released this
spring, based on comments from the original plan.
Mr. Duncan. This seems like it has drawn out a lot longer
than past 5-year plans. Is that the case?
Secretary Jewell. I don't believe that is the case.
Mr. Duncan. OK. I am going to ask, Mr. Chairman, if we
could submit for the record a letter to Secretary Jewell dated
February 29. Also, copies of letters dated August 1, 2014;
March 27, 2015; and April 23, 2015 from the Atlantic Offshore
Energy Caucus, requesting that areas in the South Atlantic/Mid-
Atlantic be included in the 5-year plan.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The information offered for the record by Mr. Duncan
follows:]

Congress of the United States
Washington, DC 20515

February 29, 2016

Hon. Sally Jewell
Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Secretary Jewell:

As the co-chairs of the Atlantic Offshore Energy Caucus, we
represent a diverse group of members unified around opening the
Atlantic for offshore energy exploration. While the Department of the
Interior concludes the planning period for the 2017-2022 Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS) Oil and Gas Leasing Proposed Program, we wanted
to remind you of the continued support that exists for Atlantic lease
sale 260 and ask that you retain the full area included in the Draft
Proposed Program (DPP) without further limitations.
According to the EIA, Gulf of Mexico production is estimated to
increase to record high levels in 2017. This increase in production is
a result of the leasing decisions made a decade or more ago. Knowing
that oil and natural gas will be needed for many more decades to come,
DOI should not prematurely close the door on future leasing and
exploration of the Atlantic OCS. Decisions made today matter.
We are joined by our colleagues in Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia in supporting future access to the oil and
natural gas resources off our states' coasts in the mid- and south-
Atlantic. We ask that you take into consideration the support of the
many stakeholders in our states including our Congressional
delegations, our Governors, state and local leaders and the citizens of
our states. We ask that you not close the door on the potential for
thousands of new jobs, enhanced national security and much needed new
government revenue by removing the Atlantic in the Proposed Plan or
further limit the one proposed lease sale included in the Draft
Proposed Program.
Members of our caucus have written to the Department regarding
their support on several occasions. On April 23, 2015, a diverse group
of 163 members from the Senate and House of Representatives wrote
expressing our views on the Department's draft proposed plan. This
letter highlighted our support for opening new areas for exploration,
including the Atlantic OCS.
On March 27, 2015, more than 30 members of the House of
Representatives wrote the Department regarding their specific support
for Atlantic lease sale 260. Additionally, on August 1, 2014, during
the Department's Request for Information comment period for the draft
proposed plan, 164 Members of Congress wrote to the Department
encouraging them to establish a rigorous lease sale schedule in the
Gulf of Mexico and open new areas for development. All of these
letters, which are enclosed here, were signed by a broad group of
Members of Congress reflecting different constituencies that recognize
the benefit offshore oil and gas exploration would have on our
communities and our nation's goal of becoming energy secure.
Clearly, members of the House of Representatives and the Senate
have demonstrated their strong support for opening the Atlantic OCS for
energy exploration and this support remains today. We continue to urge
you to retain the entire proposed Atlantic lease sale 260 area without
further restriction, and open these areas for future oil and gas
leasing. exploration, and production.

Sincerely,

Richard Hudson,
Member of Congress.
Jeff Duncan,
Member of Congress.
Scott Rigell,
Member of Congress.

Enclosures [3]: Letters dated August 1, 2014, March 27, 2015, and April
23, 2015

Enclosure 1

Congress of the United States
Washington, DC 20515

August 1, 2014

Hon. Sally Jewell
Secretary
Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Secretary Jewell:

As Members of Congress committed to a comprehensive domestic energy
strategy, we encourage the Department of the Interior (DOI) to proceed
with a new Five Year Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Oil and Gas Leasing
Program for 2017-2022 that establishes a rigorous lease sale schedule
in the Gulf of Mexico, but also expands opportunity for development to
areas not included in the last plan--such as the vast acreage that was
opened in 2008 when both the Presidential and Legislative moratoria on
offshore drilling expired. A broad, bipartisan majority in the U.S.
House of Representatives and the American public have long supported
increased development of our nation's OCS resources. This commitment
has been repeatedly demonstrated by passage of legislation that expands
access to these new areas, while continuing leasing in existing areas.
We wish to see a Five Year Outer Continental Shelf leasing program that
reflects these important principles.
The commencement of this program occurs at a critical time in our
country's resurgence as an energy superpower. Increasing onshore
production on state and private lands is helping to pull our nation out
of a recession and driving down our trade deficit. At the state and
local level in Pennsylvania, Texas, Wyoming, Colorado, North Dakota and
many others, economic activity related to energy production is creating
thousands of jobs and generating increased revenues that are being
reinvested in public education, transportation projects, and other
municipal improvements. The energy boom on state and private lands
stands as a paradigm of our nation's entrepreneurial spirit. There is
no reason why we cannot replicate this vigorous job growth in more
states by opening new OCS areas for development as was envisioned in
2008 when the moratoria on the OCS was lifted in a bipartisan fashion
between the then Democrat Majority House and President Bush.
Since the 1950s, the Gulf of Mexico has been the world's preeminent
area for offshore drilling alongside thriving fishing and tourism
industries. This is where the technological innovation behind pursuing
deepwater resources was born and where it has flourished. Today, over
60 years later, the playing field has significantly changed. Countries
like Canada, Mexico and China are ramping up their efforts to develop
their offshore resources and directly competing with the United States.
Simply put: the status quo will not suffice. By producing more American
energy from our OCS resources, we can help to insulate our nation from
global price shocks and put the United States and our allies on a more
secure path.
As you consider areas to include in the 2017-2022 Draft Proposed
Program, we note that the administration and the Department of the
Interior have made considerable changes to the structure and
regulations that govern offshore energy development to enhance safety.
The industry has also stepped up with the development of best practices
and technologies focused on the areas of spill prevention, containment,
and recovery. We are confident that these changes will allow offshore
exploration and development to proceed in an environmentally
responsible way.
For these many reasons, we believe the Department must move forward
with a Five Year Program that continues to lease in the Gulf of Mexico
but also includes new areas with the greatest resource potential as
well as areas such as the Mid- and South-Atlantic, or the Arctic, where
there is strong bipartisan support from Members of Congress, governors,
state legislators, local leaders and the general public for allowing
oil and natural gas development. With the formation of the 2017-2022
Five Year Program, this administration will be responsible for a decade
of offshore lease planning; a legacy of leasing in existing areas will
not put our nation's offshore energy production on sound footing. We
cannot afford to pass up this pivotal opportunity to expand safe and
responsible OCS energy development.
It is our sincere hope that you will demonstrate a similar
commitment to our nation's energy future by crafting a program that
increases offshore production in new areas to create more American
jobs, provide much-needed federal and local government revenue, and
fortify our nation's growing position as an energy leader.

Sincerely,

Signed by the following Members of Congress:
Jeff Duncan                   Bill Flores
Scott Rigell                  Richard Hudson
Doc Hastings                  Doug Lamborn
Rob Bishop                    Bill Cassidy
Jeb Hensarling                Steve Scalise
Dave Camp                     Joe Barton
Tom Cotton                    Michael McCaul
Patrick McHenry               Shelley Moore Capito
Lamar Smith                   Jim Jordan
Cathy McMorris Rodgers        Tom Price, M.D.
Robert Aderholt               Rob Woodall
Andy Harris                   Mick Mulvaney
Patrick Tiberi                Mike Pompeo
Cynthia Lummis                Lou Barletta
Blake Farenthold              Glenn Thompson
Robert Hurt                   Jim Renacci
Joe Heck, D.O.                Cory Gardner
Jim Bridenstine               Marsha Blackburn
Scott Tipton                  Mark Amodei
Robert Pittenger              Peter Roskam
James Lankford                Chuck Fleischmann
Todd Rokita                   Kevin Brady
Gregg Harper                  Brett Guthrie
Pete Olson                    Vance McAllister
Richard Hanna                 Chris Stewart
Aaron Schock                  Bob Gibbs
Steve Palazzo                 Randy Hultgren
Phil Roe, M.D.                John Carter
Tom Marino                    David McKinley
Scott DesJarlais              John Fleming, M.D.
Joe Pitts                     Renee Ellmers
Tom Graves                    Tom McClintock
Ann Wagner                    Phil Gingrey, M.D.
Keith Rothfus                 Paul Gosar
Randy Weber                   Michael Grimm
Doug Collins                  Austin Scott
David Valadao                 Todd Young
Steve Stivers                 Kevin Cramer
Kenny Marchant                Markwayne Mullin
Chris Collins                 Stephen Fincher
Steve Womack                  Roger Williams
David Schweikert              Sean Duffy
Sam Johnson                   Adam Kinzinger
Paul Cook                     Brad Wenstrup
Mo Brooks                     Tim Griffin
Trey Gowdy                    Sam Graves
Randy Neugebauer              Alan Nunnelee
Charles Boustany              Tom Reed
Susan Brooks                  Reid Ribble
Mark Meadows                  Mike Kelly
Raul Labrador                 Diane Black
Billy Long                    Bill Johnson
Rick Crawford                 Jeff Denham
Rodney Davis                  Randy Forbes
Ed Whitfield                  Howard Coble
John Duncan                   Bill Shuster
Steve King                    Joe Wilson
Jason Smith                   Pete Sessions
Bradley Byrne M.C.            Adrian Smith
Louie Gohmert                 Lee Terry
Ken Calvert                   Bob Goodlatte
Don Young                     Mac Thornberry
John Campbell                 Tim Murphy
Michael Burgess, M.D.         Matt Salmon
Virginia Foxx                 John Culberson
Steve Chabot                  Ralph Hall
Ted Poe                       Michele Bachmann
Mike Conaway                  Stevan Pearce
Lynn Westmoreland             Trent Franks
Tim Walberg                   Paul Broun
John Kline                    Blaine Luetkemeyer
Mike Coffman                  Bob Latta
John Shimkus                  Robert Wittman
Charles W. Dent               Tom Cole
Jason Chaffetz                Dana Rohrabacher
Marlin Stutzman               David Joyce
Patrick Meehan                Kerry Bentivolio
Lynn Jenkins                  Martha Roby
Michael R. Turner             Steve Daines
Morgan Griffith               Mike Simpson
James Sensenbrenner           Fred Upton
Luke Messer                   Andy Barr

Enclosure 2

Congress of the United States
Washington, DC 20515

March 27, 2015

Hon. Sally Jewell
Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Secretary Jewell:

As Members of Congress who represent Atlantic states, we are
encouraged by the Department of the Interior's (DOI) decision to
include areas in the Mid and South Atlantic as part of the 2017-2022
Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Oil and Gas Leasing Draft Proposed
Program (``Five Year Program''), but we remain disappointed in the
draft plan's unnecessary restrictions in the Atlantic that could
jeopardize America's long-term energy and economic security. As the
planning process moves forward in the development of the Five Year
Program, we urge you to retain the entire proposed Atlantic lease sale
260 area without further restricting these areas for future oil and gas
leasing, exploration, and production.
A strong all-of-the-above energy strategy for our nation cannot
exist without a robust offshore oil and gas leasing program that
includes access to America's energy resources in the Atlantic. In the
current 2012-2017 Five Year Program, 87 percent of America's OCS
remains off-limits to energy leasing, exploration and production. While
other countries are actively expanding OCS energy development, it is
unacceptable that our nation remains blindfolded with regard to what
resources exist offshore and that this Administration continues to
unnecessarily restrict access to critical domestic energy resources.
The American public, and particularly the overwhelming majority of
residents in our states, support the increased development of our
nation's OCS resources, and we wish to see a Five Year Program that
reflects these important principles. Restricting access within a 50
mile buffer along the entirety of the proposed area, and only including
one lease sale in 2021, fails to meet this standard. We urge the
Department to reconsider the configuration of the buffer and add more
lease sales earlier in the plan, which would more accurately reflect
the desires of individual states.
As we have seen in the Gulf of Mexico and in other areas around the
world for decades, other ocean industries, as well as tourism and
military operations, can all thrive in conjunction with offshore energy
exploration and development. In addition, there are numerous existing
regulatory systems--at the state, federal, and local levels--that
ensure the compatibility of all industries, as well as the conservation
of our environment. By relying upon a cooperative process to reach
science-based decisions, offshore development is guided by ample public
input from state officials, local communities and leaders, and all
coastal stakeholders. Furthermore, the energy industry has enhanced
spill prevention and containment, as well as proven response
capabilities, and the Department's robust regulatory requirements have
put in place various new standards that have made offshore drilling
safer than ever. As the co-chairs of the national spill commission
formed after Macondo said in April 2014, ``offshore drilling is safer
than it was four years ago.''
There is strong bipartisan support in our states from Members of
Congress, governors, state legislators, local leaders and the general
public for allowing oil and natural gas development in the Atlantic.
Our states, which have not seen the direct benefits of offshore
development. are anxious to reap the many economic benefits and help
put America on a path to greater energy security.
Offshore energy production must play a key role as America
continues to grow as an energy superpower--creating more good-paying
American jobs, providing much-needed federal and local government
revenue, and enhancing our nation's energy security. For these many
reasons, we urge the Department to move forward with a Five Year
Program that includes the entire proposed Atlantic lease sale 260 area
without any additional restrictions on access, while thoughtfully
reconsidering the proposed 50 mile buffer.
It is also important that the Department work quickly to approve
permits for seismic and other geophysical surveys in the Atlantic.
These permits have been pending since last July when the Department
completed its Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement and
Record of Decision for Geological and Geophysical Activities in the
Mid- and South Atlantic OCS. Since the current estimates of the
Atlantic's resource potential are out of date and based on surveys
conducted over 30 years ago, the information derived from these new
surveys will provide an updated and environmentally safe assessment of
the oil and natural gas reserves in the Atlantic. As you have indicated
in testimony before Congress, the importance of these surveys will
enable informed decisions to be made on how to best utilize these
resources to ensure our future energy security. Timely consideration
and approval of the permits is critical so that companies can plan
their operations, conduct the surveys, and process the data into
meaningful tools that can be used by decision-makers.
We look forward to working with you to ensure that exploration and
production of our natural resources continues to move America to energy
security in the 21st Century. We await your response.

Sincerely,

Jeff Duncan,
Member of Congress.
Richard Hudson,
Member of Congress.
Scott Rigell,
Member of Congress.

Also signed by the following Members of Congress:
Bob Goodlatte                 Tom Price
Jeb Hensarling                Pete Sessions
Robert Hurt                   Jody Hice
Joe Wilson                    Rick Allen
Mick Mulvaney                 Austin Scott
Tom Graves                    Doug Collins
Mark Meadows                  David Rouzer
Robert Pittenger              Mark Walker
Virginia Foxx                 Renee Ellmers
Patrick McHenry               George Holding
Barbara Comstock              H. Morgan Griffith
Robert Wittman                Randy Forbes
Louie Gohmert                 Paul Gosar
Glenn Thompson                Steve Pearce
Pete Olson                    Cynthia Lummis

Enclosure 3

Congress of the United States
Washington, DC 20515

April 23, 2015

Hon. Sally Jewell
Secretary
Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW, Room 7229
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Secretary Jewell:

We are writing to express our views on the recently released Draft
Proposed 2017-2022 Five Year Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Leasing
Program (DPP). Specifically, we have concerns over the premature
restrictions placed on the proposed lease sale areas in the Atlantic,
including the 50-mile buffer zone for the entirety of the Atlantic
proposed areas, the permanent withdrawal of areas offshore Alaska and
the limited opportunities available under the program as proposed. As
this process moves forward, we urge you to retain the entire Atlantic
lease sale 260 area without additional restrictions in these planning
areas for future oil and natural gas leasing, exploration and
production. We also strongly encourage the Administration to make
additional areas of the OCS available for leasing and to increase the
amount of lease sales from the historic low number proposed in the
draft plan.
As Members of Congress committed to a strong, comprehensive
domestic energy strategy, we wholeheartedly believe that the United
States must not shrink away from developing our nation's offshore
energy resources. A robust Five Year OCS Program should be a key
component of the Administration's all-of-the-above energy strategy that
can continue to advance the job creation, economic growth and energy
security gains that the U.S. has enjoyed thanks to the recent boom in
energy production on state and private lands. Given that offshore
developments have high costs and exceptionally long development
timelines, the Five Year program sets the foundation for more than a
decade of development. As such, we fear that the currently proposed DPP
sets the stage for energy insecurity instead of domestic prosperity.
While we were pleased to see the Administration finally take a step
in the right direction by including one potential lease sale in the
Atlantic in the draft plan, this step was offset by the additional
restrictions in the Atlantic and area withdrawals in the offshore of
Alaska. What the administration proposed appears merely to be an effort
to provide political cover irrespective of the opportunity foregone.
When coupled with the imposed buffer zones, and an insufficient number
of lease sales, none of which are required to be held, this draft
proposal fails to produce a long-term energy policy that harnesses the
potential of our nation's vast natural resources. In this respect it is
disingenuous.
During your March 5, 2015 testimony before the House Natural
Resources Committee you admitted that you cannot guarantee that the
Atlantic would have a single lease sale in the final DPP. Considering
that the Department of the Interior (DOI) is not mandated to actually
hold any lease sale made available in a DPP, it seems shortsighted and
irresponsible to limit at this early stage in the process the proposed
lease sales to a number that doesn't even meet President Jimmy Carter's
low threshold nearly 40 years ago.
This Administration's insistence on keeping more than 85 percent of
our OCS off-limits to domestic energy development has been
counterproductive to efforts to boost our nation's economy. Our
struggling economy is on the verge of a transformational manufacturing
renaissance and is capable of producing the resources needed to make it
a reality. The federal budget needs new revenues, and U.S. energy
security, which is finally on the brink of breaking OPEC's
stranglehold, could be realized if not for these unnecessary
bureaucratic barriers. Considering the significant and uncontrollable
geopolitical forces that continue to impact our energy security, this
Administration can no longer afford to ignore our abundant offshore
resources.
There is strong bipartisan support from Members of Congress,
governors, state legislators, local leaders and the general public for
allowing oil and natural gas development in more areas of the U.S. OCS.
States that have not directly seen the economic prosperity that
accompanies offshore development are anxious to reap the benefits from
the indirect investment in technologies and manufacturing that
facilitate such work. We strongly believe that the Department should
move forward from the DPP with a 2017-2022 Proposed Program that sets a
more aggressive schedule of sales in currently open areas and also
allows for the exploration of new areas, such as the Atlantic and the
offshore in Alaska. These areas are significant for future resource
development, without subjective and potentially damaging area
withdrawals, omissions and exclusions. The 2017-2022 OCS Five Year
Program must represent a significant departure from the existing
moratorium on the vast majority of the U.S. OCS and embrace America's
offshore energy program as a serious contributor to the nation's
standing as an energy superpower.
Rather than just indulge our engagement in the development stages
of the 2017-2022 OCS Five Year Program planning process, we ask that
you actually work with Congress on this important proposal. We are at a
critical time in developing America's energy policy, and decisions we
make today will have an impact on future U.S. oil and natural gas
production. Such decisions will also significantly impact our standing
in a volatile global economy. It is important that the administration
is forward-thinking in America's energy development planning and we are
eager to work with the administration to ensure we are headed down the
path to prosperity and security through increased offshore American
energy production.

Sincerely,

Lisa Murkowski                Rob Bishop
Tim Scott                     Doug Lamborn
Bill Cassidy, M.D.            Garret Graves
John Barrasso, M.D.           Mike Lee
James Inhofe                  John Cornyn
Rob Portman                   Roger Wicker
Deb Fischer                   Cory Gardner
Orrin Hatch                   David Perdue
Johnny Isakson                Michael Enzi
Thom Tillis                   Thad Cochran
Jeff Sessions                 James Risch
Shelley Capito                Steve Daines
John Thune                    David Vitter
Dan Sullivan                  Ted Cruz
Tom Cotton                    Richard Burr

----Signed along with 133 other Members of Congress.

______

Mr. Duncan. Do you think the 5-year plan will mirror the
DPP, as far as the areas available?
Secretary Jewell. There has been tremendous input that we
have taken since the DPP. When the proposed plan comes out, you
will see the answer to that question, based on the input we
have received.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, and I appreciate the input that you have
taken, and I hope that it does.
Are we seeing any serious movement on permits for G&G
activity in the South and Mid-Atlantic? Because last year at
this time, and a couple of times last spring, we had hearings
with BOEM and some of the sub-agencies that are under you about
G&G activity, and they have been slow-walking these permits. I
know that is U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service doing that, but are
we seeing any movement on that?
Secretary Jewell. Yes. Actually, it would be NOAA Fisheries
with the marine mammals that Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
works closely with. We had 13 conventional energy G&G permit
applications: 3 were withdrawn; 1 is being held pending
additional information; 1 was issued, but they did not choose
to use it, and it expired January 11 of this year; 8 are
currently under review.
Six of them have applications with the National Marine
Fisheries Service--one has not determined if he needs one yet,
and one of them has not even begun that process. So, we are
being responsive as the requests come in.
Mr. Duncan. OK, I appreciate that. And I ask you, could you
just put that in writing into my office for me? That is just so
I will have it for my record. We are asked about that quite a
bit.
I want to shift gears a little bit. I followed the story in
the Malheur Wildlife Refuge very closely, as many Americans
did. When I was looking at the history of that, I understand
that the Ammons had water rights and permitted grazing rights
on BLM land within the refuge. Then, at some point in time,
their access to that water was fenced off, and their road
access to grazing areas was blocked off. That is based on what
I read in numerous sources as I was investigating that.
Now, I am not going to get into Oregon's issues, but are
those common practices within the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service or within BLM, to block off permitted grazing rights or
to block off water access?
Secretary Jewell. Let me just clarify. I believe you are
talking about the Hammonds. That is completely separate from
the people that occupied the Malheur Refuge. And those two
individuals who are serving time for arson charges on Federal
public land basically distanced themselves from the people that
took over the refuge.
Mr. Duncan. But it was all interconnected. I agree, it was
the Hammonds, but their arrest and re-imprisonment was all part
of what led to the occupation. So let's go back to just the
Hammonds, and leave the Malheur Refuge out. The Hammonds had
grazing rights on BLM land permitted. My understanding from
what I read is that they also had water rights in the area that
were fenced off, and then the grazing rights were blocked.
The question to you is, is that normal practice to do that
when people have permitted grazing rights?
Secretary Jewell. We operate within the rights that people
are granted. So, I have to look specifically into the
circumstances that you bring out, but there is nothing that I
have heard from the BLM or the Fish and Wildlife Service that
suggested that agreed-upon rights were not provided. That is
consistent with the way we operate.
So, if there is something specific, we are very happy to
respond directly on that.
Mr. Duncan. Will do that.
Secretary Jewell. OK.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Dingell.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. I spent 2 hours in the dental chair before I came
here, and I think I had a better 2 hours than you are having.
And I thank Mr. Duncan for the tone of his questions,
because I do think that the Secretary is really doing a good
job, and the Interior Department is something that is very
important for protecting our natural resources in this country.
Last week was Great Lakes week, and the advocates and local
leaders were in talking to all of us from the Great Lakes Basin
region. The Number one issue that is on everyone's minds is the
Asian carp.
We have 20 percent of the world's fresh water, thousands of
jobs are tied to it, a $16 billion recreation industry. So,
protecting the delicate ecosystem that provides drinking
water--and, lord knows, drinking water is on everybody's minds
throughout the country--it sustains more than 3,500 species of
plants and animals. The presence of a single carp in the lakes
could disrupt the entire ecosystem and cause serious damages to
the lakes.
The Fish and Wildlife Service and the U.S. Geological
Survey now are all involved in the fight involving invasive
species. Your budget request was a very modest increase of
$669,000 to improve aquatic invasive species prevention. How
will this funding help the Department prevent Asian carp from
reaching the Great Lakes?--which you know has us all very
neurotic. And what would happen if this were to be cut? Nobody
else asked you this, but is it enough?
Secretary Jewell. The short answer on this invasive
species, of Asian carp and others, it is not enough compared to
the situation we have. I hear it from every state and I hear it
from both political parties.
We have $13.5 million specifically for Asian carp for the
USGS, in its work in eDNA, on early detection, and the Fish and
Wildlife Service, on different methodologies to try and prevent
the Asian carp from getting into the Great Lakes. It is a very
serious and risky issue. We don't want it to get away from us,
as we have with the zebra and quagga mussels that are infecting
many, many water bodies.
This is really critical funding to maintain the work that
we have done. If there was more money, we would be able to put
it to good use, as well.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I want to also
applaud the fact that your budget proposes a significant
investment in our National Refuge System. Again, I think a lot
of people are not appreciating the fact that these refuges are
a national treasure, that it is a network of lands and water
which have been established for conservation management and
appropriate restoration of fish, wildlife, and plant resources,
so that we are protecting these habitats generation to
generation.
I was shocked when I read your testimony last night and saw
that more than 400 staff positions have been eliminated since
2010, or have been lost. Your proposal to increase funding by
$25 million for the refuge system would go a long way toward
making the investments we need to be making in the system. What
consequences have you seen from the elimination of these jobs
to invest adequate resources in the refuge system, and how will
you use these increased resources you are proposing and I hope
we are going to give you?
Secretary Jewell. Well, I will give you a specific example
from one particular refuge I had visited, which had a staff of
16. It is down to about six. They had a volunteer volunteer-
coordinator that burned out, because it is really a full-time
position, so they could not even harness the volunteers
necessary to continue the education programs. And this is a
refuge that is located close to an urban area.
The budget that we have does prioritize urban refuges, in
particular, to begin to give some of these children that are so
disconnected from nature and urban areas an opportunity to
understand what is at risk, but it does not even go close to
addressing the issue of where we were a few years ago, in terms
of providing access, resources, invasive species control,
hunting, fishing access, and so on, which is so important to
people on refuges.
I appreciate your support. We will put it to good use,
largely around the visitor experience and the urban refuge
partnerships. But it is nowhere near where we were just half-a-
decade ago.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, I had a question on self-bonding, but I am
respecting your time limitations and would request asking a
question for the record.
The Chairman. OK, thank you. But you are just in pain,
right? You are just in dental pain, that is really the reason
you are doing it, right?
Mrs. Dingell. That is right. A tooth implant. I don't
recommend it. It is more fun than this, though.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Probably more productive, too.
Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We appreciate you being here today. Notwithstanding the
intensity of the questions today, they are very important
because we get the same intensity when I go home to my
district. The growing poll numbers on BLM and parks is not the
same for the people that live next to them when they are
subject to burning forest, wolf introduction, mountain lions,
and all this other stuff they have to live next door to, and
you are getting after their livestock, their pets, and even
their families. So it is a little bit different when you live
next to these areas as it is in the cities that they get the
polling information from. That said, I do appreciate you coming
here and answering the hard questions, as we have to in our
districts.
For years there has been an effort to address water supply
issues in the Klamath. We have worked many hours with folks up
and down the region who are impacted by this situation, as well
as my colleague, Mr. Walden, who is here today, who offered a
draft bill that I think would have really gone a long way
toward resolving these issues and providing a water supply
certainty to those folks in the region.
Now what we have pressing forward is the dam removal. What
I have here is a copy of an agreement in principle that you
just signed this last month, in which the Department of the
Interior agrees to work with California, Oregon, and PacifiCorp
to create a so-called non-Federal entity to engage in removal
of the four dams. This agreement focuses on dam removal alone,
leaving the water supply issues of the basin unresolved. They
are doing so without the approval of Congress or consultation.
Is this non-Federal entity you agreed to create subject to
open government and Freedom of Information Act requests? And
since my time is short, I will ask you for a compact answer
along the yes-or-no lines.
Mr. Connor. The non-Federal entity has not been formed yet.
It will be dependent on how it is structured. I don't know the
answer to your question right now.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, there is Federal involvement here with
your agency and others.
Mr. Connor. It will be a non-Federal entity formed by the
states of California and Oregon.
Mr. LaMalfa. But you are signers on the agreement.
Mr. Connor. The agreement in principle, which will include
provisions to create this non-Federal entity by the states of
California and Oregon.
Mr. LaMalfa. This seems like a front company for a process
to avoid public scrutiny. My own staff had to work pretty hard
to get involved in the Sacramento meeting. We asked to be part
of one that is going on in Portland today, and they did not get
back to us, but they will be there anyway. So that sounds like
a no to me, because there does not seem to be the opportunity
for open government or freedom of information.
OK, I have another document here. It is the confidential
settlement communication discussion draft, which was circulated
at that meeting I mentioned last week in Sacramento. This
document specified that the non-Federal entity must be created
by yesterday. Was there a signature made by your office
yesterday on the creation of the entity? The target date was
February 29.
Mr. Connor. No signature by our office.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, very good. This was just a month after the
first document, the AIP. Did Congress authorize the
Administration to create a non-Federal entity?
Mr. Connor. The Administration is not creating a non-
Federal entity. Congress has not authorized it. It is not a
creation of the Administration. It is a creation by the states
of California and Oregon, as contemplated by the agreement in
principle.
The whole premise here is there has been a desire to have
the Federal Government removed from the dam removal process. I
understand that was an issue. That was one of the reasons why
the Klamath Basin restoration agreement legislation was not
enacted.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, these are administrative goals.
Mr. Connor. Now we are taking the Federal Government out of
the dam removal process.
Mr. LaMalfa. These are Administration goals here. Now here
is Administration involvement. Unless you are doing it pro
bono, it is going to have impacts on your budget.
The very fact you are involved and signed the agreement
indicates that we are spending Federal dollars in this process.
Is this a pro bono process?
Mr. Connor. There has been significant environmental
analysis done on the question of dam removal.
Mr. LaMalfa. But are you spending money from your agency
toward this effort?
Mr. Connor. Toward the environmental analysis associated
with dam removal, yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. The answer would have to be yes, because you
are spending your time, you are spending agency hours and
staff, yes?
Mr. Connor. That is correct, Congressman.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. So they do not feel it is important that
they need authorization from Congress to participate in this
project, even though we are supposed to budget for it.
Mr. Connor. There is Federal authorization for dam removal
through the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and that is
the process. The proceeding will go through the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission.
Mr. LaMalfa. But the process of creating a non-Federal
entity, a shell corporation, basically?
Mr. Connor. That is not part of the FERC regulatory
process. That is a creation by the states of California and
Oregon.
Mr. LaMalfa. I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Lowenthal.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here and for answering all our questions.
I want to talk about coal, and I want to thank you for
pushing the pause button on Federal coal leasing while you take
a long-needed review of the program.
You have said before that this sort of thing, this kind of
pause, has been done multiple times in the past, and I believe
by Republican administrations. Is that right?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, that is correct. Both under Nixon
and Reagan.
Dr. Lowenthal. So, both under Nixon and Reagan it has been
done before. We have had a bipartisan precedent for this pause.
You have made it clear that this will not impact existing
operations, even with a pause on new coal production, since
coal companies now hold approximately 20 years' worth of coal
under lease.
But I think it could be even more than 20 years, based upon
current amounts of production, that coal use, as you have
indicated earlier today, is actually on the decline. And,
according to information that I have from the Energy
Information Administration, coal production in 2015 was 10
percent less than in 2014, and that our use of coal to produce
electricity in the United States is now less than 30 percent. I
think that is great for the climate. I hope that number gets
even smaller as we move forward and that we work with the
Department of the Interior to develop more renewable sources
for energy, rather than coal.
Can you tell us, in your words again, why is coal
production down in the United States?
Secretary Jewell. Largely, coal production is down because
of a change to natural gas in electricity production. We are
the world's largest producer of natural gas. Natural gas is
both a cleaner burning fossil fuel than coal, as well as less
expensive to construct new plants, and we have seen a
significant transition. That, plus renewables and conservation
is a large reason why coal has declined in its use.
Dr. Lowenthal. Isn't it also true that other countries are
now becoming less interested in purchasing coal, and would
rather also purchase more natural gas? Is that not true, also?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, that is correct, also. We have seen
significant declines, for example, in China.
Dr. Lowenthal. Well, I think, then, it is really important
for us to get on the record to say that these changes in coal
production are not due to administrative policies, but they are
really due to the marketplace. And that the marketplace now is
driving down coal production, not administrative processes or
policies.
Actually, I think we have unfairly been subsidizing coal
production, such as from the Powder River Basin, and letting
coal be produced or mined at rock-bottom prices. So, I am glad
you are taking another look at how we lease coal and that we do
not give it away too cheaply, Madam Secretary.
But while you are doing this review, are you going to
include some of the external costs that burning coal produces
on our environment and on our public health?
Secretary Jewell. It is our intent in the programmatic EIS
to look broadly at the coal program, which will include the
environmental impacts of the mining and burning of coal, and
that will be scoped as we continue with this process in the
coming months.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I think it is very important that
we take this overarching careful look at coal.
I also want to commend you and your Department for taking a
number of other positive steps. For example, the recent methane
venting and flaring draft rule is a win-win for both the
environment and for the taxpayers. Just last week, Gina
McCarthy said that the oil and gas industry is emitting far
more methane than was previously assumed. I think this rule
will be timely and it is critically important.
I also want to thank you for the proposed rules to
strengthen oil and gas oversight in national parks and wildlife
refuges. I know Ranking Member Grijalva, Ms. Tsongas, and I
sent to Assistant Secretary Schneider, with over 50 of our
colleagues, asking her to finalize those rules as soon as
possible.
The last question I have is, there was a proposed renewable
energy competitive leasing rule which was published almost a
year-and-a-half ago. When might we see that rule finalized?
Secretary Jewell. Mike, do you have the answer to that?
The Chairman. You have 1 second.
Secretary Jewell. Sorry, we will get back to you on that. I
cannot scramble through the book in time.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, and I yield back.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Jewell, thank you for being here. I want to thank
all of you for being here. I also want to commend you for
including funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund in
the budget request. I have seen some of the projects that you
have participated in around the United States. I think when you
acquire land from willing sellers, you make sure you are using
the right investment principles in acquiring land that truly
provides value to the country, and preserves opportunities for
recreation, and I think it is the right move. Again, I want you
to commend you for funding the program.
But I want to pivot on that a little bit. The Land and
Water Conservation Fund is derived from offshore energy
production. While you are proposing to conserve and protect
lands in the West, primarily, you are taking money from
offshore energy production, which is primarily, in some years
up to nearly 90 percent of all offshore energy production, off
the coast of Louisiana.
Your budget request further slaps the Gulf Coast in the
face by proposing to take those funds to fund the Land and
Water Conservation Fund and at the same time proposing to
divert our GOMESA, Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act funds and
give those to Alaska.
I talked to Mr. Young earlier and told him that I was not
going to say anything offensive about Alaska. I understand
there are severe coastal problems and I have been to a lot of
the coastal communities up there. He threatened to knife me if
I did not put that caveat in there. He assured me it would be a
non-essential part of my body.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves. But I am having trouble reconciling this, Madam
Secretary. So let me just take the synopsis here.
You are taking funds from energy production off the coast
of Louisiana and other Gulf states. You are funding the Land
and Water Conservation Fund in western states to protect their
environment and conserve lands. Then you are proposing to take
other funds that were due to the Gulf states, and you are
proposing to give it to Alaska. I am not doubting that there is
merit there and I think they should have revenue sharing, but
why is Alaska more important than the Gulf Coast, and why are
the western states more important than the Gulf Coast?
Secretary Jewell. Let me be clear on this, our position is
that the offshore oil and gas revenues collected from Federal
waters belong to all Americans.
Mr. Graves. And if I can quote you, you just said, in
response to a question previously, that onshore flared gases
were also a resource that all Americans enjoy.
As you know, for onshore production under refuge revenue
sharing in the Mineral Leasing Act, up to 90 percent of the
revenues that ``belong to all Americans'' are sent back to
those states through the reclamation fund and through revenue
sharing. So, this whole argument about it belongs to all
Americans, and trying to treat onshore and offshore
differently, it does not hold water.
Secretary Jewell. Well, let me just say that we are talking
about Federal waters. In state waters, obviously, the state
gets the revenues. On lands that are within state boundaries,
they have a 50 percent revenue share. Offshore is owned by all
Americans, it is in Federal waters, it is not in state waters.
So that is a difference.
Mr. Graves. Wait a minute, you are saying that onshore is
not owned by all Americans? Because earlier you just said that
flared gas was owned by all Americans. I thought that those
lands were all Americans that are Federal lands within states'
boundaries.
Secretary Jewell. Public lands are owned by all Americans.
Mr. Graves. OK
Secretary Jewell. There is a 50 percent revenue share.
Mr. Graves. And the mineral resources on those lands are
all owned by all Americans.
Secretary Jewell. That is correct.
Mr. Graves. OK.
Secretary Jewell. And when it is within the boundaries of a
state, there is a revenue share. When it is outside the
boundaries of the state, as in the case of the Outer
Continental Shelf, there is not a revenue share until GOMESA.
Mr. Graves. And is that because the offshore energy
production does not affect our coast? Like in the example of
Deepwater Horizon, where we had 660 miles of our coast oiled in
Louisiana? Is that the reason?
Secretary Jewell. You are impacted both from environmental
consequences and also economic opportunity. There is $17
billion, I believe, for Gulf Coast restoration as a result,
largely, of the BP Horizon spill.
Mr. Graves. Madam Secretary, I am sorry, you raised the
same thing last time. That is because of law. You cannot say
that we lose money because BP is now paying their fines and
penalties. You cannot have a maintenance of effort swap here.
So, Madam Secretary, I have to tell you, I am offended, I
really am. And a lot of people in the Gulf Coast are offended.
But let me take it a step further. If you look at what is
happening right now, we have lost 25 percent of our oil and gas
workforce in the state of Louisiana, 25 percent in the last 14
months. To add insult to injury, you proposed a well control
rule. God bless the people that work at Interior, and offshore
energy is very, very complex and highly technical--but the rule
that they have written, they fundamentally do not understand
the technology associated with offshore energy. I don't want to
pretend to understand it as well as industry does. I can tell
you it is flawed.
Number two, you are proposing a $10-a-barrel tax at the
same time we just lifted the export ban. How in the world are
we going to compete on a global basis if you are increasing the
tax on a domestic product by anywhere from 30 to 40 percent of
the prices? This simply does not make sense.
Secretary Jewell. The well control rule will be finalized
soon and I think you will find that significant changes have
been made.
The Chairman. Thank you. But now we know all we have to do
is brandish a knife to control him.
Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very much
for being here. I would like to add my support to Mr.
Cartwright's RECLAIM Act, which is bipartisan, that Mr.
Cartwright is the lead Democrat on.
I would like to clarify. Dr. Benishek has left, but we said
nice things about his praise of the Fish and Wildlife Service
for delisting the gray wolves. Let's point out the judge set
aside that delisting because, as part of the Fish and Wildlife
delisting, they made it contingent on the state's developing
scientifically managed plans for the wolves, and those
scientifically managed plans did not happen. What we found was
the wholesale slaughter of the gray wolves, poisoning,
trapping, anything other than recreational hunting. So we will
see how the court case goes and how it goes in the Senate.
I wanted to start with three thank you's. First, thanks so
much for the Every Kid in a Park initiative. I think it is just
great to get all of these fourth-graders--we are taking fourth-
graders from Mount Vernon Woods Elementary School out to Great
Falls. We are not going to let any of them fall in, but it will
be very exciting for them. I think it will perhaps change their
lives to think about the outdoors in a different way.
Thank you very much for putting in your budget all the
efforts to save the coal miners' pension fund. I know there are
100,000 coal miners that are affected by this. When the whole
thing went bankrupt, there were a lot of people that were just
desperate in southwest Virginia and across the country, who
spent their lives mining coal who suddenly had no pension or
health benefits to look forward to. So, thank you very much for
that.
And thank you for putting the $2 billion in for a coastal
resilience project. Again, the East Coast of the Atlantic is so
heavily affected by it. I am sorry Mr. Young has left because I
was impressed to see in your written testimony that you said
that this coastal climate resilience program will address the
unique impacts of climate change in Alaska, where rising seas,
coastal erosion, and storm surges are threatening Native
villages that must prepare for potential relocation.
One quick question. It looks like the $2 billion may not be
approved. Is there any merit in looking for a smaller pilot
project, $5 to $10 million, that would continue the National
Fish and Wildlife Foundation's work on coastal resiliency?
Secretary Jewell. Coastal resilience is a big issue. It is
certainly on the Atlantic Coast; and Alaska, as you mentioned;
and also on the Gulf Coast, which was part of the intent on the
redirection of the GOMESA money to coastal resilience programs.
It certainly did not exclude the Gulf, that is very much
included.
We have a problem with coastal resilience across the United
States. If we are not successful in this particular program, we
are going to have to find ways to support these communities
that are very much impacted. In your own state, the impact on
Jamestown is very significant, both in terms of historic
artifacts and archeological artifacts, because we see dramatic
increases in sea level rise and storms associated with climate
change. That is true along the Atlantic seaboard, as it is in
Alaska and on the Gulf Coast.
Mr. Beyer. And we have seen a 14-inch rise in water level
in Norfolk in the last 10 years, affecting the naval base.
Secretary Jewell. Right.
Mr. Beyer. I would also like to mention an effort to
quantify outdoor recreation's contributions. I think you know a
little bit about outdoor rec. Once again, it is a bipartisan
bill called the REC Act, the ``Recreation and Economic
Enhancement Act.'' It was introduced last year in the Senate by
Senators Gardner and Shaheen, and now we are putting it
together with Representatives Reichert, McMorris-Rodgers, and
Blumenauer.
Can you tell us about how you will work with the Department
of Commerce and the Department of Labor to make sure this kind
of economic data is comprehensive and gives us the tools we
need to stimulate outdoor recreation?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, I am going to turn to Kris, because
we are working very closely with the economic folks on this
right now.
Go ahead.
Ms. Sarri. It is our hope to work with the Department of
Commerce, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and the Department
of Labor to capture how beneficial the outdoor recreation is to
our economy. That would be something that all of the land
management bureaus, whether it is within Interior, Forest
Service, or NOAA, would work with those entities.
The hope is to create what they call a satellite account to
supplement what we have in terms of data on economics from
outdoor recreation.
Mr. Beyer. Great, thank you. We only have 35 seconds left.
We spend a lot of time in this committee talking about the
Endangered Species Act. Can you go one step further, because I
know you have done a lot on connectivity, especially with the
sage-grouse. Can you talk more about connectivity efforts,
nationally?
Secretary Jewell. Really, the key to habitat in general for
species is looking at the landscape more holistically, and that
means connectivity. One of the biggest challenges we have had
has been fragmentation. You cannot really have little pockets
and islands and support a species. The pine forest in the
southern states, the Great Lake ecosystem, the Chesapeake Bay,
these are all very important. Thanks.
The Chairman. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Secretary Jewell. I have three questions to ask,
so I am going to try to talk fast and I'd appreciate if you
would do the same.
The state we both call home the last 2 years has suffered
from record-setting catastrophic wildfires. In my district,
certainly, that has been the case. Since 2000, the Department's
budget for fighting wildfires was less than their actual cost.
I know about the 10-year averaging system that you use for
suppression efforts.
So after these last two fire seasons, do you think a 10-
year average is the most practical way to allocate funding for
fire suppression, even with your proposed $290 million
adjustment to the cap? Additionally, what will likely happen to
other critical activities, such as forest fuel management,
health, and resiliency projects, should more funds be required
to fight fires in this coming year?
And, as a follow-up, what do you believe the Interior
Department and Forest Service could do to ensure adequate
forest management and rehabilitation occurs in order to get
ahead of this vicious cycle that we find ourselves in?
Secretary Jewell. Thank you very much for pointing out the
vicious cycle. We do not have adequate funds in our budget to
continue the work of rangeland and forest health, as well as
fighting fires. It is more acute in the Forest Service than it
is for the Department of the Interior, but it acute for both of
us.
I was on the Colville Reservation. I am red-carded so I was
able to go out on the fires themselves. These fires are burning
hotter and longer, because we are not doing fuels treatment. We
do not have the money to do that, so we would welcome a fix.
We have put in place in our budget the fix that was
recommended by Congress in both bodies, and we hope that that
passes. Certainly we could use more for fuels removal, and it
would put people to work. We would welcome an opportunity to do
that.
Mr. Newhouse. I want to thank you for addressing the
elephant in the room in your opening comments about the recent
protests that shined a spotlight on Federal management of lands
in the West. I am talking about what happened in Oregon.
One of the issues I hear from my constituents is regarding
the practice of back-burning. Certainly, in the case of the
Hammond family, they are being prosecuted for using an anti-
terrorism statute for trying to protect their private property,
which I find somewhat concerning. It seems like that is over-
prosecution, especially since the Federal Government uses the
same practice. It is not unusual for those fires the Federal
Government starts to spread onto private lands with no
compensation to the landowner.
So, could I ask you your position on the use of back-
burning? What would you have me tell my constituents who have
to decide whether to protect their land or face an anti-
terrorism charge if they do?
Secretary Jewell. Well, let me separate these a little bit.
Back-burning is absolutely an important practice for fuels
management on private and public lands. When there is an
inadvertent spread, which does occasionally happen, there is
typically not a criminal prosecution. The situation with the
Hammonds was different and there was other poaching activity
that was being covered up that came out in that criminal
prosecution, which has not really hit the media.
But, there is no question back-burning is important and I
would suggest that your constituents work closely with the
Federal land management agencies to coordinate those efforts.
We do that frequently across the landscape.
Mr. Newhouse. One more question, just real quickly. Given
that there is ample evidence to support delisting of the gray
wolf, do you believe that the wolf has been adequately
recovered, and should be delisted?
Additionally, why has the Department of the Interior and
the Fish and Wildlife Service failed to finalize this proposed
rule and move forward with delisting?
Secretary Jewell. The Fish and Wildlife Service has
recommended delisting of the gray wolf due to recovery. We have
had that action stayed by the courts. So, we cannot move
forward as a result of that. But we have recommended for
delisting due to recovery.
Mr. Newhouse. So you support delisting?
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Mr. Newhouse. We look forward to working with you on making
that happen.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Secretary, I don't know what your
schedule was. We have roughly about 40 minutes worth of
questions still here with this panel. That would take us to
quarter to. Are you on a drop-dead schedule here?
Secretary Jewell. No, I am willing to stay until quarter
to.
The Chairman. OK. Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to be
having at least an initial discussion on a budget process here
in this committee.
Secretary Jewell, thank you for being here. As you know,
the Indian Health Service, through its annual appropriation,
provides contract support cost to Indian tribes in tribal
organizations to offset the cost of administering IHS-funded
programs under self-determination contracts.
Indian tribes and tribal organizations have raised concerns
about the contract support funding shortfalls, and note that
these shortfalls have resulted in reduced services or decreased
efficiency for tribes with contracts.
My first question to you is, do you consider the Fiscal
Year 2017 request of $278 million for contract support costs
adequate to help tribes as they work to provide effective
health services?
And second, because we don't have a whole lot of time, how
were tribes consulted and their program needs considered when
coming up with the $278 million budget?
Secretary Jewell. Let me just answer generically. The
Indian Health Service is within HHS, so that is not my budget.
But we do have contract support costs for all of the self-
determination contracts we have in Interior.
We are fully supportive of 100 percent contract support
costs and that is what we anticipate the level to be that is
reflected in our budget. We did settle the litigation which was
around past non-payment of contract support costs. That
resulted in close to $1 billion of payouts to tribes for us not
living up to our obligations in the past. This budget reflects
our intent to pay full contract support costs, both for Indian
Health Service and those contracts as well as those within
Interior and other agencies.
Mrs. Torres. So, my second question was how did that
process look like?
Secretary Jewell. I am sorry.
Mrs. Torres. What did it look like? Were you consulting
with tribes to ensure that their needs were met?
Secretary Jewell. The short answer is yes. There is a
tribal budget committee that meets in conjunction with policy,
management, and budget. There is tribal consultation
throughout.
Ms. Sarri. Yes, we worked very closely with the tribes in
looking at the program costs on this issue.
Another thing that we did this year is, we adopted what the
Congress provided in 2016, which is an indefinite count, to
make sure that there are sufficient funds for contract support
costs. We continued the proposal from last year, where we were
asking for full mandatory funding in 2018 for this purpose.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you. Going back to the question that Mr.
Graves asked, can you help me understand that process of
funding or taking funds from international waters, which would
be considered for the entire country, and areas where it is
within a state? What does that look like?
Secretary Jewell. In 1964, Congress passed the Land and
Water Conservation Act. That said we are going to allow up to
$900 million from offshore oil and gas activities in Federal
waters to support land conservation across the United States.
That was authorized and roughly about 50 percent of what was
authorized has been spent over the years. That is because those
are in the Outer Continental Shelf waters that belong to all
Americans. As Congressman Lummis said, it is about 1.7 billion
acres.
Onshore, within the boundaries of the states, there is a 50
percent revenue sharing. When BLM typically does oil and gas
activities by private companies, those companies pay a royalty
to the Federal Government. Half of that goes to states when it
is onshore. That is not true offshore, with the exception of
this GOMESA proposal, the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act,
which starts to ramp up in 2018 and directs money from revenue
sharing from Gulf of Mexico production to four states only. The
President's budget recommends that be repealed and that money
be used for coastal resilience projects across the country.
Mrs. Torres. So, the only way to change that formula would
be through the legislative process?
Secretary Jewell. That is correct.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here. One
of President Obama's signature pledges on the campaign trail
was to run ``the most transparent administration in U.S.
history.'' In fact, his commitment to create an unprecedented
level of openness still stands proudly at the top of the White
House's Open Government Web page.
Secretary Jewell, do you believe in transparency and
honoring that pledge?
Secretary Jewell. I do.
Dr. Gosar. Does your agency typically comply with the
Freedom of Information requests, and if so, what is the average
turnaround time?
Secretary Jewell. We do comply with the requests. That is
done by career staff. I don't know what their average response
time is.
Dr. Gosar. My understanding is you do try to respond within
30 days, true?
Secretary Jewell. I don't know.
Dr. Gosar. I find it interesting that yesterday at 4:00
p.m. your agency sent me 143 pages of crap, responding to an
FOIA request from eight Members of Congress made 3 months ago
about information related to potential monument designations.
In our request, we asked for all Federal land units under
your jurisdiction that have been considered, analyzed, and
designated as national monuments since January 20, 2009. Your
agency sent us a crap sandwich, comprised entirely of other
Members' written questions to you during last year's budget
hearings without your response. A third-grader could have
provided this. Shame. And you wonder why we have problems.
Your agency is intimately involved in carrying out the
national monument designations, right?
Secretary Jewell. That is a Presidential power. We are
asked to weigh in on recommendations.
Dr. Gosar. But you are involved?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, we are involved.
Dr. Gosar. OK.
Secretary Jewell. Sometimes.
Dr. Gosar. In fact, your agency requested $43 million, a $9
million increase for such activities in this year's budget.
Since you have not responded to our FOIA request from the eight
Members of Congress, I am going to give you one more chance
today. How many more new national monuments does this
Administration plan to designate this year? What are the names
and geographic locations of potential monuments being
considered?
Secretary Jewell. That is entirely up to the President of
the United States. There are many people that come through the
doors saying, ``We would like you to look at monuments.'' There
are assessments that happen from places across the country of
interest. They go directly to the White House.
Dr. Gosar. Let me stop you there. So, the President has not
given you any detailed leanings, one way or the other?
Secretary Jewell. The President has not.
Dr. Gosar. Absolutely zippo?
Secretary Jewell. Absolutely zippo.
Dr. Gosar. OK, let's move on. Let's go to another one.
Have you ever visited Oak Flat?
Secretary Jewell. I have been to the area. I have been to
the San Carlos Apache Tribe, and very close by.
Dr. Gosar. But you haven't, though.
Secretary Jewell. I have flown over it. I have not been on
the ground.
Dr. Gosar. You have not been on the ground.
Secretary Jewell. I have not been on the ground.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Well, once again, the same type of thing. In
December 2014 you stated in a poorly worded press release,
``The Oak Flat area has significant religious, cultural,
historical, and archeological value.'' If you never visited
there, how can you make such a claim?
Secretary Jewell. I sat in a room in a nursing home with
elders from the San Carlos Apache Tribe, all of whom were in
tears over the potential mining development of Oak Flats.
Dr. Gosar. Oh, I am glad you just said that. I have very
little time. Dale Miles, a current member of the San Carlos
Tribe, and a former tribal historian, recently wrote a full-
page Op-Ed stating that the Oak Flat Campground had never been
a sacred site. Here is a copy for your record, so you can read
this.
Three times, Representative Ann Kirkpatrick and I have sent
the Park Service a bipartisan letter asking the agency to
withdraw a fundamentally flawed historical place nomination for
Oak Flat. The first time this nomination was published in June
2015 there was no notification to my office, nor Ms.
Kirkpatrick's. The initial nomination was redacted, included no
maps, and was listed under a misspelled city, not even close to
the proposed location.
Just yesterday, the Park Service finally utilized the name
Oak Flat and published a new listing notice in the Federal
Register, allowing 5 days for public comment. Does this sound
like a transparent process to you?
Secretary Jewell. There are many, many properties that come
up for National Register listing. I don't know what the normal
process is.
Dr. Gosar. Five days of public comment for people around
there is an adequate statement, right?
Secretary Jewell. I will have to look into it. I don't know
the specifics.
Dr. Gosar. You know, this gets old and old, and you were
talking about back-burning in forests. When are we going to
start taking the loads out of the forest so that we do not have
these exorbitant catastrophic fires? I mean 4FRI initiative is
one of those applications where we are supposed to be going and
thinning the forest so that we do not have this horribly,
despondently, non-scientifically based problem of burns.
We need to come to a common denominator here and start
pushing common sense. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Polis.
Mr. Polis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to actually
follow up on a bill that I have with Mr. Gosar, who just got to
ask the question.
Madam Secretary, of course we know that renewable energy
development on public lands has great opportunity. Since 2009,
there have been over 50 large-scale renewable energy projects
approved on public lands. But the siting and permitting process
around getting those renewable energy projects going frequently
stands in the way. I recently heard an anecdote from a company
yesterday that abandoned a project after seeking permitting for
several years.
When we compare this to oil and gas, it just seems to be
they get our public lands without hardly any notice, and
without any NEPA process or anything else. They just go and
drill. So, I wonder what we can do to make it more of a level
playing field.
I, along with Mr. Gosar, have introduced the Public Lands
Renewable Energy Development Act. As an overseer of 20 percent
of our Nation's land, can you commit to pushing for more
renewable energy development and facilitating and expanding the
opportunities to move through the permitting process around use
of Federal lands for renewable energy?
Secretary Jewell. Let me just start by saying we do a NEPA
process any time we do activities on Federal land, including
with oil and gas. But, absolutely, it is our intent to help
facilitate renewable energy development.
I think the best examples of that have been in California
and Nevada, which have been the Desert Renewable Energy
Conservation Plan, a landscape-level look, and then the solar
energy zones within the state of Nevada. We would welcome the
opportunity to do more of that and to accelerate the potential
that we have on our public lands.
Mr. Polis. Are you saying that establishing a drilling rig
on public land requires the full NEPA process?
Secretary Jewell. We do NEPA when we do the leasing
process. I don't know that each individual rig would require
that. I don't think so, once we issue a permit. That is within
the broad NEPA for the development in each of those areas.
Mr. Polis. Yes, once the land is leased, there is really no
NEPA process around the siting of the wells.
As you know, I represent a district that has a great
tourism economy. And of course, one of the types of land you
oversee are our national parks. And, of course, congratulations
on the centennial. We are very excited about that. We had a
number of festivities in Rocky Mountain National Park in my
district. We had our own centennial last year for that same
park.
It is also, of course, an economic lifeline for our area; 3
million visitors generating hundreds of millions of dollars of
economic activity and thousands of jobs. And, of course, it is
your responsibility to maintain those treasures. Rocky Mountain
National Park alone faces a deferred maintenance backlog of $68
million.
Do you believe that the National Park Service has the
efficient resources to manage its natural assets across
ecosystems? And, what can Congress do to help ensure that NPS
can help maintain this vital investment in keeping economic
prosperity in regions where our economy relies on our national
parks?
Secretary Jewell. Well, thanks for recognizing that an
investment in national parks actually drives a great return to
the American taxpayer. It is about 4 dollars of return for
every dollar spent.
The budget that we have, on the discretionary side, begins
to chip away at the maintenance backlog. But we really need a
longer-term solution, and we have put on the table proposed
Centennial legislation that would do that and would clear up
the high priority maintenance backlog within 10 years. We would
very much appreciate support from this body to make that
happen.
Mr. Polis. Thank you, and thanks for mentioning the return
on investment for public lands. You mentioned four-to-one.
In addition to that return, it is also crucial that we make
sure that all Americans, including diverse populations and
under-served communities and youth, have opportunities to
experience nature and benefit from our public lands. What can
your Department do to help connect people, especially diverse
and under-served populations, with the great benefits of the
outdoors and our public lands?
Secretary Jewell. Thanks very much for the question. We
have about $100 million spread across the Department with
everything from internships at the USGS to Every Kid in a Park.
The Every Kid in a Park program gives every fourth-grader in
America access to America's public lands. We are gearing up our
training for that. We are raising private money, supplemented
with our money, to get Title I schools access to go out to
those places. There are many other programs that we are doing
philanthropically, as well as with our own resources, to ensure
that next generation is introduced.
Mr. Polis. My final question is around interstate
transmission lines, like TransWest and Gateway South. There has
been concern that they were given deferential treatment, even
though they have huge impact on, for instance, sage-grouse
habitat, as well as other areas with wilderness character. What
are you doing to ensure that transmission lines will not cause
undo and unnecessary degradation to our public lands?
Secretary Jewell. Well, that was certainly factored into
the analysis. We know these are important lines and we took
that into account with the sage-grouse plans. Thank you.
The Chairman. And for the record. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You mentioned that the driver behind the lack of coal
demand was the market. But I will submit to you also that the
punishment that coal has been taking on regulation also has an
impact. My question really is about the moratorium.
You said in statements and today that it would not affect
jobs. But have you done an economic analysis of the jobs in
states like Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Kentucky, Wyoming,
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Utah, and Montana on the effect of jobs
and the moratorium on coal leases?
Secretary Jewell. The pause that we are putting on coal
leases for the length of the PEIS had a number of exclusions to
them, exclusions for metallurgical coal, recognizing that
existing coal mines have nearly 20 years, or more than 20
years, of coal under lease. But exceptions also so that if a
mine is at risk of shutting down, that we can consider that an
exception, or if a power plant is at risk of shutting down.
We also grandfathered a number of projects that were in the
pipeline and nearing completion, and we have provided ongoing
ability for people to conduct their NEPA analysis so that they
can continue their efforts during the time we are doing the
PEIS. So, we believe we have made accommodations to where there
will be no impact on coal jobs.
Mr. Zinke. So, do I have your commitment, then, if a mine
company applies for one of these exceptions, your agency will
work to ensure that the processing of those requests and
applications is done before they have to shut down?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, I mean they have to come to us with
sufficient time. They cannot come the day before they are going
to shut down, but as long as they come to us and work with us,
we are very happy to work with them to support the exceptions
that we have put in place.
Mr. Zinke. Well, thank you for your commitment.
Turning to the buffalo, which is a big issue in Montana
with the BLM; I went out to Montana and toured across, and
there is concern about placing the buffalo. The argument is
this: the cattlemen that lease BLM land are required to have a
certain number of animals per acre, they are required to have
fences, they are required not to graze year-round, and there
are a number of U.S. Fish and Game areas that have been
identified for grazing not to occur. The fear is that when the
buffalo came in, it seems like we have scraped all those rules
away. The proposal is that buffalo do not have to have number
of buffalo per acre, fences are going to be removed because
buffalo are very difficult to keep in a fence, there is year-
round grazing.
And you talked about the NEPA process. If we are going to
make a change of that scope, would you agree that the same
environmental impact statements would apply to cattle as they
do to buffalo if we are going to make this scale of change?
Secretary Jewell. I know there is a national bison plan. I
am not specifically familiar with how a bison-grazed range
compares versus a cattle-grazed range. All that would be taken
into account if we were taking Federal action to impact that.
But we are happy to get back to you for the record with more
information on that, if that is helpful.
Mr. Zinke. Well, and the national bison plan is by a group.
I have never had a problem on private land when you do it, as
long as it brucellosis free, and there are provisions in place
where the cattle and buffalo can live in a relative area of
harmony. But on public land, we are obligated to have the same
environmental review on it, and if there are brucellosis
problems, they need to be addressed. The buffalo plan, to my
knowledge, has never been through the state of Montana, where
it affects it.
My last question is about parks. I am sure we all agree on
the importance of our parks. But looking at your budget, we all
know you are behind. I just got finished talking to the
superintendent of Yellowstone. I know the superintendent of
Glacier. I know how important it is, I grew up in the backyard.
You and I both have toured the parks. But in your budget it
does not seem like you prioritized the infrastructure.
So, if the infrastructure is so important on road
maintenance, why isn't it at the top of the list on your
budget, as far as national parks?
Secretary Jewell. Infrastructure and beginning to deal with
the backlog is a very high priority in our budget. So it is in
there, not only in the discretionary budget, but also in our
recommendations for the centennial initiative, which would
clear up the high-priority maintenance backlog over 10 years.
Mr. Zinke. Would you say it is a top priority? Because as
you look through it there are a lot of other programs in there,
but it should be infrastructure first, I would think, before
some of these other education programs and some of these ones
that are less on the list.
Secretary Jewell. In our centennial year of the Park
Service, visitor experience also is very important.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you.
The Chairman. Look, we are almost a quarter to. I have
four, five Members left. I don't know about your time and I
feel bad about this, but if I could ask us to voluntarily limit
to 3 minutes instead of 5 for the last round, can you stick
around that long? I am sorry.
Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Secretary Jewell, as you know, PILT is one
essential program that supports rural counties in Arizona and
across the West. In fact, Arizona receives the fourth largest
PILT payment in the country. Counties depend on PILT funds to
provide a quality of services. They provide it every year, but
they are struggling without permanent, stable funding from
Congress, in terms of the long-term budgeting.
The volatility that county budgets have faced during the
annual budget process has caused counties to withdraw money
from their reserve accounts to pay for essential services. The
continued instability will eventually lead to layoffs of some
of our essential employees in these county areas.
Secretary Jewell, could you talk about the importance for
Congress to work to secure guaranteed future funding for PILT
and how it impacts services on public lands?
Secretary Jewell. Thanks for the question. We do not
believe that PILT should be subject to the vagaries of this
budget process every year. We know it is essential for 911
services, for many, many county services, education and so on.
So, we are fully supportive of a long-term solution to this,
and we would welcome this body working with us on that. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Wow, thank you.
Mrs. Radewagen.
Mr. Gallego. Done.
The Chairman. Oh, I am sorry, were you done?
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. OK, Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Jewell, thank you for taking time from your busy
schedule to be here today. I know you have a demanding job and
I appreciate the work you do.
As you know, every year a little over $22 million is
provided to American Samoa by the Office of Insular Affairs for
the operations of the local government, judiciary, community
college, and LBJ Hospital. The people of American Samoa are
very grateful for the assistance that the United States
provides and we cherish our relationship, as demonstrated by
the rate of enlistment into our Nation's armed forces, which is
higher than any other state or territory.
However, as you may know, this level of funding has not
changed since its inception over 20 years ago, despite
inflation, a growing population, and federally-mandated wage
hikes. On page 19 of the Fiscal Year 2017 budget justifications
for OIA, it is noted that American Samoa does not have
sufficient local revenues to fund the entire operating costs of
its government.
Also, within that very section, it is noted that a
secondary object of the funding program for American Samoa is
to promote self-sufficiency by maintaining the operations
funding at a constant level. Requiring American Samoa to absorb
the costs of federally-mandated wage hikes and inflation does
not lend itself to self-sufficiency. Actually, quite the
opposite.
By maintaining a consistent funding level since its
inception, the government of American Samoa has been forced to
play catch-up, which has caused some real needs on the island.
For instance, the hospital cannot serve our local veterans,
due to the fact that they do not meet VA standards, forcing
them to fly to Hawaii, which is like flying from Los Angeles to
DC every time they need hospital care. An increase in this
funding would go a long way in resolving those issues at the
hospital. The ASG operation funding provided currently
represents approximately 13 percent of ASG's general fund
revenue and 11 percent of LBJ's revenue.
Costs that are outside of the control of our constrained
local government, and costs that prevent our people from
resources that could be needed, could be used to further other
initiatives, such as badly needed energy infrastructure
projects and climate change initiatives.
I look forward to continuing to work with the Department to
ensure that the people of the U.S. territories, and
particularly American Samoa, are not left behind and are
allocated the same resources and opportunities as their
counterparts in the states.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Hardy.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here along with your deputies.
Each year, we hold budget hearings and we hear about the
massive backlogs. Currently it is at about $19 billion. Yet the
same time each year the Congress receives a request to spend
hundreds of millions of dollars on acquisition of new lands,
which gives me grave concern, especially with the comment that
I just heard a few minutes ago that we acquire these lands to
close access to our lands. Those were your words when the
question was asked.
Also, it is hard for me to understand and square this
circle when we need these extra dollars. I understand that we
have massive bureaucracy that already cannot manage the
enormous land holdings currently in its possession and asking
for more money to buy more land gives me concern. Either we
manage the land we have, or let someone else buy it who can
take care of it.
Let's say that the Department of the Interior gets this $20
billion that it requested in the President's budget. That is an
11 percent increase. Can the American people expect a minimum
11 percent decrease in our backlog with that 11 percent better
management across the board? And especially given the fact that
the budget requests are funding another 1,100 new full-time
employees?
Secretary Jewell. Let me start with the first part of your
comments. We actually have money in the budget to increase
access through the Land and Water Conservation Fund. There is
money in there that would be used for sportsmen's access, for
conservation easements across private land. There is nothing
that we do in the Land and Water Conservation Fund to limit
access.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you. Mr. Thompson made the statement and
asked you about why we acquired these lands, and your words
were, ``It helps us close access.''
Secretary Jewell. No, I don't believe I said that. I think
that is incorrect.
Mr. Hardy. Well, it is on the record.
Secretary Jewell. Kris was going to answer your other
question.
Mr. Hardy. OK.
Ms. Sarri. Sorry, I just want to be clear. In terms of the
$18 billion figure, that includes permanent and mandatory
funding. The fair comparison is the $13.3 million that is in
discretionary funding, compared to the $13.4 million in
discretionary last year.
Mr. Hardy. OK. The answer should be yes, in my opinion. So,
I want to go to another thing that was just stated here by Mr.
Polis, from the other side of the aisle. You asked a question
that said a four-to-one return was on those public lands. Is
that the case?
Secretary Jewell. That is a National Park Service number.
Mr. Hardy. OK. He said public lands, you said Park Service.
OK. With that, we should not be needing a budget. We should be
able to handle it yourself, if you are getting that kind of
return.
Secretary Jewell. The return goes oftentimes to local
communities, places like Estes Park in Colorado, like Moab,
Utah. So it is not a return to the Park Service, it is a return
to the local communities, largely.
Mr. Hardy. With your indulgence, Mr. Chair, I really would
like to ask a question on sage-grouse. The BLM indicates that
it will focus on revoking the withdrawals that are no longer
needed. At the time they announced the 10 million acre mineral
withdrawal, DOI officials went on record as saying the withdraw
areas do not appear to have highly prospective mining.
On what information were such statements based, as there is
abundant USGS and state data indicating otherwise?
The Chairman. I have been unfair with trying to cut these
last questions off quickly, so I will give you a chance to
answer that, if you would like to.
Secretary Jewell. OK, I will answer very quickly. The 10
million acres of proposed lands for mineral withdrawals are 10
million acres that are critical habitat for sage-grouse. There
are some areas that have mining potential. The vast majority of
them do not. We are working through this 2-year segregation
process with states, with mining companies, with counties and
other interested parties, to identify areas where they believe
they should not be part of the withdrawal.
There are active discussions, for example, going on in
Nevada. We are going to continue to work with states throughout
this 2-year segregation process.
The Chairman. OK, thank you.
Mr. Walden.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, Secretary Connor, thank you for being here
today. I will try and move through these quickly.
First of all, as you know, the Malheur Wildlife Refuge is
in my district. We appreciate the work of the people who work
there and at the BLM and I understand what they have been
through. They are important parts of our community. But I want
to get to the issue of the monument.
You and I had a phone conversation about this. I know you
met with Judge Grasty and Commissioner Reynolds, as well. And
the Malheur County Commission and judge there have written you
expressing their opposition to any monument there. I just want
to reconfirm: there is no effort in your agency, there is no
coordination with CEQ or the White House that you are aware of
to do an Owyhee Canyons National Monument?
Secretary Jewell. The concept of Owyhee Canyons came from
Keen Footwear. It has been kicking around, it is one of those
things people have recommended to us. But we have not held any
community meetings, we have not had any discussions in those
communities. People have not been actively in my office asking
about it.
Mr. Walden. OK, but is there any coordination with the
White House that you are aware of, or with CEQ, because I would
assume they would have to come to you.
Secretary Jewell. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Walden. If that does happen, would you be willing to
let me know and the committee know?
Secretary Jewell. Yes.
Mr. Walden. If that process begins.
Secretary Jewell. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Because, as you and I have talked in the past,
there has been dark-of-night from prior administrations that
have caused you headaches and people I represent real concerns.
Secretary Jewell. I understand.
Mr. Walden. I appreciate that. Second, now that the armed
standoff is over at the refuge, I do hope the BLM will move
rapidly on complying with Federal law regarding Steens Mountain
and the fencing issue up there on Steens. I think you talked to
Judge Grasty about that, as well.
Secretary Jewell. I did talk about that with Judge Grasty
and I plan on following up with the BLM.
Mr. Walden. Perfect, because under the Cooperative
Management Protection Act, which I helped author, that fencing,
if it is an issue of doing an EA or an EIS, could cooperatively
be done on adjacent private land. The landowners are open to
that to facilitate this compliance with the law. The BLM was
wrong in this case in their initial analysis and I hope you can
help correct that.
On another note, thank you for coming out regarding the
sage-grouse habitat cooperative collaborative. I am sure you
will be disappointed to know one of the environmental groups
has now sued over that. This is kind of the frustration that we
feel very strongly, as I don't have to tell you in the West,
when the collaboration does come together and then another
group sues. It is really, really frustrating to what we are
trying to do out there. And so, that is an issue, as well.
I want to commend the Interior Department for finally
getting done the change in the Wild and Scenic Rivers status on
Bowman Dam and moving that down. It took far longer than I
wanted it to take, but I commend you for finally getting that
done. This is a important movement forward.
As for law enforcement funding, because this was a Federal
facility, and because most of the people who were there were
not from Harney County, let alone from the state of Oregon, I
do hope the Federal Government will figure out a way to help
cover some of the local costs. I know you are looking at that.
I don't know if you have anything to add to any of those
statements.
The Chairman. Again, let me give you some flexibility,
because these are arbitrary time limits.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you for your comments, and
particularly for your advocacy of the people of Harney County
and also for the education we had in my conversation about your
work on Steens Mountain.
I don't know about the reimbursement and how the process
works with the FBI and so on, so that is certainly something
that we are happy to have a dialogue on. But I don't know what
the rules are.
Mr. Walden. And I am with you, but I would be happy to have
that conversation on this and other matters. And I will be
meeting with Mr. Bezdek later this week on the Klamath Basin.
Secretary Jewell. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. We are out of time to get into that, but I look
forward to continuing those discussions, as well. Thank you.
The Chairman. I ask unanimous consent to have Mr. Lujan
added to our panel, as well.
[No response.]
The Chairman. We recognize you. Try to keep it within 3
minutes and we will see how close we can get it for you.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are three documents that I asked to be given to you,
Secretary Jewell, I hope that they have been put in front of
you. There are three documents that have been given to your
staff right behind you. If you could, please hand them to
Secretary Jewell. Thank you so much.
The first document is a right-of-way agreement between San
Ildefonso Pueblo and Santa Fe County. If you would go to page 5
of that agreement, Madam Secretary, you can see that it is
signed and agreed to by San Ildefonso Pueblo Tribal Council on
this day, June 6, 1989. On page 6 of that agreement, there is
an amendment. This amendment is to issue rights-of-way to some
of the county roads.
I want to read this into the record. ``This document will
amend the right-of-way agreement between San Ildefonso Pueblo
and Santa Fe County regarding the easements for improvement
purposes of the following: the El Ranch Bridge, County Road
101D, and County Road 84,'' which is critically important,
County Road 84. ``All rights-of-way are as presented in the
resolution dated June 6, 1989 and addressed in San Ildefonso's
resolution SI008, dated June 6, 1989.''
The purpose of this amendment is to specify the term of
``rights-of-way.'' ``It is hereby agreed to by all parties that
the rights-of-way for items one, two, and three,'' item three,
which I will remind everyone is County Road 84, ``in this
amendment are granted in perpetuity.'' The way I understand
perpetuity, that is forever, right? That is perpetuity.
``By San Ildefonso Pueblo and the Santa Fe County,'' signed
by Santa Fe County, signed and dated by the former governor of
San Ildefonso Pueblo, signed and dated by the Secretary of
Tribal Council, signed and dated by the county attorney, and
then it says ``approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs,'' and
it is signed and dated. Madam Secretary, that was 1989.
On December 6, 2013, the BIA wrote a letter to show cause
to Santa Fe County alleging trespass on County Road 84 and
Sandy Way. You can see why I am confused. Here is a letter
accepted by the BIA. Twenty-four years later, a trespass letter
is issued.
Then, on January 7, 2014, Santa Fe County responded to the
BIA. If I could submit all three of those documents into the
record?

The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information offered by Mr. Lujan for the record
follows:]

RIGHT OF WAY AGREEMENT

BY AND BETWEEN

SAN ILDEFONSO PUEBLO AND SANTA FE COUNTY

Lease No. 8700628999

THIS AGREEMENT, is entered into by and between the County of Santa
Fe, a political subdivision of the State of New Mexico, by and through
its Board of County Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as ``the
County''), and the Pueblo of San Ildefonso, a federally recognized
Indian tribe, by and through its Governor and Tribal Council
(hereinafter referred to as ``the Pueblo'')

WHEREAS:

ARTICLE 1. The Pueblo owns, subject to federal restrictions, a
tract of land situated within the geographical boundaries of the
County, known as the San Ildefonso Pueblo Grant. The Pueblo has
ownership rights and governmental jurisdiction over and within such
lands, defined and protected by Federal law;

ARTICLE 2. The County wishes to replace a bridge on County Road
101-D within The Pueblo Grant; (Exhibit A)

ARTICLE 3. The County wishes to pave a portion of County Road 84
(Exhibit B). The County also wishes to develop plans for the paving of
County Road 101-D from its intersection with County Road 84 to its
intersection with County Road 84C. All projects in articles two (2) and
three (3) are described in Exhibits C-1, C-2, and C-3;

NOW THEREFORE, The parties agree as follows:

A. For all right-of-way and temporary construction easements needed to
complete the projects referred to in Articles 2 and 3 the County will:

1.   Install a gate at the end of County Road 84B which leads into
the Pueblo. This gate will be part of the construction
project on County Road 84. This gate will be closed during
Pueblo ceremonies and festivities at the discretion and
direction of the Pueblo.

2.   The County will sponsor the Pueblo with the New Mexico
Department of Energy and Minerals, Land and Water
Conservation Division in a cooperative effort to obtain
lights for the baseball field. Sponsorship shall include
application for funding.

3.   The County will clean up illegal dump sites on Pueblo Land and
bury the trash on Pueblo Land.

4.   The County will hire one summer youth to be employed at the
Pueblo's Visitor Center. The youth will be hired at minimum
wage for eight (8) to ten (10) weeks during 1989.

5.   The County will pay the Pueblo $20,000.00.

6.   The County will install four (4) lights at the entrance roads
into the Pueblo at their intersection with State Road 502.
The installation of the lights will be part of the County
Road 84 Paving Project. Once installed the operation and
maintenance for the lights will be provided by the County.

7.   The County will give a high priority to funding requests from
the Pueblo for advertising monies from Lodger's Tax
Revenues specifically earmarked for such purposes. This
agreement does not create any obligation for any payment
out of property tax revenue.

8.   The County will give to the Pueblo title to and possession of a
1969 Ford Van currently in the County's possession.

9.   The County will give to the Pueblo title to and possession of a
new 1989 Chevrolet 3/4 ton 4X4 Pick-up truck. The vehicle
will be purchased by the County and the County shall obtain
the approval of the State Board of Finance and deliver the
vehicle to the Pueblo upon the notice of approval from the
State Board of Finance.

10.   The County will, on an annual basis and in co-operation with
the Pueblo, clean up any illegal dumping that has taken
place on Pueblo lands. The time of the annual clean up will
be decided upon by mutual agreement between the parties.
Additional ``clean-ups'' of illegal dumping on Pueblo Lands
shall also be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
B. Right-of-way for the bridge project on County Road 101-D is shown in
Exhibit A.

1.  The Pueblo consents to the Grant by the Secretary of the Interior
to the County of a right-of-way for the construction of a
bridge across the Rio Pojoaque and public highway, together
with approaches, abutments, temporary construction
easements and construction maintenance easements.

2.  The right-of-way, as shown by Exhibit A, shall extend from a
tract of non-Indian land in the vicinity of the El Rancho
Bar to a tract of non-Indian land approximately one hundred
eighty two and eighty one-hundreds (182.81) feet north of
the bridge.

3.  The right-of-way shall be sixty (60) feet in width, the roadway
shall be thirty (30) feet in width but the bridge structure
shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width.

C. Improvements to existing development. The alignments will
necessarily follow the existing roadways adjusted to meet minimum
Highway Department standards.

1.  Construction Plans have been developed for the County Road 84
Project and will be supplied to the Pueblo.

2.  As of the date of execution of this agreement, plans for the
paving of County Road 101-D have not been developed. While
plans are in design, the Pueblo will be informed and shall
have the right of review and approval of said plans.

D. The County agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Pueblo from
property damage and personal injury caused by the acts or omissions of
the County and/or its employees, agents or representatives.

Agreed to by action of the Santa Fe County Board of County
Commissioners this 12 day of May 1989.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT

This document will amend the right-of-way agreement between San
Ildefonso Pueblo and Santa Fe County regarding the easements for
improvement purposes of the following:

1.  The ``El Rancho Bridge''.

2.  County Road 101-D.

3.  County Road 84.

All rights-of-way are as presented in the agreement dated June 6,
1989 and addressed in San Ildefonso's Resolution # SI-008 dated June 6,
1989.

The purpose of this amendment is to specify the term of the rights-
of-way.

It is hereby agreed to by all parties that the rights-of-way for
items 1, 2 and 3 in this amendment are granted in perpetuity by San
Ildefonso Pueblo to Santa Fe County.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

EXHIBIT C-1

BRIDGE PROJECT

The new bridge will be replacing the existing one-lane wooden
structure. The bridge is located on County Road 101-D. The present
bridge is 200 feet long + or  09. The new structure will be 185 feet
long with approximately the same channel width but with steeper
abutment slopes. Pre-stressed concrete beams will form the base for the
poured (concrete) deck. The deck will have two fourteen (14) foot drive
lanes , a four (4) foot sidewalk and guardrails. The approaches will be
base coursed and paved. A typical section is attached. A temporary
detour will be used during construction. The detour will be located
within the construction boundaries.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

EXHIBIT C-2

COUNTY ROAD 84 PAVING PROJECT

As shown on Exhibit B the alignment of the existing roadway will be
followed. The road will be bladed and shaped. Base course will be
installed to a depth of four (4 ) inches. A minimum of two and 5 tenths
(2.5) inches of hot mix paving shall then be installed. The width of
the paving will vary from nineteen (19) feet to approximately twenty
four (24) feet. Drainage will be handled with culverts and low water
crossings where appropriate. The termination of the project spans two
and two tenths (2.2) miles and is the prioritized length. The County's
goal is to pave the entire two and two tenth (2.2) miles if funds
allow.

A typical section is attached.

typical section

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

EXHIBIT C-3

COUNTY ROAD 101-D PAVING PROJECT

The County will be receiving funds for this project, however until
monies are in place plans will not be developed. When the money is
available the design will follow the existing roadway adjusted to meet
minimum Highway Department standards.
The existing alignment will be bladed and shaped (sub-grade
preparation). Base course will be installed. The depth to be based on
soils test results. Paving will be a minimum of two and five tenth
(2.5) inches, again based on test results. Width will be approximately
twenty (20) to twenty four (24) feet. Culverts and/or low water
crossings will be used for drainage purposes.

A typical section is attached.

typical section

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ENVIRONMENTAL STATEMENT

This statement will address the proposed bridge project on County
Road 101-D and the proposed paving projects on County Roads 101-D and
84.

The bridge project will entail the replacement of an existing
bridge. The land area involved will be essentially the same for the new
structure as for the old structure. The project is compatible within
the parameters of the present use.

The road projects will entail the paving of existing dirt roads
already being used by the public. The improvements will be limited to
existing alignments adjusted to meet minimum Highway design standards.

None of the projects will require relocation and/ or
displacements.

All of the projects will improve the public safety.

The road projects, and to some degree the bridge project,
will improve the air quality by significantly reducing the
present dust pollution.

Water quality and supply will not be affected.

There will be no increase in energy consumption.

The projects are in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.

An EIS is not required.

Our research and planning of the projects indicate that a finding
of no significant impact (FONSI) can be made. The projects will not
adversely affect the quality of the human environment.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT NO. 1

This document will amend the right-of-way agreement between San
Ildefonso Pueblo and Santa Fe County regarding the easements for
improvement purposes of the following:

1.  The ``El Rancho Bridge''.

2.  County Road 101-D.

3.  County Road 84.

All rights-of-way are as presented in the agreement dated June 6,
1989 and addressed in San Ildefonso's Resolution # SI-008 dated June 6,
1989.

The purpose of this amendment is to specify the term of the rights-
of-way.

It is hereby agreed to by all parties that the rights-of-way for
items 1, 2 and 3 in this amendment are granted in perpetuity by San
Ildefonso Pueblo to Santa Fe County.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CERTIFIED MAIL

NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE

December 6, 2013

Ms. Katherine Miller
County Manager, Santa Fe County
102 Grant Avenue
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501-2061

Dear Ms. Miller:

We are formally informing you and the County of Santa Fe
(``County'') of the issue of trespass by the County on tribal lands of
the Pueblo of San Ildefonso (``Pueblo''). Upon notification by the
Pueblo and a review of our documents, we have determined that the
County is in trespass on Pueblo land. This Notice provides the County
information concerning the instances of trespass and notifies the
County that it must show cause why the County should not be immediately
assessed trespass damages and why the County should not be evicted from
the subject Pueblo lands.
TRESPASS
The County of Santa Fe is in violation of the federal requirements
in the use of Indian trust land. County Road 84 and side roads 84A,
84B, 84C, 84D and Sandy Way (see attached map and photo) are in
trespass. No record exists to the fact that the County has an easement
or rights-of-way in our files nor is there any record that the County
has submitted an application for an easement or Rights-of-Way.
County Roads in Trespass:

County Road--84

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Sections 17, 8, 9 and
10

From the intersection of Povi Kaa Drive (main entrance to the
Pueblo of San Ildefonso from Hwy. 502) east to the intersection
of 101-D.

County Road--84A

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Section 10

From the intersection with Evergreen Lane east to the
reservation boundary line.

County Road--84B

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Sections 8 and 9

From the end of the pavement east of the Pueblo, east to the
intersection with County Road 84.

County Road--84C

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Sections 5, 4, 3, 10,
and 11

From the intersection with Tunyo Po east to the reservation
boundary line.

Country Road--84D

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Sections 10 and 11

From the intersection with Sandy Way east to the reservation
boundary line.

Sandy Way

*Township 19 North, Range 8 East, NMPM within Sections 9 and 10

From the intersection with 84D west to the private claim.

*Espanala Quadrangle, New Mexico--7.5 Minute Series (Topographic)
CONCLUSION
The County is in direct violation of the federal requirements
governing the use of Indian trust lands. Specifically:

No easement or Rights-of-way exist for County Road 84 and the
side roads on tribal trust land of the Pueblo of San Ildefonso,
thus, the County is in trespass.

You are hereby informed that the County has thirty (30) business
days from receipt of this letter to either enter into good faith
negotiations to settle the current trespass and enter into a new
easement for rights-of-way, or to show cause why the County's failure
to pursue valid easements for the county roads should not be turned
over to the U.S. Department of Justice for action against the County.
We encourage the County to enter into negotiations with the Pueblo
to resolve the current trespass as quickly as possible and establish
legal bases for the County's continued use of Pueblo land.
If you should have any questions or require additional information,
contact my office at (505) 753-1400 or Norman Jojola, Natural Resource
Manager at (505) 753-1451.

Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Raymond Fry,
Superintendent.
Enclosures
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

January 7, 2014

Raymond Fry, Superintendent
United States Department of the Interior
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Northern Pueblos Agency
P.O. Box 4269--Fairview Station
Espanola, New Mexico 87533

Re: Notice to Show Cause Dated December 6, 2013

Dear Mr. Fry:

Your letter of December 6, 2013 has been forwarded to this office
for response. The letter demands that Santa Fe County, New Mexico show
cause why it ``. . . should not be immediately assessed trespass
damages and . . . should not be evicted from the subject Pueblo
lands.'' The ``subject Pueblo lands'' consist of County Roads numbered
84, 84-A, 84-B, 84-C, 84-D and Sandy Way. The letter further states
that the Bureau of Indian Affairs has ``determined'' that the County is
in fact trespassing on San Ildefonso lands.
Santa Fe County believes the assertions in the December 6 letter to
be a serious overreaching on the part of the Bureau of Indian Affairs
and request it be withdrawn immediately. This is far from a
constructive way to renew the debate about County lands and access to
non-Indian property within the Pueblos. It comes at a time when the
County had already initiated discussions with all four Pueblos on this
very issue. It also has the potential to shift what has been a positive
and responsible discussion of the issues to a negative adversarial
situation.
The most obvious problem is that the Bureau of Indian Affairs lacks
any authority (statutory or regulatory) to require the County to ``show
cause'' in this or any instance. An order to show cause is not
authorized by statute. It is authorized by regulations of the Bureau
only as specified in 25 C.F.R. Sec. 141.56 (show cause order authorized
to enforce compliance with business practices specified in the
regulation on the Navajo, Hopi and Zuni reservation); and 25 C.F.R.
Sec. 162.006 (show cause order authorized for violations of leases and
permits). Aside from these meager regulatory examples, nothing further
exists. In fact, 25 C.F.R. Sec. 162.006(b)(1) explicitly states that it
does not apply to right of way issues, which this is. Nor is there
authority in the Code of Federal Regulations for the ``declaration'' of
trespass. 25 C.F.R. Sec. 161.700 et seq. authorizes a declaration of
trespass on Navajo Partitioned Lands, but not on lands of the Northern
Pueblos.
The letter also failed to undertake even the most basic and
rudimentary research concerning the underlying sweeping findings of
trespass. For example, nowhere in the letter does the Bureau mention
that Santa Fe County has maintained many of the ``subject Pueblo
lands'' in many cases for a period in excess of one hundred years.
Nowhere in the letter are the activities of the Pueblo Claims Board and
the Federal Courts in the 1920s and 1930s discussed with respect to the
roads in question or the adjoining property. Also not mentioned or
analyzed in any way, even cursorily, is the fact that hundreds of non-
Pueblo residents live on the roads in question and the import of the
``determination'' by BIA is to deprive those persons of access to their
homes and businesses, title to which is derived from proceedings of the
Pueblo Claims Board and the Federal Courts. Also not discussed or
analyzed are the many discussions between Santa Fe County and the
Pueblo of San Ildefonso going back decades on these various issues.
But paramount among the failures of the Bureau to properly analyze
this situation is the fact, discussed below, that an agreement with San
Ildefonso Pueblo explicitly grants the County a right-of-way on all of
the roads in question.
The agreement referred to in the previous paragraph is the ``Right
of Way Agreement by and Between San Ildefonso Pueblo and Santa Fe
County.'' A copy is attached. That agreement, dated June 7, 1989,
amended once on August 1, 1989, was developed to address the immediate
need to construct a bridge on County Road 101-D and to pave certain
County Roads within the Pueblo grant, including County Road 84 and 101-
D. The agreement was supported by substantial consideration, which is
recited in the agreement. The original agreement provided rights-of-way
for the bridge project, and the amendment granted perpetual rights-of-
way for the bridge, County Road 101-D and ``County Road 84.'' Both the
agreement and its amendment were signed by the Governor of the San
Ildefonso Pueblo, a representative of the Tribal Council, and a
representative of the Northern Pueblos Agency of the BIA. If you
assume, as the County does, that the grant of right of way for CR-84
includes all of its respective subparts (84-A, 84-B, 84-C and 84-D), to
the extent those roads pass through San Ildefonso lands (see below),
the grant expressly permits the County's activities and no
``determination'' of trespass is legally sustainable. As 25 C.F.R.
Sec. 169.28 (``Public highways'') permits state or local authorities to
apply to ``open public highways across tribal and individually owned
lands in accordance with State laws, as authorized by the Act of March
3, 1901 . . .'' (see also 25 U.S.C. Sec. 311 (1901)), the Right of Way
Agreement is very clearly an exercise of the authority granted to the
BIA and the Tribe by 25 U.S.C. Sec. 311 and 25 C.F.R. Sec. 169.28.
Unlike the Bureau, the County has thoroughly researched its rights-
of-way within all of the Five Northern Pueblos, and commissioned an
extensive analysis from Dr. Stanley Hordes, supported by a team of
expert and well-qualified historians and researchers. The resulting
report was provided to the San Ildefonso Pueblo many years ago. We have
had brief discussions about the report with the Pueblo from time to
time, but those discussions did not mature into serious discussions
until Governor Aguilar initiated further discussions last year, and
indicated he wanted to resolve the issue once and for all. We discussed
the Governor's desire to close certain roads which had been created by
the public, and the need for the County to acquire formal easements
rather than rely on the previously-mentioned agreement. And we
discussed with Governor Aguilar the County's concern that local
residents have legal access, and the right to receive gas electric,
water and other utilities through the County roads. We believe that
through concentrated efforts and dedication on the part of both
governments on this issue, both governments would ultimately benefit.
Of overriding concern with respect to the Bureau's sweeping conclusions
and directive here is the fact that the Pueblo Lands Act of 1924, in
authorizing the activities of the Pueblo Claims Board and the Federal
Court, failed to expressly provide a process for adjudication of non-
private, i.e. public land, or the issue of access to and from the many
private claims and exception lots that were adjudicated by the PCB and
the Federal Court. This failure is a failure of Congress, and the
ambiguity about these important matters continues, but it is certainly
not something that is susceptible of a ``declaration'' by the Bureau.
The Bureau's declaration is tantamount to a determination that many
thousands of non-Pueblo residents in the Pojoaque no longer have legal
access to their homes and businesses--rendering those homes and
businesses worthless--and which was something that the Pueblo Lands Act
was intended to avoid.

Dr. Hordes' discussion of the PCB and its work is helpful to
understanding the present status of the County maintained roads in
question:

``As stated above, in 1924, Congress passed the Pueblo Lands
Act in an attempt to clear up title issues resulting from
overlapping claims between Pueblos and non-Indians living in
close proximity to Pueblo lands. The Act established the Pueblo
Lands Board (PLB), which gathered testimony and issued reports
based on its investigations. The PLB confirmed to the Pueblos
all the lands within each of their grants, with the exception
of portions of tracts of land that were patented to non-Indian
settlers, as well as rights of way for utilities, railroads,
and roads. The claims of the non-Indians were only partially
honored by the PLB. In many cases, while the tracts claimed by
the non-Indians included grazing areas located above their
cultivated lands, houses and barns, extending to the hills, the
PLB recognized only the cultivated lands and improvements,
eliminating over half of the acreage claimed by the non-Indian
settlers. This was to have a particularly significant impact on
one of the roads passing through the boundaries of the Pueblo
of San Ildefonso . . .

``During its proceedings for all the Pueblos, the PLB used
discrete numbers that had been assigned to each of the private
(non-Indian) claims, based on a survey that had been conducted
in 1914 by U.S. Surveyor F.E. Joy (commonly known as the Joy
Survey). These ``private claim'' (PC) numbers provided the
order by which the PLB conducted its hearings and heard
testimony of local residents, Pueblo and non-Indian alike. The
site-specific information that these hearings generated
provides historians with the ability to derive valuable
observations with regard to the status of the lands in dispute,
and more important, the nature and ownership of the roads that
pass through these lands.

``The records of the PLB proceedings vary slightly from Pueblo
to Pueblo in the late 1920s and early 1930s, but typically they
begin with a cover sheet indicating the PC number and the name
of the claimant, followed by a summary of the ownership of the
tract, often extending back to the late nineteenth century, and
sometimes a century and a half earlier. Typically these
abstracts will contain detailed descriptions of the boundaries,
sometimes referencing the existence of a camino real, public
road, state road, or county road. In the case of most of the
five Pueblos under consideration in this report, there followed
a detailed plat of the tract, indicating dimensions, placement
of structures, and often an indication of the existence of
public roads bordering the property. Next in the file is a
transcript of the hearings held by the PLB, where owners of the
tract, family members, neighbors, and representatives of the
adjacent Pueblo offered detailed testimony with regard to
boundaries, land use and roads running by or through the
property. For each of the Pueblos, the PLB prepared large
comprehensive plats, showing the locations of each PC, as well
as the course of the roads that passed through Pueblo and non-
Indian properties.

``After the PLB considered the evidence before them, they
issued a series of reports including the validity of claims to
land asserted by the Pueblos and the non-Indians, the valuation
of the lands, and, in some cases the status of the roads that
were located within the Pueblo grant lands. Some months later
the U.S. Court of Equity issued rulings confirming or revising
the PLB's decision, and sometimes contained additional
information with regard to the ownership of these roads.''

Dr. Hordes' report contains a detailed history of County Road 84,
over which you assert the County has ``trespassed,'' and which casts
significant doubt on your ultimate conclusion. For example:

``1. CR 84:

``County Road 84, approximates the course of the road that has
connected the communities of Pojoaque and San Ildefonso for
centuries. Beginning in the 1890s Santa Fe County authorities
began to assert responsibility for maintaining this
thoroughfare, which runs through the grant lands of both
Pojoaque and San Ildefonso Pueblos. In response to petitions
from local residents, the BCC in 1892 instructed the county
road overseer to ``put in good condition the public road known
as the road from Jacona to San Ildefonso on the south side of
the river as soon as possible. . . .'' A 1913 map shows a
``wagon road'' running near the same route as today's CR 84 and
84B. Six years later, the BCC again responded to the request of
local residents, and resolved to investigate the possibility of
constructing a new road between San Ildefonso and Pojoaque,
``so that it may be made in such condition that it may be used
for the public, and for the regular mail route from the above
towns to Santa Fe.'' Apparently no action was taken
immediately, since the journals of the BCC did not reflect any
such implementation.

``In 1925, however, the State Highway Engineer revived these
plans in a preliminary letter to the Northern Pueblos Agency.
The Engineer articulated the antiquity of the highway,
indicating that ``the road now in existence and being traveled
through the Pueblo of San Ildefonso on the east side of the Rio
Grande is the old original trail which has been in use for an
indefinite period.'' He acknowledged that the 1919 plans still
remained unfulfilled, stating that ``[w]hile this route was
made a part of the State Highway System by act of the State
Legislature in 1923, it has not yet been improved by the State
Highway Department.'' Thus, the State Highway Engineer not only
linked CR 84 to the old camino real, but asserted that it was
now an official part of the state network of highways.

``The PLB's Report No. 1, as cited above, exempted certain
roads from Pueblo ownership, including FAP No. 14-B, the
highway that ``extends in a westerly direction to and across
what is known as the Jacona Grant and to and across the west
boundary of the said Pojoaque Grant, and is known as State
Highway Project No. 4,'' clearly referring to today's CR 84.
The Report acknowledges the absence of a formal right of way
from the Pueblo of Pojoaque, but cites the fact that the roads
or highways through said grant have been in use by the public
for more than 50 years, and the Board has determined, and
hereby determines, that the Territory and State have acquired
by such use an easement in and over said lands, subject only to
a reverter to the Pueblo, whenever said land shall no longer be
used by the public or the State as a highway, or shall be
abandoned for a new location across said grant.

``Over the next seventy years the documentary record reflects
consistent acknowledgment of ownership and/or maintenance of
the road by state or county authorities. In 1947 the BCC
responded to a request from one of its constituents that ``the
road [from Pojoaque to San Ildefonso] belongs to the State and
should be taken care of by the State.'' The following year the
BCC asserted that the road was in bad repair, and they would
refuse to take it over as a county road unless proper repairs
were made. By 1966 it appears that the County had assumed
control of the road, as that year the BCC reported abandonment
of a small segment of then State Road 4 adjacent to Pojoaque
High School, no longer needed for road purposes. The land was
deeded to the Board of Education. BCC minutes from 1988 to 2000
reflected action by County officials relating to paving and
repairs to CR 84.''

Note that italicized language that recites that the Pueblo Claims
Board, assigned to address conflicting claims with the Northern Pueblo
boundaries, explicitly determined with respect to County Road 84 that:
``. . . the Territory and State have acquired by such use an easement
in and over said lands, subject only to a reverter to the Pueblo,
whenever said land shall no longer be used by the public or the State
as a highway, or shall be abandoned for a new location across said
grant.''

The County has always been interested in reaching a more permanent
solution to the claims of the San Ildefonso Pueblo concerning these
roads. We are aware that this matter, even though the subject of
express right-of-way agreement, is still unsettled in the view of the
San Ildefonso Pueblo. The present uncertainty is made even more complex
by the Aamodt settlement, in which the Pueblo has agreed to provide
rights-of-ways for the public water system and an accompanying
wastewater system. These matters are best the subject of a negotiated
resolution by the County and the Pueblo, without intervention by the
Bureau of Indian Affairs. Certainly, the Bureau's finding of a trespass
and the ultra vires declaration of a responsibility of the County to
``show cause'' are completely unhelpful to a resolution of these
issues, which have persisted for 80 or more years.

Please withdraw the letter immediately, or consider this to be an
appeal of the determination pursuant to 25 C.F.R. Part 2.

Sincerely,

Katherine Miller,
County Manager.

Stephen C. Ross,
County Attorney.

______

Mr. Lujan. Madam Secretary, the reason I am here before you
is for the last 2 years I have been trying to work with the
Bureau of Indian Affairs to bring some resolution, some
assistance, some help, some recognition. I have not been
getting anything except for what appears to be a bit of a
stonewall.
There is a letter dated April 16, 2014, where the BIA wrote
back to my office, quoting part of the letter from Santa Fe
County, which I highlighted on the second-to-last page, stating
that the county has always been interested in reaching a more
permanent solution to the claims of San Ildefonso Pueblo
concerning these roads. We are aware of this matter. But the
BIA asserted that that is ambiguity.
We need to get to the bottom of what these easement
agreements are. When I have been asking for a criteria or a
process by the BIA on what they do to issue trespass letters, a
database that is reviewed, documents and agreements that are
stamped as approved by the BIA to be looked at and considered,
and these ambiguities are created.
What is happening now is in 1924 there was something called
the Pueblo Lands Act that the Congress adopted. And in 1930,
all the adjudicated lands were cleared up with land disputes in
this area. Patents were issued by the United States of America,
which, is my understanding, the clearest title that you could
have in the United States. But now there is a dispute with some
of these roads.
Subsequent to that, these agreements have been put in
place. I need your help now, because the lands that are owned
by the non-tribal residents in this case in the exterior
boundaries of San Ildefonso, they are trying to sell their land
or build homes on their land, third, fourth, fifth generations,
whatever they may be. The title insurance companies are saying
that this letter from the BIA dated December 2013 is stopping
all of that.
So I bring all of this to your attention with a little bit
of passion, Madam Secretary, because this community needs our
help and I am concerned what is going to happen there.
Thanks again for the indulgence, Mr. Chairman. I look
forward to working with you and your team to bring resolution
here, and hopefully reversing that 2013 letter in light of the
amendment on that agreement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Do you want 15 seconds to respond?
Secretary Jewell. Well, I will just say this is the first I
have heard of it. My door and my phones are always open, as you
have concerns. You don't feel like you have to come to a budget
hearing for that. But we are happy to look into it.
The Chairman. Mr. Denham, we are way over time. You have
not had a chance to ask any questions. Can you do it in a
couple of minutes?
Mr. Denham. I will do my best, sir.
The Chairman. OK.
Mr. Denham. Secretary Jewell, there are a number of social
justice issues in California's Central Valley areas that will
once again have a zero water allocation, have a 30 to 50
percent unemployment in a number of different cities, water
that is going to be trucked in once again, mobile showers, food
lines. The social justice issues go on and on in California and
Central Valley. But there is one question in particular that I
want to have you address.
Three weeks ago, this committee heard about the non-native
fish in the Stanislaus River, in the Delta, and elsewhere, that
are killing and eating up to 98 percent of the threatened
endangered species that we are spending so much money and so
much water on trying to save.
The big conflict has been perpetuated by the Central Valley
Project Improvement Act, which is CVPIA. It has a fish doubling
goal. So not only are we trying to double the goal of trying to
double the endangered and threatened species, but also the goal
is to double the non-native fish that are eating 98 percent of
what we are trying to save, and the main reason that we are
pushing all of this water out to the ocean, bypassing the
Central Valley, and creating these big social justice issues.
So, my question is very simple. I have a bill that
eliminates this Federal fish doubling goal for the striped
bass, and I would just ask you simply: Would you agree with
addressing the endangered and threatened species, rather than
having a conflicting goal that causes a greater imbalance?
Secretary Jewell. I am going to ask Mike Connor to answer.
Mr. Connor. Congressman Denham, thank you for raising the
issue. There have been many legislative proposals. I think this
is one that has been a constant theme of what to do about
striped bass. So we are happy to take a look at your
legislation.
I believe the CVPIA provisions have been essentially
stayed, because they are supposed to be implemented in
partnership with the state of California and there has been no
action on them. But there have been provisions for a
demonstration project to reduce the predation by striped bass.
Your provision to undo that provision within the CVPIA, we are
happy to look at those legislative authorizations.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. We certainly have an amendment in
both the House and Senate bills that deal with predation on the
Stanislaus River, but this is obviously a much bigger issue and
the doubling goal in CVPIA needs to be addressed. So, I would
ask you to give me a written response, once you get an
opportunity to look at that legislation.
But I will say in front of this committee, we have had
several people testify that have said predation is one of the
key reasons that we have already pushed 500,000 acre-feet out
to the ocean in the last 2 months. We would look forward to
working with you on that and look forward to a rapid response.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. LaMalfa, if you can do it in 1 minute, you get the last
question.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it.
Ms. Jewell, again, the Portland hearing right now, which
required non-disclosure forms to be signed, same as in
Sacramento, so far the highlights are that they have formed a
Klamath River removal corporation, a 501(c)(3), and that they
are going to call the dam removal disconnecting them rather
than decommissioning them. Those are highlights from Portland
so far.
Were you aware, Madam Secretary, that non-disclosure forms
are required to be signed to participate in the Sacramento and
Portland hearing?
Mr. Connor. Yes, I was made aware of that after the
original hearing.
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you think it is appropriate for government
employees and even my office to be subject to that, when it
would seem like a public process with millions of taxpayer
dollars involved?
Mr. Connor. With respect to those meetings, the process is
being carried out under the Klamath Hydropower Settlement
Agreement amongst the parties. It was the parties themselves
who, I believe, were seeking non-disclosure.
Mr. LaMalfa. Mr. Chairman, the Federal Government is a
partner in this thing because they are deep into it, they are
going to be seeking Federal funding.
For the record, sir, I want you to know that I will be
submitting a Freedom of Information request to your office,
Secretary Jewell, for all these documents related to the
Portland meeting today, the Sacramento meeting last week, and
anything else that comes on line. So, I really appreciate a
rapid response on that.
With all these secret meetings, a front company being
formed, and no end being discussed on how the water supply
issues for the people in the Basin, this is really a jam job on
my district.
Sorry about that, but this is tough business. And I yield
back. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. I also have a request that we came
in there on a Department law enforcement database and your
staff said you could get our answers soon. I hope that could be
done this week, as well.
Ms. Jewell, I really do apologize for keeping you this
long. You do realize the only other person that stayed the
entire time is me. So we have to quit meeting like this. But I
do appreciate you coming here with the answers.
There may be some additional questions Members have. Under
our rules we have 10 business days to accommodate those.
With that, unless there is anything else, with our deep
consideration, I want to sincerely thank you for actually
staying here and especially staying the extra half-hour, which
was above and beyond the call that was supposed to be here. So,
thank you very much for doing that. I apologize we kept you
this long.

With that, the committee is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 1:07 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
