- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON AN ANALYSIS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S SOCIAL COST OF CARBON

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN ANALYSIS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S SOCIAL COST OF CARBON

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, July 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-643 PDF    WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Vacancy
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Vacancy

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Parker, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, July 22, 2015.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Lowenthal, Hon. Alan S., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lummis, Hon. Cynthia M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho, a Delegate in Congress
from the Territory of the Northern Mariana Islands.........     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:

Dayaratna, Kevin, Ph.D., Senior Statistician and Research
Programmer, Center for Data Analysis, The Heritage
Foundation, Washington, DC.................................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Dorsey, Michael K., Ph.D., Interim Director, Energy and
Environment Program, Joint Center for Political and
Economic Studies, Washington, DC...........................    39
Prepared statement of....................................    40
Michaels, Patrick J., Ph.D., Director, Center for the Study
of Science, The Cato Institute, Washington, DC.............    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    30
Segal, Scott H., Founding Partner, Policy Resolution Group,
Washington, DC.............................................    43
Prepared statement of....................................    45

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

List of documents submitted for the record retained in the
Committee's official files.................................    76
.............................................................

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON AN ANALYSIS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S SOCIAL
COST OF CARBON

----------

Wednesday, July 22, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Rob Bishop,
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Gohmert, Fleming,
McClintock, Lummis, Benishek, Duncan, Gosar, Labrador, Cook,
Westerman, Newhouse, Zinke, Hice, Hardy; Sablan, Lowenthal,
Cartwright, Beyer, Torres, Gallego, Capps, and Polis.
The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
The committee is meeting today to hear the testimony on an
analysis of the Obama administration's social cost of carbon.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), oral opening statements at the
hearing are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member, the Vice Chair or designee of the Ranking Member. This
will also allow us to hear from our witnesses sooner and help
Members keep their schedules.
Therefore, I am going to ask unanimous consent that all
other Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing
record if they are submitted to the Clerk by 5:00 p.m. today.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I am now going to recognize myself for an opening
statement, if I could.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

The Chairman. This is the second of a series of oversight
hearings on policies that involve the National Environmental
Policy Act, an act which is actually older than some of the
Members that are up here. I wish I could say it is older than
me, but I was not able to legally vote when it was actually
passed, and it has not been changed since that time.
Today's hearing is going to focus on the requirement of
CEQ's Draft Greenhouse Gas Emissions Guidance that the social
cost of carbon be considered in all NEPA environmental reviews.
Three weeks ago, we invited OMB to testify, and I was
hoping to ask them directly about this guidance and their
participation in it, but OMB said they could not make it again.
Since OMB is usually the one that stops most of the testimony
from getting to us on time, perhaps they did not have enough
time to clear their own testimony with themselves.
An informal Interagency Working Group led by OMB and the
Council of Economic Advisors, with a host of other Federal
agencies, has developed specific numbers for the social cost of
carbon using a dollar per metric ton basis. Got to love it.
According to a GAO report though, these closed-door
meetings were fairly collegial, and bureaucratic participants
were allowed to contribute their input on the final product,
but guess who was missing: the public--people, people who know,
people who are impacted. They were totally shut out of the
process so far.
The Federal working group did produce a specific dollar
amount for the cost of carbon using three different models, all
of which require arbitrary assumptions about discount rates,
socioeconomic predictions, and measuring changes in
temperature; and to be doubly safe, the Interagency Working
Group even projected the cost of carbon out to the year 2300.
According to Dr. Christy's testimony at our last NEPA
hearing, scientists cannot replicate what we know has already
happened with temperature, and scientists cannot predict what
will happen in the future with the current modeling systems.
Meteorologists cannot even predict next week's weather pattern,
and yet for the social cost of carbon, this Administration
chose to rely on models to predict a whole host of factors
beyond temperature out to the year 2300.
Oh, wait, wait. Maybe not necessarily, because even in
their own technical support documents, citing a National
Academies of Science report, they acknowledge, and I want to
quote from their own document, ``any assessment will suffer
from uncertainty, speculation, and lack of information about:
(1) future emissions of greenhouse gas; (2) the effects of past
and future emissions on the climate system; (3) the impact of
changes in climate on the physical and biological environment;
and (4) the translation of these environmental impacts into
economic damages.''
``As a result,'' the report concludes, ``any effort to
quantify and monetize the harms associated with climate change
will raise serious questions of science, economics, and ethics
and should be viewed as'' provincial--``provisional.''
Provisional, but it is also provincial, too, but
provisional.
It is fair to say that the whole concept of the social cost
of carbon is highly speculative. The Interagency Working
Group's own documents say it raises serious questions of
science, economics, and ethics. Yet the Administration decides
to move forward to a plan to ensure that it is used in every
NEPA action and it does not matter that it does not work and
they cannot prove it.
And the fun part is, guess how the public finally found out
about this broad-sweeping, all-encompassing assessment of the
cost of carbon on society? We found out about it in interim
estimates in Department of Energy regulations for vending
machines, we found out about the final estimates in the DOE
rule for small electric motors, and we found out about the
updated estimates in--wait for it--a DOE rule for microwave
ovens.
Now, I don't have anything against vending machines or
microwave ovens, but this is not the appropriate way that the
most transparent administration in history should go about
hatching a plan that assesses the cost of carbon for the next
three centuries.
What the Interagency Working Group did not do is develop a
formula for the social benefits of carbon. No one can argue
that we are not better off than our ancestors were 300 years
ago, and can anyone really argue with a straight face what
might happen to the world in the next 300 years?
In summary, we have a social cost of carbon developed
behind closed doors, with arbitrary inputs into speculative
models over a 300-year time span, the output of which is to be
used by a CEQ draft guidance document that is admittedly
legally unenforceable without the legal authority to do it in
the first place.
One of our witnesses gave us some testimony last night. I
would like to quote one line from it. It says, ``At last,
today's hearing on SCC might simply be a sideshow aimed at
undermining climate action.'' Not only is that sentence
insulting, it is totally inaccurate.
If there is a sideshow, it is this Administration, who
rejects reality to enforce some kind of dogma, and what we need
are policies from the Federal Government that actually empower
people and address real-life problems and face our Nation's
realities and not simply based on fantasy work.
I expect to hear that from our witnesses today as we move
forward.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Bishop follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rob Bishop, Chairman, Committee on
Natural Resources
This is the second in a series of oversight hearings on policies
involving the 45-year-old National Environmental Policy Act. Today's
hearing will focus on a requirement in CEQ's Draft Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Guidance that the social cost of carbon be considered in all
NEPA environmental reviews. Over 3 weeks ago, we invited OMB to testify
and I was hoping to ask them directly about this guidance, but OMB said
they couldn't make it. Perhaps they didn't have time to clear testimony
with OMB.
An informal Interagency Working Group led by OMB and the Council on
Economic Advisors, with a host of other Federal agencies, developed
specific numbers for the social cost of carbon using a dollars per
metric ton basis. According to a GAO report, these closed-door meetings
were fairly collegial, and bureaucrat participants were allowed to
contribute their input on the final product. Guess who was missing? The
public.
The Federal working group did produce a specific dollar amount for
the cost of carbon, using three different models, all of which require
arbitrary assumptions about discount rates, socioeconomic predictions,
and measuring changes in temperature from a doubling of carbon dioxide
concentrations in the atmosphere. To be doubly safe, the Interagency
Working Group even projected the cost of carbon out to the year 2300.
According to Dr. Christy's testimony at our last NEPA hearing,
scientists cannot replicate what we know already happened with
temperatures. Scientists cannot predict what will happen in the future
with current modeling. Meteorologists barely can predict next week's
weather. And yet, for the social cost of carbon, this Administration
chose to rely on models to predict a whole host of factors beyond
temperature out to the year 2300? Oh, wait. Maybe not. Even they, in
their own Technical Support Document, citing a National Academies of
Science report, acknowledge:

``any assessment will suffer from uncertainty, speculation, and
lack of information about (1) future emissions of greenhouse
gases, (2) the effects of past and future emissions on the
climate system, (3) the impact of changes in climate on the
physical and biological environment, and (4) the translation of
these environmental impacts into economic damages. As a result,
any effort to quantify and monetize the harms associated with
climate change will raise serious questions of science,
economics, and ethics and should be viewed as provisional.''

It's fair to say that the whole concept of Social Cost of Carbon is
highly speculative. The Interagency Working Group's own document says
it raises serious questions of science, economics, and ethics. And yet,
the Obama administration moved forward with its plan to ensure it's
used in every NEPA action.
Guess how the public found out about such a broad-sweeping, all-
encompassing assessment of the cost of carbon on society? We found out
about the interim estimates in a DOE regulation for vending machines.
We found out about the final estimates in a DOE rule for small electric
motors. We found out about the updated estimates--wait for it--in a DOE
rule for microwave ovens. I don't have anything against vending
machines, small electric motors, or microwaves, but that is not the
appropriate way the most transparent administration in history should
go about hatching a plan to assess the cost of carbon for the next
three centuries.
What the Interagency Working Group did not do was develop a formula
for the social benefits of carbon. No one can really argue we are not
better off than our ancestors were 300 years ago. Can anybody really
argue with a straight face what might happen in the world in another
300 years?
In summary, we have a social cost of carbon, developed behind
closed doors with arbitrary inputs into speculative models over a 300-
year time span, the output of which is to be used in a CEQ draft
guidance document that is admittedly legally unenforceable.
We need policies from the Federal Government that empower people
and address the real-life problems our Nation faces, not policies based
on fantasy.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' views on the social cost
of carbon--hopefully they will be more realistic.

______

The Chairman. I recognize Mr. Lowenthal, who is sitting in
for the Ranking Member, to give a statement for the Minority.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Dr. Lowenthal. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, witnesses, for being here.
For years, the world's top economists have been saying that
in not accounting for climate change, we have created a market
failure. Let's be clear: a market failure. The market currently
fails to account for the costs associated with greenhouse gas
emissions and climate change.
Polluting industries are pumping out greenhouse gases free
of charge, but others, such as taxpayers, property owners, and
also healthcare systems, are and will be paying for the
resulting damage to property and human health, to name just two
impacted sectors.
To help correct for this market failure, the social cost of
carbon, or what I will call SCC, puts the effects of these
greenhouse gas emissions into a monetary context so that the
agencies and taxpayers can understand the impacts of their
actions on infrastructure, on health, and food security.
The SCC, or the social cost of carbon, is derived by
estimating the cost of the damage to society of emitting a
single metric ton of carbon dioxide. But because most of the
damages attributed to the marginal ton occur not in the year
that they are emitted, but many years into the future, we must
find a way to consider not only this generation's welfare, but
the welfare of future generations who are going to be paying
for the actions we take, and are also going to be paying if we
fail to take actions today.
For this reason, and to use a single dollar figure to
compare different regulatory alternatives with different
emission time profiles, the scientific literature supports
developing discount rates that consider the long term and
intergenerational impacts of climate change.
In other words, with each ton of carbon emitted, we are
deciding now between the well-being of current and the well-
being of future generations, and the social cost of carbon
provides us with the tool to make more informed decisions on
one of the greatest ethical questions of our time.
The value derived from calculating the social cost of
carbon is then incorporated into an agency's broader cost-
benefit analysis, which includes many other costs and many of
the other benefits of a given rulemaking.
Republican and Democratic presidents alike have required
cost-benefit analyses to be performed on proposed regulations,
and as new, modern methods have developed, successive
administrations have updated their guidance to agencies on how
to perform these analyses. In fact, the Majority has repeatedly
supported legislation that would add cost-benefit requirements
to agencies' rulemaking.
However, it appears now that we are dealing with climate
change cost, the Majority may be having a change of heart.
Instead of having a reasonable debate on the proper costs to
assign climate change damages, the Majority appears to be
attacking the entire premise of the existence of climate change
damages.
I say that because, unfortunately, the Majority's witnesses
here today appear not to support much of any action on climate
change. One witness works for a lobby shop that represents the
oil and gas industry; the other two Majority witnesses have
ties to the climate change counter-movement, or CCCM, also
known as the Climate Denier Campaign. Indeed, one witness has
said in the past that he does not even believe we have a
climate change problem.
To make matters more difficult, the Majority did not
provide the White House enough time to secure someone who could
actually talk to the committee about the SCC and the
interagency process to develop it, how it was developed.
So it appears that we cannot have a credible discussion
about social cost of carbon, which we were told was the focus
of this hearing. This is too bad, because I know there are in
this room Republican members of this committee who do want to
do something about climate change, but sadly this hearing does
not appear to be a productive step forward.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lowenthal follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our witnesses for being
here today.
For years, the world's top economists have been saying that in not
accounting for climate change, we have created a market failure. The
market currently fails to account for the costs associated with
greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Polluting industries are
pumping out greenhouse gases free-of-charge, but others--such as
taxpayers, property owners, and our healthcare system--are, and will
be, paying for the resulting damages to property and human health, to
name just two impacted sectors.
To help correct this market failure, the social cost of carbon
(SCC) puts the effects of those greenhouse gas emissions into a
monetary context so that agencies and taxpayers can understand the
impacts of their actions on infrastructure, health, and food security.
The SCC is derived by estimating the costs of the damages to
society of emitting a single metric ton of carbon dioxide. But because
most of the damages attributed to that marginal ton occur not in the
year emitted, but many years into the future, we must find a way to
consider not only this generation's welfare, but the welfare of future
generations who will be paying for the actions we take--or fail to
take--today.
For this reason, and to use a single dollar figure to compare
different regulatory alternatives with different emissions time-
profiles, the scientific literature supports developing discount rates
that consider the long-term and intergenerational impacts of climate
change.
In other words, with each ton of carbon emitted, we are deciding
now between the well-being of current and future generations, and the
social cost of carbon provides us with a tool to make more informed
decisions on one of the greatest ethical questions of our time.
The value derived from calculating the social cost of carbon is
then incorporated into an agency's broader cost-benefit analysis, which
includes many other costs and benefits of a given rulemaking.
Republican and Democratic presidents alike have required cost-
benefit analysis to be performed on proposed regulations. And as new
modern methods have developed, successive administrations have updated
their guidance to agencies on how to perform those analyses.
In fact, the Majority has repeatedly supported legislation that
would add cost-benefit analysis requirements to agency rulemakings.
However, it appears that now, when we are dealing with climate change
costs, the Majority may be having a change of heart, and instead of
having a reasonable debate on the proper costs to assign climate change
damages, the Majority appears to be attacking the entire premise of the
existence of climate change damages.
I say that because, unfortunately, the Majority's witnesses here
today appear not to support much of any action on climate change. One
witness works for a lobby shop that represents the oil and gas
industry, and the other two Majority witnesses have ties to the climate
change counter-movement, also known as the ``climate denier campaign.''
Indeed, one witness has said in the past that he doesn't even believe
we have a climate change problem.
To make matters more difficult, the Majority didn't provide the
White House enough time to secure someone who could actually talk to
the committee about the SCC and the interagency process to develop it.
So it appears that we can't have a credible discussion about the
social cost of carbon, which we were told was the focus of this
hearing. And that is too bad, because I know there are Republican
members of this committee who do want to do something about climate
change, but sadly, this hearing doesn't appear to be a productive step
forward.

______

The Chairman. I now recognize the Vice Chair, Mrs. Lummis
for her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The social cost of carbon estimates that will come out of
this Administration's attempt to monetize costs and benefits of
carbon emissions are going to be incorporated into project
analyses under NEPA.
As this committee explored in a hearing in May, this global
warming analysis will be applied to projects in nearly every
sector of our economy, including agriculture, energy,
infrastructure, and manufacturing, just to name a few. Projects
and permits may hinge on what the Administration deems to be
their global warming cost or benefit.
The cost-benefit analysis of proposed regulations will be
impacted to the tune of billions of dollars under the social
cost of carbon. Yet Administration officials concocted the
social cost of carbon in a process lacking transparency,
lacking peer review, and, most offensively, lacking public
input.
Today we will shine some light on the questionable
assumptions that underlie the social cost of carbon, which
seeks to predict projects' global warming costs 285 years into
the future. In pursuing this brazen endeavor, the
Administration has handpicked the science and even the Federal
scientific guidance it chooses.
The social cost of carbon risks American jobs and our
Nation's prosperity all in the name of questionable statistical
models. The Federal decisionmaking process should be held to a
higher standard of integrity. The American people, who will
ultimately bear the cost of this policy, deserve better from
their government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Lummis follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Cynthia M. Lummis, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Wyoming
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

The social cost of carbon is this Administration's attempt to
monetize the costs and benefits of carbon emissions. These estimates
will be incorporated into project analysis under the National
Environmental Policy Act.
As this committee explored in a May hearing, this global warming
analysis will be applied to projects in nearly every sector of our
economy, including energy, agriculture, infrastructure, and
manufacturing, just to name a few. Projects and permits may hinge on
what the Administration deems to be their global warming cost or
benefit.
The cost-benefit analysis of proposed regulations will be impacted
to the tune of billions under the social cost of carbon. Yet the
Administration concocted the social cost of carbon in a process lacking
transparency, peer review, and public input.
Today we will shine some light on the questionable assumptions that
underlie the social cost of carbon, which seeks to predict projects'
global warming costs 285 years into the future. In pursuing this brazen
endeavor, the Administration has handpicked the science and even the
Federal scientific guidance it chooses to follow or not follow.
The social cost of carbon risks American jobs and our Nation's
prosperity, all in the name of questionable statistical models. The
Federal decisionmaking process should be held to a higher standard of
integrity. The American people, who will ultimately bear the cost of
this policy, deserve better from their government.

Thank you Mr. Chairman. I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Sablan, I understand you are also speaking for the
Minority side.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, A
DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA
ISLANDS

Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I would
like to welcome today's panel to this hearing.
Flooding is one of the main threats that climate change
poses to coastal states, including the Northern Mariana
Islands, the district I represent. Flooding could threaten our
freshwater lens that protects the drinking water on our
islands. Flooding, which affects subsistence farming, has
impacted taro patches because taro cannot be planted in
saltwater. The archipelago's coral reefs, wetlands, and
shoreline vegetation help protect our coast. Flooding and ocean
acidification puts them all at risk.
Tourism is a major part of our economy. People come from
all over the world to bask on our shores and see our coral
reefs. Garapan is one of the most popular tourism areas. It is
also one of, if not the most low-lying and vulnerable area on
the island of Saipan. American Memorial Park on Saipan is at
risk of increasing sea level rise.
If flooding and ocean acidification undermine such a
prominent part of our economy, we do not have many other
economic options in our small islands. Climate change is very
real to my constituents and my son and me, and it is happening
now.
And to those who deny the science of climate change,
including those in today's panel, then please come join me and
I will bring you to a place that has the physical evidence of
rising seas.
The traditional cost-benefit analysis that accompanies many
Federal rules necessarily leaves out some of the most important
factors. The cost of property damage from floods, for example,
is left out. The enormous economic impact of loss of
agricultural productivity is also left out. The loss of our
wetlands, our coral, and our beaches, which are so central to
our economy and our livelihoods, are left out.
The social cost of carbon tries to correct that. It
incorporates many of the very real costs that we, all levels of
government, and other communities are already paying to deal
with the effects of climate change.
In the case of climate change, so many of these things that
are historically omitted from a cost-benefit analysis are the
things that affect those at the margins first and worst. When
agricultural productivity goes down and food prices go up, low-
income communities are hit the hardest. When jobs are lost from
tourism, the lowest income folks often have the fewest options.
When drinking water becomes more rare and more expensive, those
without means suffer the most.
And if these important impacts are omitted from cost-
benefit analyses, they do not exist in the eyes of
decisionmakers. Bringing these impacts into the process paints
a more complete picture for decisionmakers of the impacts of
their decisions. It makes these impacts visible, and failing to
do so leaves those at the margins behind.
I want to thank Dr. Patrick Michaels for his candor on this
subject. In a talk in June on the social cost of carbon at the
Heritage Foundation, he said, and I quote, ``People adapt to
their environment as long as they have enough money to do so.''
I don't know whether Dr. Michaels thinks it is acceptable
to rely on adaptation as a primary way of dealing with climate
change, and in so doing, leave behind the millions that do not
have enough money to adapt. I certainly do not.
We need the social cost of carbon to reflect the full range
of the true cost of climate change, the costs that are being
borne already. Incorporating the social cost of carbon into
decisionmaking increases the chances of an effective policy
response. It is a small but necessary act of justice. That is
true not just for my community, but for communities through the
United States.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sablan follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, a
Delegate in Congress from the Territory of the Northern Mariana Islands
Thank you, Chairman and I would like to welcome today's panel to
the hearing.

Flooding is one of the main threats that climate change poses to
coastal states including the Northern Mariana Islands, the district I
represent. Flooding could threaten our freshwater lens that protects
the drinking water on our islands. Flooding, which affects subsistence
farming, has impacted taro patches because the taro cannot be planted
in saltwater. The archipelago's coral reefs, wetlands and shoreline
vegetation help protect our coasts. Flooding and ocean acidification
puts them all at risk.
Tourism is a major part of our economy. People come from all over
the world to bask in our shores, and see our coral reefs. Garapan is
one of the most popular tourism areas; it is also one of, if not the
most low lying and vulnerable area on the island of Saipan. American
Memorial Park on Saipan is at risk of increasing sea level rise. If
flooding and ocean acidification undermine such a prominent part of our
economy, we don't have many other economic options in our small
islands. Climate change is very real to my constituents and me and it
is happening now.
The traditional cost-benefit analysis that accompanies many Federal
rules necessarily leaves out some of the most important factors. The
costs of property damage from floods, for example, is left out. The
enormous economic impact of loss of agricultural productivity is left
out.
The loss of our wetlands, our coral, and our beaches, which are so
central to our economy, are left out. The social cost of carbon tries
to correct that. It incorporates many of the very real costs that we,
all levels of governments, and other communities are already paying to
deal with the effects of climate change.
In the case of climate change, so many of these things that are
historically omitted from a cost-benefit analysis, are the things that
affect those at the margins first and worst. When agricultural
productivity goes down and food prices go up, low income communities
are hit the hardest. When jobs are lost from tourism, the lowest income
folks often have the fewest options. When drinking water becomes more
rare and more expensive, those without means suffer the most.
If these important impacts are omitted from cost-benefit analyses,
they do not exist in the eyes of decisionmakers. Bringing these impacts
into the process paints a more complete picture for decisionmakers of
the impacts of their decisions. It makes these impacts visible. Failing
to do so leaves those at the margins behind.
I want to thank Dr. Patrick Michaels for his candor on this
subject. In a talk in June on the social cost of carbon at the Heritage
Foundation, he said ``People adapt to their environment, as long as
they have enough money to do so.'' I don't know whether Dr. Michaels
thinks it is acceptable to rely on adaptation as a primary way of
dealing with climate change, and in so doing, leave behind the millions
that do not have enough money to adapt. I do not.
We need the social cost of carbon to reflect the full range of the
true costs of climate change, the costs that are being born already.
Incorporating the social cost of carbon into decisionmaking increases
the chances of an effective policy response. It is a small but
necessary act of justice. That is true not just for my community, but
for communities throughout the United States.

I yield back the balance of my time.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
We will now hear from our witnesses. Let's introduce the
panel.
We have with us Mr. Patrick Michaels, who is the Director
of the Center for the Study of Science at The Cato Institute;
Kevin Dayaratna--is that close?--Senior Statistician and
Research Programmer for the Center for Data Analysis, The
Heritage Foundation; Michael Dorsey, who is the Interim
Director for the Energy and Environment Program at the Joint
Center for Political and Economic Studies; and Scott Segal, who
is the founding partner for the Policy Resolution Group.
We will hear from each of you in that order. For those of
you who may be new to this process, I am going to try and
strictly hold you to the 5-minute rule. Your written testimony
is part of the record. This is the oral testimony only. You
will see the lights in front of you. If it is green, you are in
great shape. If it is yellow, you only have a minute to finish,
and when it is red, I will probably gavel you down. I apologize
for that in advance, but we want to get to all of you in here.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Michaels to testify.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK J. MICHAELS, Ph.D., DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR
THE STUDY OF SCIENCE, THE CATO INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Michaels. Mr. Chairman and standing Ranking Member
Lowenthal, members of the committee, thank you for inviting my
testimony on scientific problems relating to the current
calculation of the social cost of carbon, hereafter SCC.
I am Patrick J. Michaels, Director of the Center for the
Study of Science of The Cato Institute. Prior to that I was
research professor of environmental sciences at the University
of Virginia for 30 years.
The Administration's calculation of the SCC is in
contravention of a large and growing body of scientific
literature demonstrating that the sensitivity of temperature to
human emissions of carbon dioxide is less than was previously
thought and, more importantly, that the probability of high
values is much lower than previously indicated.
Sensitivity is the amount of net warming one gets for
doubling atmospheric carbon dioxide. It also roughly
approximates the forecast for total surface warming from carbon
dioxide by the end of the 21st century.
I would like the next image please.
[Slide.]
The Administration uses a probability distribution
developed by Roe and Baker for warming that runs from roughly
1.7 degrees to about 7.1 degrees, basically the length of this
chart. Its mean sensitivity is 3 degrees, and again, the 95
percent confidence limits are 1.72 to 7.14.
Beginning in 2011, with the exception of two papers
published a decade earlier by myself and MIT's Richard Lindzen,
a growing body of scientific literature has yielded 21 new
estimates of the sensitivity generated by 46 researchers from
12 countries, and that is what is shown there. The mean
sensitivity is 2.0 +C. The 5 to 95 percent confidence limits
are 1.1 to 3.5 +C. Those who deny this are denying science.
Our illustration graphically shows the major differences
that have evolved between what the Administration uses and the
new scientific reality. The higher probabilities in the Roe and
Baker determination resulted mainly because of the extremely
wide range of estimates for the cooling effects of sulfate
aerosols.
Recently these have been dramatically narrowed by
researchers Nick Lewis and by Judith Curry of Georgia Tech,
resulting in a vanishingly small probability of major warming.
That would be the next image.
[Slide.]
You can see there, the mean warming predicted for doubling
CO
2
sensitivity is around 1.3 and the high end tails
are very, very vanishingly small.
As my colleague, Kevin Dayaratna will show, the newer, more
constrained science results in a dramatic lowering of the SCC.
As an example of the dramatic changes that are evolving in
science, an important recent paper by Otto, et al., reports a
mean sensitivity of 2.0 +C with a 5 to 95 percent confidence
range of 1.2 to 3.9 +C.
This is noteworthy because there are 15 co-authors on this
paper who were lead authors of chapters in the latest report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. This is truly a
consensus statement that the previously published sensitivity
was far too large. Those who deny this are denying science.
Here is another major scientific shortcoming in the
Administration's calculation of the SCC. Thousands of
scientific papers written around the world demonstrate the
direct fertilization effect of atmospheric carbon dioxide on
agricultural output.
A recent literature review by Dr. Craig Idso shows it
results in a 10 to 15 percent increase in the overall yield of
major food crops contributing to an increase in global
agricultural output of $3.2 trillion since 1961. Properly
including this well-documented information, as will be
demonstrated by Dayaratna, can result in a negative social cost
of carbon or a net external benefit from the combustion of
carbon dioxide.
[Slide.]
In closing, I implore the committee to require the
Administration--next image--to back up their calculation of the
SCC with real reproducible science. This graphic was shown to
this committee on May 13 by Dr. John Christy. I need say
nothing more about it. It is a stark representation of the
failure of the climate models that form the basis for the
Administration's calculation of the social cost of carbon.
Those who deny this are denying science.
I thank you for inviting my testimony, and I note that an
expanded version has been submitted to the committee as
supplemental material.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Michaels follows:]
Prepared Statement of Patrick J. Michaels, Director, Center for the
Study of Science, Cato Institute, Washington, DC
I am Patrick J. Michaels, Director of the Center for the Study of
Science at the Cato Institute, a nonprofit, nonpartisan public policy
research institute located here in Washington, DC, and Cato is my sole
source of employment income. Before I begin my testimony, I would like
to make clear that my comments are solely my own and do not represent
any official position of the Cato Institute.
My testimony concerns the selective science that underlies the
Obama administration's determination of the social cost of carbon (SCC)
and how a more inclusive and considered process would have resulted in
a lower value for the social cost of carbon.
Earlier this month, the Administration's Interagency Working Group
on the Social Cost of Carbon (IWG) released a report that was a
response to public comments of the IWG determination of the social cost
of carbon that were solicited by the Office of Management and Budget in
November 2013. Of the 140 unique set of comments received (including a
set of my own from which this testimony in drawn), the IWG adopted
none.
Here, I address why this decision was based on a set of flimsy,
internally inconsistent excuses and amounts to a continuation of the
IWG's exclusion of the most relevant science--an exclusion which
assures that low, or even negative values of the social cost of carbon
(which would imply a net benefit of increased atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels), do not find their way into cost/benefit analyses of
proposed Federal actions. If, in fact, the social cost of carbon were
near zero, it would eliminate the justification for any Federal action
(greenhouse gas emissions regulations, ethanol mandates, miles per
gallon standards, solar/wind subsidies, DoE efficiency regulations,
etc.) geared toward reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
equilibrium climate sensitivity
In May 2013, the Interagency Working Group produced an updated SCC
value by incorporating revisions to the underlying three Integrated
Assessment Models (IAMs) used by the IWG in its initial 2010 SCC
determination. But, at that time, the IWG did not update the
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) employed in the IAMs. This was
not done, despite there having been, since January 1, 2011, at least 14
new studies and 20 experiments (involving more than 45 researchers)
examining the ECS, each lowering the best estimate and tightening the
error distribution about that estimate. Instead, the IWG wrote in its
2013 report: ``It does not revisit other interagency modeling decisions
(e.g., with regard to the discount rate, reference case socioeconomic
and emission scenarios, or equilibrium climate sensitivity).''
This decision was reaffirmed by the IWG in July 2015. But, through
its reaffirmation, the IWG has again refused to give credence to and
recognize the importance of what is now becoming mainstream science--
that the most likely value of the equilibrium climate sensitivity is
lower than that used by the IWG and that the estimate is much better
constrained. This situation has profound implications for the
determination of the SCC and yet continues to be summarily dismissed by
the IWG.
The earth's equilibrium climate sensitivity is defined by the IWG
in its 2010 report (hereafter, IWG2010) as ``the long-term increase in
the annual global-average surface temperature from a doubling of
atmospheric CO
2
concentration relative to pre-industrial
levels (or stabilization at a concentration of approximately 550 parts
per million (ppm))'' and is recognized as ``a key input parameter'' for
the integrated assessment models used to determine the social cost of
carbon.
The IWG2010 report has an entire section (Section III.D) dedicated
to describing how an estimate of the equilibrium climate sensitivity
and the scientific uncertainties surrounding its actual value are
developed and incorporated in the IWG's analysis. The IWG2010, in fact,
developed its own probability density function (pdf) for the ECS and
used it in each of the three IAMs, superseding the ECS pdfs used by the
original IAMs developers. The IWG's intent was to develop an ECS pdf
which most closely matched the description of the ECS as given in the
Fourth Assessment Report of the United Nation's Intergovernmental panel
on Climate Change which was published in 2007.

The functional form adopted by the IWG2010 was a calibrated version
of Roe and Baker (2007) distribution. It was described in the IWG2010
report in the following Table and Figure (from the IWG2010 report):

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The calibrated Roe and Baker functional form used by the
IWG2010 is no longer scientifically defensible; nor was it at the time
of the publication of the IWG 2013 SCC update, nor at the time of the
July 2015 update.

The figure below vividly illustrates this fact, as it compares the
best estimate and 90 percent confidence range of the earth's ECS as
used by the IWG (calibrated Roe and Baker) against findings in the
scientific literature published since January 1, 2011.

Whereas the IWG ECS distribution has a median value of 3.0 +C and
5th and 95th percentile values of 1.72 +C and 7.14 +C, respectively,
the corresponding values averaged from the recent scientific literature
are 2.0 +C (median), 1.1 +C (5th percentile), and 3.5 +C (95th
percentile).

These differences will have large and significant impacts on the
SCC determination.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: The median (indicated by the small vertical line) and 90
percent confidence range (indicated by the horizontal line with
arrowheads) of the climate sensitivity estimate used by the Interagency
Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon Climate (Roe and Baker,
2007) is indicated by the top black arrowed line. The average of the
similar values from 20 different determinations reported in the recent
scientific literature is given by the grey arrowed line (second line
from the top). The sensitivity estimates from the 20 individual
determinations of the ECS as reported in new research published after
January 1, 2011 are indicated by the colored arrowed lines. The arrows
indicate the 5 to 95 percent confidence bounds for each estimate along
with the best estimate (median of each probability density function; or
the mean of multiple estimates; colored vertical line). Ring et al.
(2012) present four estimates of the climate sensitivity and the red
box encompasses those estimates. Spencer and Braswell (2013) produce a
single ECS value best-matched to ocean heat content observations and
internal radiative forcing.

The IWG2010 report noted that, concerning the low end of the ECS
distribution, its determination reflected a greater degree of certainty
that a low ECS value could be excluded than did the IPCC. From the
IWG2010 (p. 14):

``Finally, we note the IPCC judgment that the equilibrium
climate sensitivity ``is very likely larger than 1.5 +C.''
Although the calibrated Roe & Baker distribution, for which the
probability of equilibrium climate sensitivity being greater
than 1.5 +C is almost 99 percent, is not inconsistent with the
IPCC definition of ``very likely'' as ``greater than 90 percent
probability,'' it reflects a greater degree of certainty about
very low values of ECS than was expressed by the IPCC.''

In other words, the IWG used its judgment that the lower bound of
the ECS distribution was higher than the IPCC 2007 assessment
indicated. However, the collection of the recent literature on the ECS
shows the IWG's judgment to be in error. As can be seen in the chart
above, the large majority of the findings on ECS in the recent
literature indicate that the lower bound (i.e., 5th percentile) of the
ECS distribution is lower than the IPCC 2007 assessment. And, the
average value of the 5th percentile in the recent literature (1.1 +C)
is 0.62 +C less than that used by the IWG--a sizable and important
difference which will influence the SCC determination.
In fact, the abundance of literature supporting a lower climate
sensitivity was at least partially reflected in the new IPCC assessment
report issued in 2013. In that report, the IPCC reported:

Equilibrium climate sensitivity is likely in the range 1.5 +C
to 4.5 +C (high confidence), extremely unlikely less than 1 +C
(high confidence), and very unlikely greater than 6 +C (medium
confidence). The lower temperature limit of the assessed likely
range is thus less than the 2 +C in the AR4 . . .

Clearly, the IWG's assessment of the low end of the probability
density function that best describes the current level of scientific
understanding of the climate sensitivity is incorrect and indefensible.
But even more influential in the SCC determination is the upper
bound (i.e., 95th percentile) of the ECS probability distribution.
The IWG2010 notes (p. 14) that the calibrated Roe and Baker
distribution better reflects the IPCC judgment that ``values
substantially higher than 4.5 +C still cannot be excluded.'' The
IWG2010 further notes that:

``Although the IPCC made no quantitative judgment, the 95th
percentile of the calibrated Roe & Baker distribution (7.1 +C)
is much closer to the mean and the median (7.2 +C) of the 95th
percentiles of 21 previous studies summarized by Newbold and
Daigneault (2009). It is also closer to the mean (7.5 +C) and
median (7.9 +C) of the nine truncated distributions examined by
the IPCC (Hegerl, et al., 2006) than are the 95th percentiles
of the three other calibrated distributions (5.2-6.0 +C).''

In other words, the IWG2010 turned toward surveys of the scientific
literature to determine its assessment of an appropriate value for the
95th percentile of the ECS distribution. Now, more than 5 years hence,
the scientific literature tells a completely different story.
Instead of a 95th percentile value of 7.14 +C, as used by the
IWG2010, a survey of the recent scientific literature suggests a value
of 3.5 +C--more than 50 percent lower.
And this is very significant and important difference because the
high end of the ECS distribution has a large impact on the SCC
determination--a fact frequently commented on by the IWG2010.

For example, from IWG2010 (p. 26):

``As previously discussed, low probability, high impact events
are incorporated into the SCC values through explicit
consideration of their effects in two of the three models as
well as the use of a probability density function for
equilibrium climate sensitivity. Treating climate sensitivity
probabilistically results in more high temperature outcomes,
which in turn lead to higher projections of damages. Although
FUND does not include catastrophic damages (in contrast to the
other two models), its probabilistic treatment of the
equilibrium climate sensitivity parameter will directly affect
the non-catastrophic damages that are a function of the rate of
temperature change.''
And further (p. 30):

Uncertainty in extrapolation of damages to high temperatures:
The damage functions in these IAMs are typically calibrated by
estimating damages at moderate temperature increases (e.g.,
DICE was calibrated at 2.5 +C) and extrapolated to far higher
temperatures by assuming that damages increase as some power of
the temperature change. Hence, estimated damages are far more
uncertain under more extreme climate change scenarios.

And the entirety of Section V [sic] ``A Further Discussion of
Catastrophic Impacts and Damage Functions'' of the IWG 2010 report
describes ``tipping points'' and ``damage functions'' that are
probabilities assigned to different values of global temperature
change. Table 6 from the IWG2010 indicated the probabilities of various
tipping points.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The likelihood of occurrence of these low probability, high
impact, events (``tipping points'') is greatly diminished under the new
ECS findings. The average 95th percentile value of the new literature
survey is only 3.5 +C indicating a very low probability of a warming
reaching 3-5 +C by 2100 as indicated in the 3rd column of the above
Table and thus a significantly lower probability that such tipping
points will be reached. This new information will have a large impact
on the final SCC determination using the IWG's methodology.

The size of this impact has been directly investigated.

In their Comment on the Landmark Legal Foundation Petition for
Reconsideration of Final Rule Standards for Standby Mode and Off Mode
Microwave Ovens, Dayaratna and Kreutzer (2013) ran the DICE model using
the distribution of the ECS as described by Otto et al. (2013)--a paper
published in the recent scientific literature which includes 17
authors, 15 of which were lead authors of chapters in the recent
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Fifth Assessment Report.
The most likely value of the ECS reported by Otto et al. (2013) was
described as ``2.0 +C, with a 5-95 percent confidence interval of 1.2-
3.9 +C.'' Using the Otto et al. (2013) ECS distribution in lieu of the
distribution employed by the IWG (2013), dropped the SCC by 42 percent,
41 percent, and 35 percent (for the 2.5%, 3.0%, 5.0% discount rates,
accordingly). This is a significant decline.
In subsequent research, Dayaratna and Kreutzer (2014) examined the
performance of the FUND model, and found that it too, produced a
greatly diminished value for the SCC when run with the Otto et al.
distribution of the equilibrium climate sensitivity. Using the Otto et
al. (2013) ECS distribution in lieu of the distribution employed by the
IWG (2013), dropped the SCC produced by the FUND model to $11, $6, $0
compared with the original $30, $17, $2 (for the 2.5%, 3.0%, 5.0%
discount rates, accordingly). Again, this is a significant decline.
The Dayaratna and Kreutzer (2014) results using FUND were in line
with alternative estimates of the impact of a lower climate sensitivity
on the FUND model SCC determination.
Waldhoff et al. (2011) investigated the sensitivity of the FUND
model to changes in the ECS. Waldhoff et al. (2011) found that changing
the ECS distribution such that the mean of the distribution was lowered
from 3.0 +C to 2.0 +C had the effect of lowering the SCC by 60 percent
(from a 2010 SCC estimate of $8/ton of CO
2
to $3/ton in
1995). While Waldhoff et al. (2011) examined FUNDv3.5, the response of
the current version (v3.8) of the FUND model should be similar.
Additionally, the developer of the PAGE (Policy Analysis of
Greenhouse Effect) model affirmed that the SCC from the PAGE model, too
drops by 35 percent when the Otto et al. (2013) climate sensitivity
distribution is employed (Hope, 2013).
These studies make clear that the strong dependence of the social
cost of carbon on the distribution of the estimates of the equilibrium
climate sensitivity (including the median, and the upper and lower
certainty bounds) requires that the periodic updates to the IWG SCC
determination must include a critical examination of the scientific
literature on the topic of the equilibrium climate sensitivity, not
merely kowtowing to the IPCC assessment. There is no indication that
the IWG undertook such an independent examination. But what is clear,
is that the IWG did not alter its probability distribution of the ECS
between its 2010, 2013, and 2015 SCC determination, despite a large and
growing body of scientific literature that substantially alters and
better defines the scientific understanding of the earth's ECS. It is
unacceptable that a supposed ``updated'' social cost of carbon does not
include updates to the science underlying a critical and key aspect of
the SCC.
We note that there has been one prominent scientific study in the
recent literature which has argued, on the basis of recent observations
of lower tropospheric mixing in the tropics, for a rather high climate
sensitivity (Sherwood et al., 2014). This research, however, suffers
from too narrow a focus. While noting that climate models which best
match the apparent observed behavior of the vertical mixing
characteristics of the tropical troposphere tend to be the models with
high climate sensitivity estimates, the authors fail to make note that
these same models are the ones whose projections make the worst match
to observations of the evolution of global temperature during the past
several decades. The figure below shows the observed global surface
temperature history from 1951-2013 compared with the temperature
evolution projected by the collection of models used in the new IPCC
2013 report. We broke the climate models down into two groups--those
which have a climate sensitivity greater than 3.0 +C (as suggested by
Sherwood et al., 2014) and those with a climate sensitivity less than
3.0 +C. The Figure shows that while neither model subset does a very
good job is capturing evolution of global temperature during the past
15-20 years (the period with the highest human carbon dioxide
emissions), the high sensitivity models do substantially worse than the
lower sensitivity models.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Observed global average temperature evolution, 1951-2013,
as compiled by the U.K's Hadley Center (black line), and the average
temperature change projected by a collection of climate models used in
the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report which have a climate sensitivity
greater than 3.0 +C (red line) and a collection of models with climate
sensitivities less than 3.0 +C (blue line).

While Sherwood et al. (2014) prefer models that better match their
observations in one variable, the same models actually do worse in the
big picture than do models which lack the apparent accuracy in the
processes that Sherwood et al. (2014) describe. The result can only
mean that there must still be even bigger problems with other model
processes which must more than counteract the effects of the processes
described by Sherwood et al. After all, the overall model collective is
still warming the world much faster than it actually is (see Figures
below). In fact, for the observed global average surface temperature
evolution for the past 30 years largely lies below the range which
encompasses 95 percent of all climate model runs--an indication that
the observed trend is statistically different from the trend simulated
by climate models. And for periods approaching 40 years in length, the
observed surface trend lies outside of (below) the range that includes
90 percent of all climate model simulations--and indication that the
observed surface trend is marginally inconsistent with climate model
simulations.

MODELS VS. OBSERVATIONS
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: The annual average global surface temperature from 108
individual CMIP5 climate model runs forced with historical (+ RCP45
since 2006) forcings were obtained from the Climate Explorer website.
Linear trends were computed through the global temperatures from each
run, ending in 2014 and beginning each year from 1951 through 2005. The
trends for each period (ranging in length from 10 to 64 years) were
averaged across all model runs (black dots). The range containing 90
percent (grey lines), and 95 percent (dotted black lines) of trends
from the 108 model runs is also indicated. The observed linear trends
for the same periods were calculated from the annual average global
surface temperature record compiled by the U.K. Hadley Center
(HadCRUT4) (colored dots). Observed trend values which were less than
the 2.5th percentile of the model trend distribution were colored red,
observed trend values which were between the 2.5th and the 5th
percentile of the model trend distribution were colored yellow, and
observed trend values greater than the 5th percentile of the model
trend distribution were colored green. (Source: Michaels and
Knappenberger, 2014)

We note that our statistics are based upon both the warm and the
cold departures from predicted trends. In reality, the cold departure
is what is of most interest from a policy perspective--for if warming
is being demonstrably overpredicted, then policies based upon models
that are in error are a substantial regulatory over-reach. Our
probability estimates are conservative as values at the .05 level are
actually at the 2.5th percentile for warmth from the model ensemble.
The divergence between observations and climate model projections
is even worse in the earth's low-to-mid atmosphere (Figure below). As
shown by Christy (2015), there is a gross departure of ``reality'' from
model predictions. Christy (2015) noted that ``On average the models
warm the global atmosphere at a rate three times that of the real
world.''
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Five-year running mean temperatures predicted by the UN's
climate models, and observed lower atmospheric temperatures from
weather balloons and satellites.

These results argue strongly against the reliability of the
Sherwood et al. (2014) conclusion and instead provide robust
observational evidence that the climate sensitivity has been
overestimated by both climate models, and the IWG alike.
agricultural impacts of carbon fertilization

Carbon dioxide is known to have a positive impact on vegetation,
with literally thousands of studies in the scientific literature
demonstrating that plants (including crops) grow stronger, healthier,
and more productive under conditions of increased carbon dioxide
concentration. A recent study (Idso, 2013) reviewed a large collection
of such literature as it applies to the world's 45 most important food
crops (making up 95% of the world's annual agricultural production).
Idso (2013) summarized his findings on the increase in biomass of each
crop that results from a 300 ppm increase in the concentration of
carbon dioxide under which the plants were grown. This table is
reproduced below, and shows that the typical growth increase exceeds 30
percent in most crops, including 8 of the world's top 10 food crops
(the increase was 24% and 14% in the other two).

Idso (2013) found that the increase in the atmospheric
concentration of carbon dioxide that took place during the period 1961-
2011 was responsible for increasing global agricultural output by 3.2
trillion dollars (in 2004-2006 constant dollars). Projecting the
increases forward based on projections of the increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration, Idso (2013) expects carbon dioxide
fertilization to increase the value of agricultural output by 9.8
trillion dollars (in 2004-2006 constant dollars) during the 2012-2050
period.
Average percentage increase in biomass of each of the world's 45 most
important food crops under an increase of 300 ppm of carbon
dioxide.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This is a large positive externality, and one that is
insufficiently modeled in the IAMs relied upon by the IWG in
determining the SCC.
In fact, only one of the three IAMs used by the IWG has any
substantial impact from carbon dioxide fertilization, and the one that
does, underestimates the effect by approximately 2-3 times.
The FUND model has a component which calculates the impact on
agricultural as a result of carbon dioxide emissions, which includes
not only the impact on temperature and other climate changes, but also
the direct impact of carbon dioxide fertilization. The other two IAMs,
DICE and PAGE by and large do not (or only do so extremely minimally;
DICE includes the effect to a larger degree than PAGE). Consequently,
lacking this large and positive externality, the SCC calculated by the
DICE and PAGE models is significantly larger than the SCC determined by
the FUND model (for example, see Table A5, in the IWG 2013 report).
But even the positive externality that results from carbon dioxide
fertilization as included in the FUND model is too small when compared
with the Idso (2013) estimates. FUND (v3.7) uses the following formula
to determine the degree of crop production increase resulting from
atmospheric carbon dioxide increases (taken from Anthoff and Tol,
2013a):
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Column 8 in the table below shows the CO
2

fertilization parameter (&
r
) used in FUND for various
regions of the world (Anthoff and Tol, 2013b). The average
CO
2
fertilization effect across the 16 regions of the world
is 11.2 percent. While this number is neither areally weighted, nor
weighted by the specific crops grown, it is clear that 11.2 percent is
much lower than the average fertilization effect compiled by Idso
(2013) for the world's top 10 food crops (35%). Further, Idso's
fertilization impact is in response to a 300 ppm CO
2

increase, while the fertilization parameter in the FUND model is
multiplied by ln(CO
2t
/275) which works out to 0.74 for a
300 ppm CO
2
increase. This multiplier further reduces the 16
region average to 8.4 percent for the CO
2
fertilization
effect--some four times smaller than the magnitude of the fertilization
impact identified by Idso (2013).
Although approximately four times too small, the impact of the
fertilization effect on the SCC calculation in the FUND model is large.
According to Waldhoff et al. (2011), if the CO
2

fertilization effect is turned off in the FUND model (v3.5) the SCC
increases by 75 percent from $8/tonCO
2
to $14/
tonCO
2
(in 1995 dollars). In another study, Ackerman and
Munitz (2012) find the effective increase in the FUND model to be even
larger, with CO
2
fertilization producing a positive
externality of nearly $15/tonCO
2
(in 2007 dollars).
Impact of climate change on agriculture in FUND model.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Clearly, had the Idso (2013) estimate of the CO
2

fertilization impact been used instead of the one used in FUND the
resulting positive externality would have been much larger, and the
resulting net SCC been much lower.

This is just for one of the three IAMs used by the IWG. Had the
more comprehensive CO
2
fertilization impacts identified by
Idso (2013) been incorporated in all the IAMs, the three-model average
SCC used by the IWG would be been greatly lowered, and likely even
become negative in some IAM/discount rate combinations.

In its 2015 Response to Comments Social Cost of Carbon for
Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866, the IWG admits
to the disparate ways that CO
2
fertilization is included in
the three IAMs. Nevertheless, the IWG quickly dismisses this as a
problem in that they claim the IAMs were selected ``to reflect a
reasonable range of modeling choices and approaches that collectively
reflect the current literature on the estimation of damages from
CO
2
emissions.''

This logic is blatantly flawed. Two of the IAMs do not reflect the
``current literature'' on a key aspect relating to the direct impact of
CO
2
emissions on agricultural output, and the third only
partially so.
[The prepared statement of ??? appears in the appendix.]
CO
2
fertilization is a known physical effect from
increased carbon dioxide concentrations. By including the results of
IAMs that do not include known processes that have a significant impact
on the end product must disqualify them from contributing to the final
result. The inclusion of results that are known a priori to be wrong
can only contribute to producing a less accurate answer. Results should
only be included when they attempt to represent known processes, not
when they leave those processes out entirely.

The justification from the IWG (2015) that ``[h]owever, with high
confidence the IPCC (2013) stated in its Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
that `[b]ased on many studies covering a wide range of regions and
crops, negative impacts of climate change on crop yields have been more
common than positive ones' '' is completely irrelevant as
CO
2
fertilization is an impact that is apart from ``climate
change.'' And further, the IAMs do (explicitly in the case of FUND and
DICE or implicitly in the case of PAGE) include damage functions
related to the climate change impacts on agriculture. So not only is
the IWG justification irrelevant, it is inaccurate as well. The impact
of CO
2
fertilization on agricultural output and its impact
on lowering the SCC must be considered.

the misleading disconnect between climate change and the social cost of
carbon in the integrated assessment models

It is generally acknowledged, the results from IAMs are highly
sensitive not only to the model input parameters but also to how the
models have been developed and what processes they try to include. One
prominent economist, Robert Pindyck of M.I.T. recently wrote (Pindyck,
2013) that the sensitivity of the IAMs to these factors renders them
useless in a policymaking environment:

Given all of the effort that has gone into developing and using
IAMs, have they helped us resolve the wide disagreement over
the size of the SCC? Is the U.S. Government estimate of $21 per
ton (or the updated estimate of $33 per ton) a reliable or
otherwise useful number? What have these IAMs (and related
models) told us? I will argue that the answer is very little.
As I discuss below, the models are so deeply flawed as to be
close to useless as tools for policy analysis. Worse yet,
precision that is simply illusory, and can be highly
misleading.

[A]n IAM-based analysis suggests a level of knowledge and
precision that is nonexistent, and allows the modeler to obtain
almost any desired result because key inputs can be chosen
arbitrarily.

Nevertheless, Federal agencies, such as the EPA and DoE incorporate
the IWG determinations of the SCC into their cost/benefit analyses of
proposed regulations--ill-advisedly so in my opinion.

Consider the following: the social cost of carbon should reflect
the relative impact on future society that human-induced climate change
from greenhouse gas emissions would impose. In this way, we can decide
how much (if at all) we are willing to pay currently to reduce the
costs to future society. It would seem logical that we would probably
be more willing to sacrifice more now if we knew that future society
would be impoverished and suffer from extreme climate change than we
would be willing to sacrifice if we knew that future society would be
very well off and be subject to more moderate climate change. We would
expect that the value of the social cost of carbon would reflect the
difference between these two hypothetical future worlds--the SCC should
be far greater in an impoverished future facing a high degree of
climate change than an affluent future with less climate change.

But if you thought this, you would be wrong.

Instead, the IAMs as run by the IWG2013 (and reflected in the July
2015 update) produce nearly the opposite result--the SCC is far lower
in the less affluent/high climate change future than it is in the more
affluent/low climate change future. Such a result is not only
counterintuitive but misleading.

I illustrate this illogical and impractical result using the DICE
2010 model (hereafter just DICE) used by the IWG (although the PAGE and
the FUND models generally show the same behavior). The DICE model was
installed and run at the Heritage Foundation by Kevin Dayaratna and
David Kreutzer using the same model set up and emissions scenarios as
prescribed by the IWG. The projections of future temperature change
(and sea level rise, used later in the Comment) were graciously
provided to us by the Heritage Foundation.
The figure below shows the projections of the future change in the
earth's average surface temperature for the years 2000-2300 produced by
DICE from the five emissions scenarios employed by the IWG. The
numerical values on the right-hand side of the illustration are the
values for the social cost of carbon associated with the temperature
change resulting from each emissions scenario (the SCC is reported for
the year 2020 using constant $2007 and assuming a 3% discount rate--
numbers taken directly from Table A3 of the IWG2013 report). The
temperature change can be considered a good proxy for the magnitude of
the overall climate change impacts.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Future temperature changes, for the years 2000-2300,
projected by the DICE model for each of the five emissions scenarios
used by the IWG2013. The temperature changes are the arithmetic average
of the 10,000 Monte Carlo runs from each scenario. The 2020 value of
the SCC (in $2007) produced by the DICE model (assuming a 3% discount
rate) is included on the right-hand side of the figure. (DICE data
provided by Kevin Dayaratna and David Kreutzer of the Heritage
Foundation).

Notice in the figure above that the value for the SCC shows little
(if any) correspondence to the magnitude of climate change. The MERGE
scenario produces the greatest climate change and yet has the smallest
SCC associated with it. The ``5th Scenario'' is a scenario that
attempts to keep the effective concentration of atmospheric carbon
dioxide at 550 ppm (far lower than the other scenarios) has a SCC that
is more than 20 percent greater than the MERGE scenario. The global
temperature change by the year 2300 in the MERGE scenario is 9 +C while
in the ``5th Scenario'' it is only 3 +C. The highest SCC is from the
IMAGE scenario--a scenario with a mid-range climate change. All of this
makes absolutely no logical sense--and confuses the user.

If the SCC bears little correspondence to the magnitude of future
human-caused climate change, than what does it represent?
The figure below provides some insight.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Future global gross domestic product, for the years 2000-
2300 for each of the five emissions scenarios used by the IWG2013. The
2020 value of the SCC (in $2007) produced by the DICE model (assuming a
3% discount rate) is included on the right-hand side of the figure.

When comparing the future GDP to the SCC, we see, generally, that
the scenarios with the higher future GDP (most affluent future society)
have the higher SCC values, while the futures with lower GDP (less
affluent society) have, generally, lower SCC values.
Combining the results from the two figures above thus illustrates
the absurdities in the IWG's use of the DICE model. The scenario with
the richest future society and a modest amount of climate change
(IMAGE) has the highest value of the SCC associated with it, while the
scenario with the poorest future society and the greatest degree of
climate change (MERGE) has the lowest value of the SCC. A logical,
thinking person would assume the opposite.
While we only directly analyzed output data from the DICE model, by
comparing Tables 2 and Tables 3 from the IWG2010 report, it can be
ascertained that the FUND and the PAGE models behave in a similar
fashion.
This counterintuitive result occurs because the damage functions in
the IAMs produce output in terms of a percentage decline in the GDP--
which is then translated into a dollar amount (which is divided by the
total carbon emissions) to produce the SCC. Thus, even a small climate
change-induced percentage decline in a high GDP future yields greater
dollar damages (i.e., higher SCC) than a much greater climate change-
induced GDP percentage decline in a low GDP future.
Who in their right mind would want to spend (sacrifice) more today
to help our rich decedents deal with a lesser degree of climate change
than would want to spend (sacrifice) today to help our relatively less-
well-off decedents deal with a greater degree of climate change? No
one. Yet that is what the SCC would lead you to believe and that is
what the SCC implies when it is incorporated into Federal cost/benefit
analyses.
In principle, the way to handle this situation is by allowing the
discount rate to change over time. In other words, the richer we think
people will be in the future (say the year 2100), the higher the
discount rate we should apply to damages (measured in 2100 dollars)
they suffer from climate change, in order to decide how much we should
be prepared to sacrifice today on their behalf.
Until (if ever) the current situation is properly rectified, the
IWG's determination of the SCC is not fit for use in the Federal
regulatory process as it is deceitful and misleading.
sea level rise
The sea level rise module in the DICE model used by the IWG2013/
2015 produces future sea level rise values that far exceed mainstream
projections and are unsupported by the best available science. The sea
level rise projections from more than half of the scenarios (IMAGE,
MERGE, MiniCAM) exceed even the highest end of the projected sea level
rise by the year 2300 as reported in the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (see figure).
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Projections of sea level rise from the DICE model (the
arithmetic average of the 10,000 Monte Carlo runs from each scenario )
for the five scenarios examined by the IWG2013 compared with the range
of sea level rise projections for the year 2300 given in the IPCC AR5
(see AR5 Table 13.8). (DICE data provided by Kevin Dayaratna and David
Kreutzer of the Heritage Foundation).

How the sea level rise module in DICE was constructed is
inaccurately characterized by the IWG2013 (and misleads the reader).
The IWG2013 report describes the development of the DICE sea level rise
scenario as:

``The parameters of the four components of the SLR module are
calibrated to match consensus results from the IPCC's Fourth
Assessment Report (AR4).6 ''

However, in IWG2013 footnote ``6'' the methodology is described
this way (Nordhaus, 2010):

``The methodology of the modeling is to use the estimates in
the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4).''

``Using estimates'' and ``calibrating'' are two completely
different things. Calibration implies that the sea level rise estimates
produced by the DICE sea level module behave similarly to the IPCC sea
level rise projections and instills a sense of confidence in the casual
reader that the DICE projections are in accordance with IPCC
projections. However this is not the case. Consequently, the reader is
misled.
In fact, the DICE estimates are much higher than the IPCC
estimates. This is even recognized by the DICE developers. From the
same reference as above:

``The RICE [DICE] model projection is in the middle of the pack
of alternative specifications of the different Rahmstorf
specifications. Table 1 shows the RICE, base Rahmstorf, and
average Rahmstorf. Note that in all cases, these are
significantly above the IPCC projections in AR4.'' [emphasis
added]

That the DICE sea level rise projections are far above the
mainstream estimated can be further evidenced by comparing them with
the results produced by the IWG-accepted MAGICC modeling tool (in part
developed by the EPA and available from http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/cas/
wigley/magicc/).
Using the MESSAGE scenario as an example, the sea level rise
estimate produced by MAGICC for the year 2300 is 1.28 meters--a value
that is less than 40 percent of the average value of 3.32 meters
produced by the DICE model when running the same scenario (see figure
below).

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CAPTION: Projected sea level rise resulting from the MESSAGE
scenario produced by DICE (red) and MAGICC (blue).

The justification given for the high sea level rise projections in
the DICE model (Nordhaus, 2010) is that they well-match the results of
a ``semi-empirical'' methodology employed by Rahmstorf (2007) and
Vermeer and Rahmstorf (2009).
However, subsequent science has proven the ``semi-empirical''
approach to projecting future sea level rise unreliable. For example,
Gregory et al. (2012) examined the assumption used in the ``semi-
empirical'' methods and found them to be unsubstantiated. Gregory et al
(2012) specifically refer to the results of Rahmstorf (2007) and
Vermeer and Rahmstorf (2009):

The implication of our closure of the [global mean sea level
rise, GMSLR] budget is that a relationship between global
climate change and the rate of GMSLR is weak or absent in the
past. The lack of a strong relationship is consistent with the
evidence from the tide-gauge datasets, whose authors find
acceleration of GMSLR during the 20th century to be either
insignificant or small. It also calls into question the basis
of the semi-empirical methods for projecting GMSLR, which
depend on calibrating a relationship between global climate
change or radiative forcing and the rate of GMSLR from
observational data (Rahmstorf, 2007; Vermeer and Rahmstorf,
2009; Jevrejeva et al., 2010).

In light of these findings, the justification for the very high sea
level rise projections (generally exceeding those of the IPCC AR5 and
far greater than the IWG-accepted MAGICC results) produced by the DICE
model is called into question and can no longer be substantiated.
Given the strong relationship between sea level rise and future
damage built into the DICE model, there can be no doubt that the SCC
estimates from the DICE model are higher than the best science would
allow and consequently, should not be accepted by the IWG as a reliable
estimate of the social cost of carbon.
And here again, the IWG (2015) admits that these sea level rise
estimates are an outlier on the high end, yet retains them in their
analysis by claiming than they were interested in representing a
``range'' of possible outcomes. But, even the IWG (2015) admits that
the IPCC AR5 assigned ``a low confidence in projections based on such
[semi-empirical] methods.'' It is internally inconsistent to claim the
IPCC as an authority for limiting the range of possibilities explored
by the IAMs (which it did in the case of equilibrium climate
sensitivity) and then go outside the IPCC to justify including a wildly
high estimate of sea level rise. Such inconsistencies characterize the
IWG response to comments and weaken confidence in them.
I did not investigate the sea level rise projections from the FUND
or the PAGE model, but suggest that such an analysis must be carried
out prior to extending any confidence in the values of the SCC
resulting from those models--confidence that we demonstrate cannot be
assigned to the DICE SCC determinations.
high social cost of carbon estimates
A few papers have appeared in the recent scientific literature that
have argued that the SCC should be considerably higher than that
determined by the IWG. However, these papers suffer from serious flaws.
For example, Van den Bergh and Botzen (2014) purport to make a
``conservative'' estimate of the SCC that is nearly four times larger
than the central estimate made by the IWG. This estimate suffers from
the many of the issues described previously--a low discount rate, high
climate sensitivity, and little to no positive benefits from
agriculture. By including all sorts of imagined bad climate outcomes--
with high monetary damages--and being largely dismissive of positive
impacts, high SCC values are readily created by the authors.
Another recent analysis which arrived at an estimate of the social
cost of carbon that was considerably higher than those made by the IWG
was conducted by Moore and Diaz (2015). However, a careful examination
shows that the assumptions made and methodologies employed therein
produce a non-robust and ultimately unreliable result (McKitrick,
2015). Applying a better and more thorough methodology leads to results
which are virtually opposite to those initially reported by Moore and
Diaz (2015)--one in which the social cost of carbon is quite low and
perhaps even positive.
According to McKitrick (2015), the major underlying flaw in the
Moore and Diaz paper is the reliance on the results of Dell et al.
(2012) in which a warming climate was linked to economic declines in
both rich and poor countries. Using a more up-to-date dataset,
McKitrick shows that the negative economic linkage to a warming climate
is statistically insignificant and ``not a robust basis for a policy
assertion.''
Furthermore, McKitrick (2015) shows that if a the more standard
methodology is applied, where the temperature changes are areally
weighted rather than weighted by country-level population, the
relationship between economic growth and temperature change reverses
for rich countries and becomes statistically significant. According to
McKitrick (2015), ``each degree of warming significantly increases the
annual income growth rate in rich countries by over 2 percentage
points,'' while in poor countries, the relationship ``is statistically
insignificant.'' In conclusion, McKitrick (2015) finds:

The fact that the relevant poor-country coefficients are
statistically insignificant implies they should not have been
relied upon in Moore and Diaz (2015). And since the rich
country coefficient corresponding to the [integrated assessment
model] IAM structure is positive and significant, Moore and
Diaz (2015) should actually have reported an acceleration of
economic growth in rich countries associated with rising
temperatures and a correspondingly reduced SCC. Also, since the
rich countries begin with a larger GDP it is also likely that
the overall global effect of warming on income growth would be
positive, even applying the poor country coefficient. In any
case the computations in Moore and Diaz (2015) are
uninformative since they used coefficients from DJO based on an
incomplete sample and a definition of temperature incompatible
with their IAM.

Bottom line is that the Moore and Diaz (2015) high SCC estimates as
well as the Dell et al. (2012) results upon which they were based, do
not stand up under careful re-analysis. In fact, when assessed
properly, they produce a low SCC estimate, in support of our overall
analysis.
Overall, these new papers provide additional evidence as to the
non-robust nature of current SCC determinations.
conclusion
The social cost of carbon as determined by the Interagency Working
Group in their May 2013 Technical Support Document (updated in November
2013 and July 2015) is unsupported by the robust scientific literature,
fraught with uncertainty, illogical, and thus completely unsuitable and
inappropriate for Federal rulemaking. Had the IWG included a better-
reasoned and more inclusive review of the current scientific
literature, the social cost of carbon estimates would have been
considerably reduced with a value likely approaching zero. Such a low
social cost of carbon would obviate the arguments behind the push for
Federal greenhouse gas regulations.
references
Ackerman, F., and C. Munitz, 2012. Climate damages in the FUND model: a
disaggregated analysis. Ecological Economics, 77, 219-224.

Aldrin, M., et al., 2012. Bayesian estimation of climate sensitivity
based on a simple climate model fitted to observations of hemispheric
temperature and global ocean heat content. Environmetrics, doi:
10.1002/env.2140.

Annan, J.D., and J.C Hargreaves, 2011. On the generation and
interpretation of probabilistic estimates of climate sensitivity.
Climatic Change, 104, 324-436.

Anthoff, D., and R.S.J. Tol, 2013a. The climate framework for
uncertainty, negotiation and distribution (FUND), technical
description, version 3.7, http://www.fund-model.org/publications.

Anthoff, D., and R.S.J. Tol, 2013b. The climate framework for
uncertainty, negotiation and distribution (FUND), tables, version 3.7,
http://www.fund-model.org/publications.

Christy, J.R., 2015. Testimony before the House Committee on Natural
Resources hearing ``CEQ Draft Guidance for GHG Emissions and the
Effects of Climate Change,'' May 13, 2015.

Dayaratna, K., and D. Kreutzer, 2013. Comment on the Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy Office (EERE) Proposed Rule: 2013-08-16 Energy
Conservation Program for Consumer Products: Landmark Legal Foundation;
Petition for Reconsideration; Petition for Reconsideration; Request for
Comments, http://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail;D=EERE-2013-BT-
PET-0043-0024.

Dayaratna, K., and D. Kreutzer, 2014. Unfounded FUND: Yet another EPA
model not ready for the Big Game, http://www.heritage.org/research/
reports/2014/04/unfounded-fund-yet-another-epa-model-not-ready-for-the-
big-game.

Dell, M, et al., 2012. Temperature shocks and economic growth: evidence
from the last half century. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
4, 66-95 http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/mac.4.3.66.

Gregory, J., et al., 2012. Twentieth-century global-mean sea-level
rise: is the whole greater than the sum of the parts? Journal of
Climate, doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00319.1, in press.

Hargreaves, J.C., et al., 2012. Can the Last Glacial Maximum constrain
climate sensitivity? Geophysical Research Letters, 39, L24702, doi:
10.1029/2012GL053872.

Hope, C., 2013. How do the new estimates of transient climate response
affect the social cost of CO
2
? http://
www.chrishopepolicy.com/2013/05/how-do-the-new-estimates-of-transient-
climate-response-affect-the-social-cost-of-co2/ (last visited May 5,
2014).

Idso, C. 2013. The positive externalities of carbon dioxide: Estimating
the monetary benefits of rising CO
2
concentrations on global
food production. Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global
Change, 30pp.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007. Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Solomon, S., et al. (eds). Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 996pp.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013. Climate Change 20013:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Final Draft Accepted in the 12th Session of Working Group I and
the 36th Session of the IPCC on 26 September 2013 in Stockholm, Sweden.

Lewis, N. 2013. An objective Bayesian, improved approach for applying
optimal fingerprint techniques to estimate climate sensitivity. Journal
of Climate, doi: 10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00473.1.

Lewis, N. and J.A. Curry, C., 2014. The implications for climate
sensitivity of AR5 forcing and heat uptake estimates. Climate Dynamic,
10.1007/s00382-014-2342-y.

Lindzen, R.S., and Y-S. Choi, 2011. On the observational determination
of climate sensitivity and its implications. Asia-Pacific Journal of
Atmospheric Science, 47, 377-390.

Loehle, C., 2014. A minimal model for estimating climate sensitivity.
Ecological Modelling, 276, 80-84.

Masters, T., 2013. Observational estimates of climate sensitivity from
changes in the rate of ocean heat uptake and comparison to CMIP5
models. Climate Dynamics, doi:101007/s00382-013-1770-4.

McKitrick, R., 2015. Comment on: Temperature impacts on economic growth
warrant stringent mitigation policy, by Moore and Diaz. Nature Climate
Change, in review.

Michaels, P.J., and P.C. Knappenberger, 2014. ``Quantifying the Lack of
Consistency between Climate Model Projections and Observations of the
Evolution of the Earth's Average Surface Temperature since the Mid-20th
Century.'' 2014 Fall Meeting of the American Geophysical Union, San
Francisco, December 16-19, 2014.

Moore, F.C. and Diaz, D.B., 2015. Temperature impacts on economic
growth warrant stringent mitigation policy. Nature Climate Change,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2481.

Nordhaus, W., 2010. Projections of Sea Level Rise (SLR), http://
www.econ.yale.edu/nordhaus/homepage/documents/SLR_021910.pdf.

Otto, A., F. E. L. Otto, O. Boucher, J. Church, G. Hegerl, P. M.
Forster, N. P. Gillett, J. Gregory, G. C. Johnson, R. Knutti, N. Lewis,
U. Lohmann, J. Marotzke, G. Myhre, D. Shindell, B. Stevens, and M. R.
Allen, 2013. Energy budget constraints on climate response. Nature
Geoscience, 6, 415-416.

Pindyck, R. S., 2013. Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell
Us? Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 860-872.

Rahmstorf, S., 2007. A semi-empirical approach to projecting future
sea-level rise. Science, 315, 368-370, doi:10.1126/science.1135456.

Ring, M.J., et al., 2012. Causes of the global warming observed since
the 19th century. Atmospheric and Climate Sciences, 2, 401-415, doi:
10.4236/acs.2012.24035.

Schmittner, A., et al. 2011. Climate sensitivity estimated from
temperature reconstructions of the Last Glacial Maximum. Science, 334,
1385-1388, doi: 10.1126/science.1203513.

Sherwood, S. C., S. Bony, and J-D. Dufresne, 2014. Spread in model
climate sensitivity traced to atmospheric convective mixing. Nature,
505, 37-42, doi:10.1038/nature12829.

Skeie, R. B., T. Berntsen, M. Aldrin, M. Holden, and G. Myhre, 2014. A
lower and more constrained estimate of climate sensitivity using
updated observations and detailed radiative forcing time series. Earth
System Dynamics, 5, 139-175.

Spencer, R. W., and W. D. Braswell, 2013. The role of ENSO in global
ocean temperature changes during 1955-2011 simulated with a 1D climate
model. Asia-Pacific Journal of Atmospheric Science, doi:10.1007/s13143-
014-0011-z.

van den Bergh, J.C.J.M., and W.J.W. Botzen, 2014. A lower bound to the
social cost of CO
2
emissions. Nature Climate Change, 4, 253-
258, doi:10.1038/NCLIMATE2135.

van Hateren, J.H., 2012. A fractal climate response function can
simulate global average temperature trends of the modern era and the
past millennium. Climate Dynamics, doi: 10.1007/s00382-012-1375-3.

Vermeer, M. and S. Rahmstorf, 2009. Global sea level linked to global
temperature. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 51,
21527-21532, doi:10.1073/pnas.0907765106.

Waldhoff, S., Anthoff, D., Rose, S., and R.S.J. Tol, 2011. The marginal
damage costs of different greenhouse gases: An application of FUND.
Economics, The Open-Access E-Journal, No. 2011-43, http://
www.economics-ejournal.org/economics/discussionpapers/2011-43.

Wigley, T.M.L., et al. MAGICC/SCENGEN v5.3. Model for the Assessment of
Greenhouse-gas Induced Climate Change/A Regional Climate Scenario
Generator. http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/cas/wigley/magicc/.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Grijalva to Dr. Patrick
Michaels, Director, Center for the Study of Science, The Cato Institute

Question 1. I'd like to follow up on a line of questioning from the
hearing about The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition (TASSC). You
were asked whether you were a ``member scientist'' or whether you
played some other role at The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition.
You replied that you were not active with them. Please help the
committee better understand your role.

a. How long were you a member?

b. Is it true that you assisted in drafting TASSC's Five Guiding
Scientific Principles? (https://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/
docs/#id=nyml0028)

c. Did you produce anything else for TASSC?

d. If you were not active with them, does that mean your
involvement was limited to lending your name to the organization's
efforts?

Answer. My interactions with The Advancement of Sound Science
Coalition were, as best as I can recall, extremely limited. I recall
that when the organization was formed, some 22 years ago, that I agreed
to be on some type of advisory panel. I am sure that I was sent some
proposed guidelines for ``sound science,'' and that I had some comments
on them. That is the last memory that I have of actually working with
them. I see no reference to TASSC in my list of outside presentations
on my CV. If I produced anything else, I do not remember doing so,
which would mean it would have been highly inconsequential. I was very
inactive member (as I am with most groups of this type), and I don't
know how long I even was a ``member,'' whatever that means. I hope you
are correctly reading that TASSC wasn't exactly a priority of mine.

Question 2. You were also affiliated with the European Science and
Environmental Forum (ESEF), another group associated with denying the
health effects of cigarette smoke. (https://
industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/docs/#id=rsmx0078)

a. How long were you a member?

b. What did you produce for ESEF?

c. If you were not active with them, does that mean your
involvement was limited to lending your name to the organization's
efforts?

Answer. My response on ESEF is similar. This was again somewhere
around two decades ago. I believe this was a larger organization than
TASSC in terms of number of scientists, many of whom were of
considerable stature. I see no reference to ESEF in my list of outside
presentations on my CV. I am unaware of what you mean by
``membership,'' and therefore could not tell you how long I was a
``member.'' I also think it is also unfair of you to conflate me with
the view that smoking is not harmful, as my expertise is largely in
climate change and its impacts. That I was not active with them means I
felt like I did about most of these types of groups, as per above. I
hope you are correctly reading that ESEF wasn't exactly a priority of
mine.

Question 3. The Cato Institute is funded by fossil fuel interests,
among others. How do you ensure none of that funding, which could
constitute a significant conflict of interest, goes to you?

Answer. Cato's Center for the Study of Science is funded entirely
from the general fund which is, in turn funded primarily by private,
individual donors. The structure of the arrangement--not unique among
any charitable organization, just doesn't facilitate narrow quid pro
quo exchanges. If someone gave us a million dollars to state an opinion
about global warming, they are also giving us money to decry sexual
discrimination, oppose police brutality, de-escalate the drug war,
lower taxes, fight fewer wars, etc. There's no way to untangle these.
Our stock and trade is policy analysis and opinion--there's nothing to
buy. To the extent we do original research is open to peer review and
we do nothing different than other scientists in terms of openness and
generally accepted practices and protocols. Mostly we do scientific
analysis and publicly subject it to criticism. There's no place to
hide, there's no data to fudge, our work is as transparent as it gets.
Furthermore, it's absurd to suggest that government funded science is
somehow more pure, or free of bias than ours is. Science isn't about
dogmatically holding conclusions, but rather it's a method for
determining the truth and we have a right to engage in the inquiry
process irrespective of where the money comes from.

Question 4. ``Western Fuels (Association) approached Pat Michaels
about writing a quarterly publication designed to provide its readers
with critical insight concerning the global climatic change and
greenhouse effect controversy . . . Western Fuels agreed to finance
publication and distribution of World Climate Review magazine.'' (The
Heat is On, Ross Gelbspan, 1998). What outside fossil fuel funding,
including WFA, have you received in the last 5 years from entities
other than the Cato Institute? Please include the amounts, sources, and
services rendered.

Answer. I am listing, in order of recency, fossil fuel-related
funding of the past 5 years. In the case of Quintana Minerals, all of
their funding went to my (closed) consulting firm, New Hope
Environmental Services, Inc. New Hope had several employees, and more
substantial funding than from Quintana was from the Cato Institute,
prior to my becoming a full-time employee (rather than a contractor) at
Cato in September, 2012.

As most of my time during this period was spent working with Cato,
it is fair to say that the amount of Quintana support that I
``received'' as per your question, was considerably less than what is
listed below.

--  June, 2013. Speech to California Independent Petroleum
Association. Fee: $3,300

--  March, 2013. Speech to Ohio Oil and Gas Association. Fee:
$2,500

--  October, 2012. Speech to North Carolina Coal Institute. Fee:
$1,000

--  September, 2011-August, 2012. Quintana Minerals. General
research support for New Hope Environmental Services, Inc.,
$60,000. Research on climate change.

--  September, 2010-August, 2011. Quintana Minerals. General
research support for New Hope Environmental Services, Inc.,
$95,000. Research on climate change.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
We will now recognize Mr. Dayaratna to testify. You have
the same 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN DAYARATNA, Ph.D., SENIOR STATISTICIAN AND
RESEARCH PROGRAMMER, CENTER FOR DATA ANALYSIS, THE HERITAGE
FOUNDATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Dayaratna. Chairman Bishop, standing Ranking Member
Lowenthal, and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify about the social cost of carbon.
My name is Kevin Dayaratna. I am the Senior Statistician
and Research Programmer at The Heritage Foundation here in
Washington, DC. The views I express in this testimony are my
own and should not be construed as representing any official
position of The Heritage Foundation.
One of the primary metrics that the Obama administration
has used to justify their regulatory agenda on the energy
sector of the economy is the so-called social cost of carbon,
which is defined as the economic damages associated with a
metric ton of carbon dioxide emissions summed across a
particular time horizon.
There are three primary statistical models that the
Interagency Working Group (IWG) uses to estimate the social
cost of carbon: the DICE model, the FUND model, and the PAGE
model.
Over the course of my work at The Heritage Foundation, my
colleagues and I have used the DICE and FUND models, testing
their sensitivity to a variety of important assumptions. Our
work has repeatedly illustrated that while these models might
be interesting for academic exercises, they are easily
manipulated by user-selected assumptions.
Now, at their core, the models are fundamentally flawed
because they lack clear mechanisms of the damages of carbon
dioxide emissions. Regardless, we will talk about these models
anyway.
As with any statistical model, these models are grounded by
assumptions. In our work, my colleagues and I have rigorously
examined three important assumptions, namely, the choice of a
discount rate, the time horizon, and the specification of an
equilibrium climate sensitivity distribution.
So let's first talk about the discount rate. Because there
are a host of investment opportunities, providing benefits for
the future can be achieved in a host of ways. Discounting
future benefits and costs to a common year is a tool economists
use to measure the impact of a program compared to other
possible investments.
The EPA has run these models using 2.5 percent, 3 percent,
and 5 percent discount rates despite the fact that the OMB
guidance in Circular A-4 has specifically stipulated that a 7
percent discount rate be used as well.
At Heritage, we re-estimated these models using a 7 percent
discount rate and noticed drastic reductions to the social cost
of carbon. In 2020, for example, according to the FUND model,
the social cost of carbon is estimated to be $19.33 a ton at a
3 percent discount rate, but estimated to be negative 37 cents
under a 7 percent discount rate.
This negative value is actually a very interesting aspect
about the FUND model and I will come back to it later.
A second assumption that these models are based on is a
specification of a time horizon. These models conveniently make
projections 300 years into the future in order to increase the
social cost of carbon. In our work, we have changed this time
horizon to a significantly shorter, but still unrealistic time
horizon of 150 years into the future. With the DICE model we
noticed that the results plummet by 25 percent in some
instances.
Third, estimating the social cost of carbon requires a
specification of what we call an equilibrium climate
sensitivity, or ECS, distribution. ECS distributions quantify
the earth's temperature response to a doubling of carbon
dioxide emissions.
The IWG used an ECS distribution that was published 8 years
ago by Gerard Roe and Marcia Baker in the peer-reviewed journal
Science. Since then, a number of newer ECS distributions have
been published and they suggest lower probability of extreme
global warming, as my colleague, Pat Michaels, has just alluded
to.
Using these more up-to-date ECS distributions has the
potential to generate significantly lower estimates of the
social cost of carbon by over 40 percent in some instances for
both the DICE and the FUND models.
Finally, another interesting aspect about these models is
the fundamental question they ask. Are there actually costs
associated with carbon dioxide emissions?
Well, according to the FUND model the answer is no, because
it actually allows for a negative social cost of carbon. In
fact, under some assumptions there are actually substantial
probabilities of a negative social cost of carbon. Under some
assumptions, the social cost of carbon is negative two-thirds
of the time. This would suggest that there are literally no
costs, but rather benefits to carbon dioxide emissions, and if
taken at face value, this would suggest that the government
should subsidize, not tax carbon dioxide emissions.
So what is the bottom line? As I have demonstrated,
measurement of the social cost of carbon can be readily
manipulated by conveniently selecting a discount rate, a time
horizon, and climate sensitivity. It should be clear that these
models are nowhere near reliable enough for energy policy
rulemaking.
And as I have illustrated in my own research, taking them
seriously would provide significant economic harm and little
environmental benefit.
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dayaratna follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kevin D. Dayaratna, Ph.D., Senior Statistician
and Research Programmer, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC
Chairman Bishop and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify about the social cost of carbon. My name is
Kevin Dayaratna. I am the Senior Statistician and Research Programmer
at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express in this testimony are
my own and should not be construed as representing any official
position of The Heritage Foundation.
It seems to be a fundamental goal of the Obama administration to
expand regulations across the energy sector of the economy. One of the
primary metrics that the Administration has used to justify these
regulations is the social cost of carbon (SCC), which is defined as the
economic damages associated with a metric ton of carbon dioxide
(CO
2
) emissions summed across a particular time horizon.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The official definition of the social cost of carbon is the
economic damages per metric ton of CO
2
emissions, and is
discussed further in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, ``The Social
Cost of Carbon,'' http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/
economics/scc.html (accessed September 14, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the models
There are three primary statistical models that the Interagency
Working Group (IWG) uses to estimate the SCC--the DICE Model, the FUND
model, and the PAGE model.\2\ Over the course of my work at The
Heritage Foundation, my colleagues and I have used the DICE and FUND
models, testing their sensitivity to a variety of important
assumptions. Our work has repeatedly illustrated that while these
models might be interesting for academic exercises, they are far too
sensitive to the modeler's assumptions to be legitimate tools for
regulatory policy.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For the DICE model, see William D. Nordhaus, ``RICE and DICE
Models of Economics of Climate Change,'' Yale University, November
2006, http://www.econ.yale.edu/nordhaus/homepage/dicemodels.htm
(accessed November 6, 2013). For the FUND model, see ``FUND--Climate
Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation and Distribution,'' http://
www.fund-model.org/ (accessed November 6, 2013). For the PAGE model,
see Climate CoLab, ``PAGE,'' http://climatecolab.org/resources/-/wiki/
Main/PAGE (accessed November 6, 2013).
\3\ Kevin D. Dayaratna and David W. Kreutzer, ``Unfounded FUND: Yet
Another EPA Model Not Ready for the Big Game,'' Heritage Foundation
Backgrounder No. 2897, April 29, 2014, http: // www.heritage.org /
research / reports / 2014 / 04/ unfounded-fund-yet-another-epa-model-
not-ready-for-the-big-game; Kevin D. Dayaratna and David W. Kreutzer,
``Loaded DICE: An EPA Model Not Ready for the Big Game,'' Heritage
Foundation Backgrounder No. 2860, November 21, 2013, http://
www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/11/loaded-dice-an-epa-model-not-
ready-for-the-big-game; and Kevin D. Dayaratna, and David Kreutzer,
``Environment: Social Cost of Carbon Statistical Modeling Is Smoke and
Mirrors,'' Natural Gas & Electricity, Vol. 30, No. 12 (2014), pp. 7-11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These models are estimated by Monte Carlo simulation. The general
idea behind Monte Carlo simulation is that since some aspects of the
models are random, the models are repeatedly estimated to generate a
range of probable outcomes. As a result of fundamental principles in
probability theory, repeated estimation for a sufficient amount of time
reasonably characterizes the distribution.
As with any statistical model, however, these models are grounded
by assumptions. In our work, my colleagues and I have rigorously
examined three important assumptions: the choice of a discount rate, a
time horizon, and the specification of an equilibrium climate
sensitivity distribution.
discount rate
Because there are a host of investment opportunities, providing
benefits for the future can be achieved in a host of ways. Discounting
future benefits and costs to a common year is the tool economists use
to measure the impact of a program compared to other possible
investments. The discount rate should reflect the return on generally
achievable alternative investments. The Environmental Protection Agency
has run these models using 2.5 percent, 3 percent, and 5 percent
discount rates despite the fact that the Office of Management and
Budget guidance in Circular A-4 has specifically stipulated that a 7
percent discount rate be used as well.\4\ At Heritage, we re-estimated
these models using a 7 percent discount rate and obtained the following
results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Office of Management and Budget, ``Circular A-4,'' White House,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_a004_a-4/ (accessed September
14, 2013), and Paul C. ``Chip'' Knappenberger. ``An Example of the
Abuse of the Social Cost of Carbon.'' Cato-at-Liberty. http://
www.cato.org/blog/example-abuse-social-cost-carbon (accessed September
14, 2013).
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As we can see, the SCC estimates are drastically reduced under
the use of a 7 percent discount rate. In fact, under the FUND model,
the estimates are negative, suggesting that there are actually benefits
to carbon dioxide emissions.
time horizon
Our Founding Fathers almost surely would have had no ability to
predict what the American economy looks like today. Similarly, we have
no idea what the American economy will look like 300 years from now.
Regardless, these SCC models are based on projections that are far out
into the future. In my work at Heritage, I have changed this time
horizon to the significantly less, albeit still unrealistic, time
horizon of 150 years into the future, and we obtained the following
results for the DICE model.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Clearly, the SCC estimates drop substantially as a result of
changing the end year (in some cases by over 25 percent).
equilibrium climate sensitivity distribution
Estimating the SCC requires the specification of an equilibrium
climate sensitivity (ECS) distribution. Scientists concur that the
earth's temperature warms in response to carbon dioxide emissions. The
real question, however, is how much warming would actually occur in
response to a certain change in carbon dioxide emissions. ECS
distributions quantify the earth's temperature response to a doubling
of carbon dioxide emissions in terms of probabilities.

The ECS distribution used by the IWG is based on a paper published
in the journal Science 8 years ago by Gerard Roe and Marcia Baker.
Since then, a variety of newer and more up-to-date distributions have
been suggested in the peer-reviewed literature. Many of these
distributions, in fact, suggest lower probabilities of extreme global
warming in response to carbon dioxide emissions.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Gerard H. Roe and Marcia B. Baker, ``Why Is Climate Sensitivity
So Unpredictable?'' Science, Vol. 318, No. 5850 (October 26, 2007), pp.
629-632; Nicholas Lewis, ``An Objective Bayesian Improved Approach for
Applying Optimal Fingerprint Techniques to Estimate Climate
Sensitivity,'' Journal of Climate, Vol. 26, No. 19 (October 2013), pp.
7414-7429; and Alexander Otto et al., ``Energy Budget Constraints on
Climate Response,'' Nature Geoscience, Vol. 6, No. 6 (June 2013), pp.
415-416.

Using the more up-to-date ECS distributions (Otto et al. (2013) and
Lewis (2013)), we notice drastically lower probabilities of extreme
global warming. At Heritage, we re-estimated the SCC having used these
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
more up-to-date ECS distributions and obtained the following results.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Again, we notice drastically lower estimates of the SCC using
these more up-to-date ECS distributions. These results are not
surprising--the IWG's estimates of the SCC were based on outdated
assumptions that overstated the probabilities of extreme global
warming, which artificially inflated their estimates of the SCC.
negativity
When people talk about the social cost of carbon, they tend to
think of damages. Not all of these models, however, suggest that there
are always damages associated with carbon dioxide emissions. The FUND
model, in fact, allows for the SCC to be negative based on feedback
mechanisms due to carbon dioxide emissions. In our work at Heritage, we
actually calculated the probability of a negative SCC under a variety
of assumptions.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Interestingly, under a reasonable set of assumptions, the SCC
is overwhelmingly likely to be negative, which would suggest the
government should, in fact, subsidize (not limit) carbon dioxide
emissions. I do not use these results to suggest that the government
should actually subsidize carbon dioxide emissions, but rather to
illustrate the extreme sensitivity of these models to reasonable
changes to assumptions.
economic consequences
Our results clearly illustrate that the models used to estimate the
SCC are far too sensitive to reasonable changes in assumptions to be
useful tools for policymaking. Even if we were to actually take these
models seriously and implement the associated regulations, the results
would be very costly. Our research at Heritage has shown that by 2030,
we would suffer a peak employment shortfall of over 1,000,000 lost jobs
and over 500,000 manufacturing jobs with a negligible impact (less than
two-tenths of a degree Celsius) on global temperatures.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Kevin D. Dayaratna, Nicolas D. Loris, and David W. Kreutzer,
``The Obama Administration's Climate Agenda: Will Hit Manufacturing
Hard,'' Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 2990, November 13, 2014,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2014/11/the-obama-
administrations-climate-agenda-underestimated-costs-and-exaggerated-
benefits; Kevin D. Dayaratna, Nicolas D. Loris, and David W. Kreutzer,
``The Obama Administration's Climate Agenda: Underestimated Costs and
Exaggerated Benefits,'' Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 2975,
November 13, 2014, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2014/11/
the-obama-administrations-climate-agenda-underestimated-costs-and-
exaggerated-benefits; Nicholas D. Loris, Kevin Dayaratna, and David W.
Kreutzer, ``EPA Power Plant Regulations: A Backdoor Energy Tax,''
Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 2863, December 5, 2013, http://
www.heritage.org / research /reports /2013/12 /epa-power-plant-
regulations-a-backdoor-energy-tax; David W. Kreutzer, Nicholas D.
Loris, and Kevin Dayaratna, ``Cost of a Climate Policy: The Economic
Impact of Obama's Climate Action Plan,'' Heritage Foundation Issue
Brief No. 3978, June 27, 2013, http://www.heritage.org/research/
reports/2013/06/climate-policy-economic-impact-and-cost-of-obama-s-
climate-action-plan; David W. Kreutzer and Kevin Dayaratna, ``Boxer-
Sanders Carbon Tax: Economic Impact,'' Heritage Foundation Issue Brief
No. 3905, April 11, 2013, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/
2013/04/boxer-sanders-carbon-tax-economic-impact; and Patrick J.
Michaels and Paul C. ``Chip'' Knappenberger, ``Current Wisdom: We
Calculate, You Decide: A Handy-Dandy Carbon Tax Temperature-Savings
Calculator,'' Cato Institute, July 23, 2013, http://www.cato.org/blog/
current-wisdom-we-calculate-you-decide-handy-dandy-carbon-tax-
temperaturesavings-calculator (accessed September 11, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
The SCC is based on statistical models that are extremely sensitive
to various assumptions incorporated within the models. The following
tables summarize this sensitivity for the year 2020.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Moreover, the damage functions that the estimates are based on
are essentially arbitrary with limited empirical justification. Even if
one were to take their results seriously, their use would result in
significant economic damages with little benefit to reducing global
temperatures. As a result, these models, although they may be
interesting academic exercises, are far too unreliable for use in
energy policy rulemaking.

*********

The Heritage Foundation is a public policy, research, and
educational organization recognized as exempt under section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code. It is privately supported and receives no
funds from any government at any level, nor does it perform any
government or other contract work.
The Heritage Foundation is the most broadly supported think tank in
the United States. During 2013, it had nearly 600,000 individual,
foundation, and corporate supporters representing every state in the
U.S. Its 2013 income came from the following sources:

Individuals           80%
Foundations           17%
Corporations           3%

The top five corporate givers provided The Heritage Foundation with
2% of its 2013 income. The Heritage Foundation's books are audited
annually by the national accounting firm of McGladrey, LLP.
Members of The Heritage Foundation staff testify as individuals
discussing their own independent research. The views expressed are
their own and do not reflect an institutional position for The Heritage
Foundation or its board of trustees.

______

The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate so far you have kept
the 5-minute rule right there. You have been spot on.
Mr. Dorsey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL K. DORSEY, Ph.D., INTERIM DIRECTOR, ENERGY
AND ENVIRONMENT PROGRAM, JOINT CENTER FOR POLITICAL AND
ECONOMIC STUDIES, WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Dorsey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As well, thank you
standing Ranking Member Lowenthal and members of the committee.
It is a pleasure to be here with you this morning.
I am Dr. Michael Dorsey, and I am Director of Energy and
Environment Programs at the Joint Center for Political and
Economic Studies, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisan public
policy think tank here in DC.
I want to make it clear before I start, to some of the
colleagues here on the panel, that my comments are solely my
own and do not represent policies of the Joint Center.
That said, allow me to begin by just giving some background
on the SCC. As you know, since Ronald Reagan, we have decided
that significant rules issued by the Federal Government be
accompanied through intra-governmental review by cost-benefit
analysis. So really the SCC is nothing particularly new.
As you know also, the current administration, following on
the previous one before it, has imposed the requirement to
assess climate regulation through the lens of a range of
figures that we collectively refer to as the social cost of
carbon, or the SCC.
The SCC estimates the benefit to be achieved, as many of
you have already said, expressed in monetary values, by
avoiding damages caused by each additional metric ton of carbon
dioxide.
Essentially the SCC relies, as we know, on a discount rate
greater than zero for the social cost of carbon. Choosing a
discount rate is, indeed, I think a political exercise, but it
is also a process, and I would concur that that process has to
have a degree of transparency around it. By adding more
transparency to that process, we improve efforts to calculate
the SCC.
I think when we think about accuracy though, we have to
think about making accurate submissions of those who are
involved in setting the process, such that what does
transparency really mean. It means that any transparent SCC
process must include the full disclosures of the financial
interests of all those who are involved in trying to configure
the SCC.
The full disclosure of financial interests of those
involved with the SCC calculations must emphasize I would say
the conflicts of interest of all parties. This especially must
apply to those parties that have interest in the fossil fuel
sector, inasmuch as parties from that sector may have a strong
incentive to devalue the SCC or inflate the discount rate used,
in part, to calculate it.
The Interagency Working Group, or the IWG's values for the
social cost of carbon as they stand indicate that the discount
rate used by the IWG may, indeed, be too high. Now, the equity
weighting of global damages were not conducted. The IWG does
justify including a significantly higher discount rate of up to
5 percent.
I would also add that the IWG should also provide a
rationale for excluding significantly lower discount rates.
The Working Group also should equity weigh the expected
damages of climate change. Currently the Integrated Assessment
Models that are underneath the SCC that the colleague to my
right has talked about assumed the relative impacts of the
dollar damages not varying regionally, but we know that the
impact of one dollar of damages varies widely from region to
region, and particularly within the country and between
countries.
In addition, climate damages should be weighed by relative
per capita income in the region where they occur. This would
also justify a much higher range of values for the SCC.
I would add that the SCC should also be concerned with the
disproportionate impacts that a dollar of damages will have on
different regions in the country, as well as around the world.
One of the things that we looked at at the Joint Center a
couple of years back was the way in which the response to
climate change was very uneven across the country, and we find
places like Mr. Sablan pointed out where people are already
suffering the early effects of this ongoing problem.
So we need an SCC that really focuses upon the
disproportioned impacts of climate change around the country.
I would also say that members of this committee have an
obligation to step up and to make sure that they are taking
reasonably robust actions to ensure that we are drastically
reducing carbon pollution in a timely manner proportionate with
the unfolding climate crisis. That actually requires that we
have a particularly high SCC and actually a relatively low
discount rate.
I think it is that orientation that we need to be focused
on, because setting an accurate social cost of carbon that is
based and rooted in transparency around critical disclosures
is, I think, critical, and it is a critical step to achieving
reductions in carbon emissions that we need to see in the
future.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dorsey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Michael K. Dorsey, Interim Director of the
Energy and Environment Program, Joint Center for Political and Economic
Studies, Washington, DC
I am Dr. Michael K. Dorsey, Interim Director of the Energy and
Environment Program at the Joint Center for Political & Economic
Studies (hereafter, the Joint Center), a nonprofit, non-partisan public
policy research institute located here in Washington, DC. Before I
begin my testimony, I would like to make clear that my comments are
solely my own and do not represent any official position of the Joint
Center.
what is the scc
Since Ronald Reagan, we have decided that significant rules issued
by the Federal Government be accompanied through intra-governmental
review by a cost-benefit analysis.
As you know, the Obama administration, like the Bush administration
before it, has imposed a requirement to assess climate regulation
through the lens of a range of figures collectively known as the
``social cost of carbon'' or SCC.
The SCC estimates the benefit to be achieved, expressed in monetary
value, by avoiding the damage caused by each additional metric ton of
carbon dioxide (CO
2
) put into the atmosphere.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bell, R.G. and D. Callan. 2011. More than Meets the Eye--The
Social Cost of Carbon in U.S. Climate Policy, in Plain English. WRI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled
that executive branch agencies must include the climate benefits of a
significant regulatory action in Federal benefit-cost analyses (BCA) to
comply with Executive Order 12,866.
In response, an Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of
Carbon was formed in 2010 to develop a consistent and accurate estimate
of the social cost of carbon (SCC) using models drawn from scholarly
and expert literature.\2\ The SCC is the global cost to all future
generations from one additional unit of carbon pollution in a given
time period; forest fires, drought, and disease are just some of the
costly consequences of climate change that are ideally included within
it.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Masur, J. S., & Posner, E. A. (2011). Climate regulation and
the limits of cost-benefit analysis. Cal. L. Rev., 99, 1557.
\3\ Howard, P. 2014. Omitted Damages: What's Missing from the
Social Costs of Carbon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet we need to keep improving the SCC estimate to ensure it
reflects the latest science and economics. Doing so maintains an
accurate SCC.
The SCC relies, as we know, on a discount rate greater than zero
for the social cost of carbon. When we use such a discount rate we are
making a value judgment--a moral judgment--that our society in this
period of time is more valuable than future societies--than that of our
children and their children. In other words we are saying: that our
generation's burning of fossil fuels is possibly more valuable than a
safe and livable planet.
So choosing a discount rate is a moral and political exercise, not
only a dispassionate, academic one. It is also a process.
While legally there is no need for increased transparency in the
process to set the SCC, we should ensure a transparent process for
updating and using this critical number going forward that especially
involves citizens (and their designated representatives) that we know
will be disproportionately harmed by the unfolding climate crisis.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Cleetus, R. 2013. ``The Social Cost of Carbon: Setting the
Record Straight Ahead of Today's House Hearing.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further on any transparent SCC process must include the full
disclosure of the financial interests of all of those who are involved
in configuring the SCC. The full disclosure of the financial interests
of those involved with SCC must emphasize the conflicts of interest of
all parties. This especially must apply to any parties that have
interests in the fossil fuel sector--inasmuch as parties from that
sector may have a strong incentive to devalue the SCC (or inflate the
discount rate used in part to calculate it).
Alas, today's House hearing on the SCC might simply be a sideshow
aimed at undermining climate action, not likely to focus on issues of
substance. Relying on those that downplay the extent of the unfolding
climate crisis or seeking ``opinions'' from fossil fuel backed,
industry economists is dangerous for the country--given that such
interested parties can have financial and other conflicts with setting
an accurate SCC.
why does the scc need to be accurate
The Interagency Working Group's (IWG) values for the Social Cost of
Carbon (SCC), as they stand, indicate that the discount rates used by
the IWG may be too high, and that equity weighting of global damages
was not conducted.
The IWG does give a justification for including a significantly
higher-end discount rate of 5 percent (descriptive analysis of
``possibility that climate damages are positively correlated with
market returns'').\5\ The IWG should also provide a rationale for
excluding significantly lower discount rates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See: IWG 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fact, two members of the IWG--the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and Office of Management and Budget (OMB)--suggest that
lower discount rates (between .5 and 3%) should be used in their own
guidelines. The EPA suggests a use of lower discount rates in
situations where there is ``long-run uncertainty in economic growth and
interest rates, intergenerational considerations, and the risk of high
impact climate damages (which could reduce or reverse economic
growth).'' \6\ OMB notes that although ``most people demonstrate time
preference [r] in their own consumption behavior, it may not be
appropriate for society to demonstrate a similar preference when
deciding between the well-being of current and future generations.''
\7\ These scenarios perfectly describe the scenario for rulemaking
around carbon dioxide emissions and climate impacts; the lower discount
rates, if modeled would, justify a much higher range of values for the
SCC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See: EPA 2008.
\7\ See: OMB 2003.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IWG must equity-weigh the expected damages of climate change,
which means that their models assume that the relative impacts of a
dollar of damages do not vary regionally--or that this type of judgment
is an inappropriate one to make. Since the IWG used a global social
cost of carbon dioxide, which was not mandatory under rulemaking, as
they were concerned about the global impacts of emissions. It then
follows that they should be concerned about the disproportionate
impacts that a dollar of damages might have on different regions of the
globe and in the country. Climate damages should be weighed by relative
per-capita income in the region where they occur. This would also
justify a much higher range of values for the SCC. Further on, this
could also allow those that bear more responsibility for the generating
carbon pollution, share a large burden in abating it--and ultimately
avoid catastrophic climate change and the associated political, social,
economic and ecological crises associated with it.
Beyond the work on the SCC, we need to develop an Interagency
Working Group on the Social Cost of Methane, analogous to the
Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon. Methane
pollution is becoming a greater and greater problem for the United
States as we expand our natural gas production. As scientists say we
are nearing more and more climate tipping points, methane is also
hugely important because although it is shorter lived in the
atmosphere, its radiative forcing is much higher than carbon dioxide
over any relevant time frame. Promulgating a Social Cost of Methane
will allow the Administration to be more proactive in rulemaking and
allow us to better mitigate the impacts of methane emissions on our
Nation and the world.
who's harmed if the scc is not accurate
There is a highly academic discussion underway on the ``right''
discount rate to use in calculating the social cost of carbon. Discount
rates are based on the assumption that a dollar in the future is worth
less than a dollar today, assuming the global economy and prosperity
grow. The SCC report provides estimates discounted at 2.5 percent, 3
percent, and 5 percent. The choice of discount rate matters greatly
because the impacts and costs of our carbon emissions will be borne
primarily by future generations. The concept of discounting makes some
sense when applied to individuals, not across generations.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Cleetus, R. 2013. ``The Social Cost of Carbon: Setting the
Record Straight Ahead of Today's House Hearing.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlike conventional pollutants, CO
2
persists in the
atmosphere for 200 years or more. If we use a high discount rate for
the SCC calculations, future costs could be minimized to the point of
being ignored. And as a result, the benefits of actions to reduce
emissions will also be greatly discounted. The math of compounding
discount rates means that, for example with a rate of 7 percent, beyond
the next two decades even a fairly significant cost would look small,
and by the latter half of the century would approach zero. That is
neither sensible from an economic point of view or an ethical point of
view.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Cleetus, R. 2013. ``The Social Cost of Carbon: Setting the
Record Straight Ahead of Today's House Hearing.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fact, there is a growing consensus among economists that the
best approach would be to use a declining discount rate to better
reflect inter-generational considerations.
There is a general consensus that future integrated assessment
models (IAM) research must focus on hot spots. The ``hot spot'' regions
are those that are geographically predisposed to climate change (for
example, low lying nations and island nations), and those nations as
well as communities in the United States with insufficient ability to
adapt (for example, the poorest amongst us in the United States).\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Howard, P. 2014. Omitted Damages: What's Missing from the
Social Costs of Carbon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the United States, the number of ``hot spots'' is growing and
perhaps too numerous to elaborate. Examples include, but are by no
means limited to Alaska, the southern Gulf Coast states and the West--
who are suffering from sea level rise, exceptionally strong hurricane
events and sustained carbon pollution exacerbated droughts,
respectively.
A small example of the possible magnitude of these relocation costs
are Alaskan native villages. In the case of relocating three Alaskan
villages (Kivalina, Shishmaref, & Newtok), the cost is estimated by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to be between $275 million and $455
million.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Lynn, K., & Donoghue, E. 2011. Tribal Climate Profile:
Relocation of Alaska Native Communities. Tribal Climate Change Project
at the University of Oregon. Retrieved from http://
tribalclimate.uoregon.edu/files/2010/11/AlaskaRelocation_04-13-11.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the United States, morbidity and mortality can be directly
influenced by climate in six ways: (1) high and low temperature (that
is, heat and cold stress), (2) vector-borne infectious disease, (3)
non-vector-borne infectious disease (including, zoonotic and waterborne
diseases, (4) air quality, (5) floods and storms, and (6) inter-sector
effects of agriculture and water quality.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. (2010). A
human health perspective on climate change: A report outlining the
research needs on the human health effects of climate change. In A
Human Health Perspective On Climate Change: A Report Outlining the
Research Needs on the Human Health Effects of Climate Change.
Environmental Health Perspectives (EHP); National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a 2012 study we conducted at the Joint Center, we found that
marginalized communities of color in six southern and western states
(Arizona, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, New Mexico and Texas) face a
``perfect storm'' of poor health, socioeconomic barriers and climate-
related challenges, and many are being left out of government climate
change and disaster planning activities.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ JCPES and THI. 2012. Climate Change, Environmental Challenges
and Vulnerable Communities: Assessing Legacies of the Past, Building
Opportunities for the Future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, in the face of such knowledge, since the SCC IWG
should be concerned about the disproportionate impacts that a dollar of
damages will have on different regions of the country--and world.
Our children and their children deserve to live in a world free
from the extremely negative social, political, economic and ecological
impacts of unchecked climate change. Our generation and the members of
this committee have an obligation to step up to make sure we're taking
reasonably robust actions to ensure that we're drastically reducing
carbon pollution in a timely manner proportionate with the unfolding
climate crisis. Setting an accurate social cost of carbon is one
critical step to achieve this end. I would urge the members of the
committee to keep this in mind.

______

The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate that.
We will now hear from Mr. Segal.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT H. SEGAL, FOUNDING PARTNER, POLICY
RESOLUTION GROUP, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Segal. Chairman Bishop, Mr. Lowenthal, members of the
committee, based on 25 years of practice of law and public
policy in the environmental field, it is my pleasure to offer
some thoughts on the Administration's use of the social cost of
carbon.
In short, the use of social cost is currently not an
appropriate basis for setting policy and misleads the public
regarding the true cost of government action.
First, social cost is used to make expensive rules appear
cost beneficial, when they are not. The methodology was used to
make vehicle efficiency standards that had a net cost of $50
billion appear to have a benefit of $100 billion, and the EPA's
power plant rules relied on social cost for as much as 65
percent of their alleged net benefits.
As the President's climate action plan comes further into
focus, more and more regulations claiming to reduce carbon
emissions will use social cost to appear cost beneficial when
the truth might be otherwise. It has already been cited in 114
proposed or final rules across six Federal agencies.
When actual environmental benefits fail to satisfy a
skeptical audience, social costs should not be used as some
type of Hamburger Helper to make the dish look more inviting
than it really is.
Some might say, ``Well, what is the harm in overestimating
benefits? '' The Supreme Court reminded us earlier this month
that too much wasteful expenditure devoted to one problem may
well mean considerably fewer resources available to deal
effectively with other perhaps more serious problems. Failing
to recognize this reasoned the Court was irrational and
inappropriate.
Even EPA's Air Administrator recently told Congress when
asked if a rule can actually claim a particularized benefit
related to reducing climate change. She said, ``You can't
predict the climate that way,'' and of course, she is right.
Stopping a particular project or adopting a particular rule
does not yield a benefit down to the ton. EPA does not think
so, but this is precisely what the social cost purports to do.
As a matter of law, social cost faces numerous legal,
procedural, and other shortcomings associated with its
development, derivation, and application--enough problems to
clearly warrant the immediate discontinuation of the use of
social cost values in the regulatory context.
Also, the potential use of social cost by the CEQ as a
basis for agencies to reject or condition project approval is
troubling. Seemingly it is inconsistent with Supreme Court
precedent that requires NEPA, National Environmental Policy
Act, conditions to have a real causal relationship to the
actual action under review.
One basis for this conclusion is the uncertainty that
swirls around the models used to determine social cost. This
uncertainty falls short of the complete analytic defense and
rational connection between factual inputs, modeling
assumptions, and conclusions that have long been required by
Federal courts as part of administrative law.
MIT Professor Robert Pindyck said, by contrast, the models
the Administration has used have, ``crucial flaws that make
them close to useless as tools for policy analysis. They are
completely ad hoc with no theoretical or empirical
foundation.''
The choice of models was never subject to public comment or
review. Some have contended that social cost is not a rule. So
why worry about procedural niceties like the Administrative
Procedure Act.
But APA itself says that rules encompass the ``approval and
prescription of valuations, costs and accounting.'' And it is a
good idea that the APA does. What is at stake in the carbon
context is substantial. The EPA clean power plant alone may
place electrical liability at risk, causing blackouts that can
cost millions a minute while endangering human health; energy
price increases; shut our businesses; deter hiring; cause
layoffs; increase the price of essential goods and services;
and increase the cost of living for all Americans, including
for people living on fixed incomes, like senior citizens and
the poor, who are hardest hit by rate hikes.
If OMB does possess the legal authority to use social cost,
which is a very open point, under APA it would still have to
comply with the full range of procedural requirements,
including advanced public notice, a full and robust opportunity
for comment, and a description of the legal basis and purpose
of the mechanism.
The Interagency Working Group seems to concede this point
in its recent brief response to comments, when they indicated
they would bound the matter over for a potentially lengthy
National Academy of Sciences review based on the need for
``independent expert advice.'' But they would keep the old
concept of social cost in place in the meantime.
Ladies and gentlemen, that is not how the administrative
process is supposed to work. You do not keep the bad process in
place while you are waiting for the better one.
The Administration also reiterated its commitment to
calculate global benefits to carbon reductions even when no
consideration is given to global dis-benefits associated with
perpetuating energy poverty. The Intergovernmental Group says
it prefers this because by adopting a global estimate we can
signal our leadership, but there is no evidence that our
leadership will be copied by other countries who, in fact, are
our economic competitors.
Well, thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look
forward to working with the committee further as it completes
its important oversight tasks.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Segal follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott H. Segal, Founding Partner, Policy
Resolution Group, Bracewell & Giuliani LLP

Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the
committee, my name is Scott Segal and I am a partner in the Policy
Resolution Group of the law firm Bracewell and Giuliani where I have
practiced energy, environmental and natural resource law for over 25
years. I also direct the Electric Reliability Coordinating Council,\1\
a group of energy companies working on common-sense environmental
policy, including approaches to climate change, but the comments I
present today are my own. It is an honor to be here today to address
the issue of the use of the social cost of carbon (SCC) in rulemaking
and other administrative actions. In short, the methodology promoted by
the Administration is not an appropriate basis for setting policy and
misleads the public regarding the true costs of government action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ERCC filed comments regarding SCC Technical Support Documents
pursuant to the notice at 78 Fed. Reg. 70,586 (Nov. 26, 2013). The
comments are available at regulations.gov as FR Doc #2014-01605, dated
Feb. 26, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
why the scc is misguided

Any part of the regulated community with passing interest in carbon
policy and attendant regulatory development needs to be concerned with
the development and use of SCC. Because a higher value for SCC can be
used directly to justify broader reaching and more expensive
regulations, or to deny permits, the SCC itself must be subject to
close scrutiny. Let me give you some real world examples:

A Department of Transportation (DOT) vehicle efficiency
standard would impose a cost of $350 billion on
manufacturers and would return conventional benefits of
$278 billion, meaning costs outweigh benefits by more than
$50 billion. But when DOT factored in SCC, suddenly the
regulation benefits exceeded cost by $100 billion; \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Mark Drajem, Obama Quietly Raises `Carbon Price' as Costs to
Climate Increase, BLOOMBERG (June 12, 2013, 2:52 PM), http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-12/tougher-regulationsseen-from-obama-
change-in-carbon-cost.html; Jay G. Stirling, How to Deal with Hornets:
The Administrative Procedure Act and the Social Cost of Carbon, 100
Iowa Law Rev. (2015) at 855-56.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

When the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
proposed its carbon emissions guidelines for existing power
plants, it estimated net benefits of $26 to $46 billion by
as soon as 2020--with some 40 to 65 percent of these
alleged net benefits deriving directly from SCC.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for Existing Stationary
Sources: Electric Utility Generating Units, 79 Fed. Reg. 34,830, 34,840
tbl.1 (June 18, 2014) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 60); Stirling at
856.

And as the President's Climate Action Plan comes further into
focus, more and more regulations claiming to reduce carbon emissions as
a primary or secondary benefit will use SCC to appear cost-beneficial
when the truth might be otherwise. When actual environmental benefits
fail to satisfy a skeptical audience, SCC should not be used as
Hamburger Helper to make the dish look larger than it really is.
But that's the real problem. When rulemakings and other government
actions impose real costs, and when benefits analysis can be
manipulated to yield almost any number, the result is a serious
misallocation of limited societal resources. The U.S. Supreme Court has
recently put the EPA on notice that it expects an honest assessment of
cost and benefit. In Michigan v. EPA, the Court said that, ``One would
not say that it is even rational, never mind `appropriate,' to impose
billions of dollars in economic costs in return for a few dollars in
health or environmental benefits.'' The Court explains why:

``Consideration of cost reflects the understanding that
reasonable regulation ordinarily requires paying attention to
the advantages and the disadvantages of agency decisions. It
also reflects the reality that `too much wasteful expenditure
devoted to one problem may well mean considerably fewer
resources available to deal effectively with other (perhaps
more serious) problems.' (quoting Justice Breyer in a previous
decision).'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Michigan v. EPA, 576 U. S. ____ (2015), slip op. at 7.

The SCC as it stands now is an admittedly one-sided assessment
under which the mere allusion to carbon reductions can confer large
benefits, even if the proposed action will have no effect on global
warming and related environmental endpoints. The fact that particular
rules cannot predictably result in reduction of climate-change
endpoints in a linear fashion was recently demonstrated in an exchange
between a Member of the House of Representatives and the EPA Acting
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assistant Administrator for Air Janet McCabe:

``Mr. Pompeo. You have gone from 26 to 30 indicators on your
Web site about how you measure impact of what you-all call
climate change today. So I want to ask you a series of yes or
no questions about this set of regulations, these carbon
regulations [on power plants], and what you think they will do
to the indicators that EPA uses. So, yes or no, will this set
of rules, when fully implemented, reduce sea surface
temperatures.

Ms. McCabe. I can't answer that. I don't know.

Mr. Pompeo. Will this reduce ocean acidity?

Ms. McCabe. It will contribute to reducing ocean acidity.

Mr. Pompeo. Do you have the data to support that, and can you
tell how much and when we will see reduced ocean acidity as a
result of these regulations?

Ms. McCabe. You can't predict the climate this way.

Mr. Pompeo. I will take that as you have no idea.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Transcript of Hearing on EPA's Proposed Carbon Dioxide
Regulations for Power Plants, House Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power (June 19, 2014), at 88, available at
http://democrats.energycommerce.house.gov/sites/default/files/documents
/ Preliminary-Transcript- EP- EPA -Carbon-Dioxide-Regulations-Power-
Plants-2014-6-19.pdf.

Ms. McCabe is of course correct. You cannot look at a particular
rulemaking or administrative action and determine what effect it will
have on any particular climate impact. As she says, ``You can't predict
the climate this way.'' Yet, that is precisely what the SCC would
purport to do, utilizing hand-picked inputs into hand-picked integrated
assessment models (IAMs).
scc is inappropriate as a basis for rulemaking and administrative
action
Our colleagues at the Utility Air Regulatory Group (UARG) offered a
succinct discussion of the legal shortcomings that manifest from
reliance on the SCC methodology as currently developed, pointing to
``numerous legal, procedural, and other shortcomings associated with
the development, derivation, and application of the SCC'' sufficient to
``warrant the immediate discontinuation of the use of SCC values in the
regulatory context.'' They continue:

``OMB has not identified any legal authority for this
proceeding, and lacks statutory authority to promulgate rules
that would bind the USG to use its SCC estimates in regulatory
analyses and agency proceedings. Adoption of the SCC values
would be arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law because
such action would be unauthorized by statute and because the
TSD is substantively flawed. Because there are no statutory
principles to guide OMB's exercise of discretion, this action
also raises serious constitutional concerns under the non-
delegation and separation of powers doctrines. In effect, OMB
is purporting to exercise nonexistent legislative authority in
prescribing policy to be followed by other agencies regarding
consideration of the SCC in regulatory analyses and
decisions.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ UARG Comments on Social Cost of Carbon Technical Support
Document and Updates, 78 Fed. Reg. 70,586 (Nov. 26, 2013), Docket ID
No. OMB-2013-0007, at 3. See, e.g., Coal. for Common Sense in Gov't
Procurement v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 464 F.3d 1306, 1317 (Fed.
Cir. 2006) (``The definition of a substantive rule is broad and
includes action that is legislative in nature, is primarily concerned
with policy considerations for the future rather than the evaluation of
past conduct, and looks not to the evidentiary facts but to
policymaking conclusions to be drawn from the facts.'') (internal
quotations omitted).

Others before the committee today can review in greater detail the
numerous flaws within models, including underlying sensitivity
assumptions. Curious choices abound regarding discount rates
inconsistent with growth-rate assumptions and the use of international
benefits to reducing carbon when international costs are regarded as
too speculative. But in short, there are simply too many uncertainties
in both the models themselves and in their application to neat and tidy
SCC numbers ready to be plugged in to any regulatory impact analysis.
Sometimes, it appears as though the Intergovernmental Working Group
(IWG) tasked with developing the SCC is satisfied to simply state that
we live in an uncertain world, and therefore our rulemaking process
should expect no better. But we do expect better. And it is long-
settled administrative law that the Federal Government cannot waive a
wand and call magic numbers into existence to justify its activities.
The Federal appeals courts have explained why:

``[The agency] must provide a complete analytic defense of its
model [and] respond to each objection with a reasoned
presentation. The technical complexity of the analysis does not
relieve the agency of the burden to consider all relevant
factors . . . There must be a rational connection between the
factual inputs, modeling assumptions, modeling results and
conclusions drawn from these results.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 333 (D.C. Cir. 1981)
(internal quotations omitted).

As one indication that this minimum threshold is not met by the SCC
process, consider the fact that the IWG ``simply asserts without any
documentation or other justification that the FUND, PAGE, and DICE
models now stand as the most comprehensive and reliable efforts to
measure the economic damages from climate change. No evidence is
offered to support that judgment.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Frank Ackerman & Elizabeth A. Stanton, ``The social cost of
carbon,'' 53 Real World Economics Review 129 (2010), at 135.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, noted MIT economist Robert Pindyck, despite his general
support for the SCC conceptual framework, observed that IAMs ``have
crucial flaws that make them close to useless as tools for policy
analysis . . . [; they] are completely ad hoc, with no theoretical or
empirical foundation. . . . IAM-based analyses of climate policy create
a perception of knowledge and precision, but that perception is
illusory and misleading.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Robert S. Pindyck, Climate Change Policy: What do the Models
Tell Us?, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19244
(abstract) (2013), available at http://www.nber.org/papers/W19244.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The stakes in the current context are simply too high to proceed
without an adequate framework. If OMB wishes to proceed as indicated in
its most recent response to comments, then it must stop, propose an
open and transparent basis under the strictures of the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA) and invite comments on the legal basis for SCC and
its use as a factor in justifying regulations.
violations of the administrative procedure act
OMB has on several occasions reminded the Congress that SCC is not
a rule or regulation, but merely an ``ingredient'' that is used in a
broader cost-benefit context.\10\ But the APA defines a ``rule'' as
including any ``agency statement of general or particular applicability
and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or
policy,'' encompassing ``the approval or prescription of . . .
valuations, costs, or accounting.'' \11\ Contrary to OMB's
conceptualization, the courts have held that the APA definition
includes ``virtually every statement an agency may make.'' \12\ If OMB
does possess the legal authority to establish an SCC--an open point--
under APA it would still have to comply with the full range of
procedural requirements, including advance public notice, a full and
robust opportunity for comment, and a description of the legal basis
and purpose of the SCC mechanism. Any process short of these safeguard
would be regarded, in the famous words of the statute, as ``arbitrary,
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with
law.'' \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See, e.g., Examining the Obama Administration's Social Cost of
Carbon Estimates, Hearing before the Subcomm. on Energy Policy, Health
Care and Entitlements, Comm. on Oversight and Government Reform, U.S.
House of Representatives (July 18, 2013), at 12 (hereinafter
``Shelanksi testimony'').
\11\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 551(4).
\12\ Avoyelles Sportsmen's League, Inc. v. Marsh, 715 F.2d 897, 908
(5th Cir. 1983).
\13\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 706(2)(A).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One cannot consider the development and use of SCC as anything
other than a substantive rule. After all, OMB claims that SCC is
``extremely important . . . measure of what harm to our society will
be'' in determining regulatory priorities.\14\ Once final, the entire
Federal Government is to use SCC in determining and calibrating
regulatory standards that impose real burden on the regulated
community, and beyond that, on the American public at large.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Shelanski testimony at 12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The case study of the EPA is particularly telling, in light of the
disproportionate impact the Agency has had in the development of SCC
and the operation of the IWG.\15\ The costs to the American public of
EPA carbon regulation will indeed be large in the context of the Clean
Power Plan (CPP) currently under consideration. The Electric
Reliability Coordinating Council reviewed the literature on the
proposal and found the following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ While the use of SCC first appeared in relatively obscure U.S.
Department of Energy proposed efficiency standards--small engines,
coin-operated beverage machines and then microwave ovens--these
regulations may merely have been a front to obscure the true
beneficiary of the methodology, EPA, an agency committed to far more
extensive and expensive rules. The Government Accountability Office
(GAO) found in July 2014 that ``experts'' from the Council of Economic
Advisors that had been detailed to the IWG were from EPA, and by the
time the methodology was changed and expanded, had even returned to the
Agency but still maintained seats on the IWG. With respect to each of
the IAM models, it was EPA that made the presentations on how the
models worked, and it was EPA that supervised the running of those
models to generate the SCC numbers. GAO, Regulatory Impact Analysis:
Development of Social Cost of Carbon Estimates, GAO-14-663 (July 2014),
at pp. 10-15.

The CPP puts the reliability of the U.S. electricity
supply at risk. In fact, a growing chorus of independent
experts have expressed their concern for the future of
America's affordable, dependable electricity supply were
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the CPP to take effect.

Blackouts cause incalculable economic damage. For example,
the direct costs to high technology manufacturing in the
San Francisco Bay Area alone during the California
blackouts alone ran as high as $1 million a minute due to
lost production, and the relatively brief Northeast
blackout of 2003 cost business about $13 billion in lost
productivity.

The CPP will impose tremendous costs on the U.S. economy
and the American people. Higher energy prices will produce
a ripple effect throughout the U.S. economy that will
shutter businesses, deter hiring, cause layoffs, increase
the price of essential goods and services, and increase the
cost-of-living for all Americans. People living on fixed
incomes, like senior citizens and the poor, will be hardest
hit by rate hikes.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ ERCC Comments on EPA's Proposed Clean Power Plan (June 2014),
ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2013-0602, available at https: // www.cibo.org / wp-
content / uploads / 2014 / 07 / ERCC-Comments-on-111d.pdf.

In this case, the OMB would be attempting to ``prescribe law or
policy'' by specifying particular ``valuations, costs or accounting''
under alleged executive authority, without authorization by Congress,
and without following the full and open APA procedures required by law
and designed to subject the SCC to rigorous quality assurance. Meeting
these APA standards is required before action is taken, not after the
numbers are generated time and time again. To date, OMB has cherry-
picked the administrative process by selecting models, generating
estimates, and applying them--all before seeking any comment.
openness and transparency
President Obama famously instructed heads of executive departments
and agencies that:

``My administration is committed to creating an unprecedented
level of openness in Government . . . Transparency promotes
accountability and provides information for citizens about what
their Government is doing. Information maintained by the
Federal Government is a national asset.'' \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ President Barack Obama, Transparency and Open Government,
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies,
available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/
TransparencyandOpenGovernment.

OMB Director Peter Orszag offered further definition as to how
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
these principles would be implemented:

``The three principles of transparency, participation, and
collaboration form the cornerstone of an open government.
Transparency promotes accountability by providing the public
with information about what the Government is doing.
Participation allows members of the public to contribute ideas
and expertise so that their government can make policies with
the benefit of information that is widely dispersed in society.
Collaboration improves the effectiveness of Government by
encouraging partnerships and cooperation within the Federal
Government, across levels of government, and between the
Government and private institutions.'' \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Peter R. Orszag, Dir., OMB, Memorandum for the Heads of
Executive Departments and Agencies, Open Government Directive (Dec. 8,
2009), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/open/documents/open-
government-directive.

The development of SCC by the IWG has not lived up to the
Administration's explicit commitment. The Federal Government has never
discussed openly the fundamental questions regarding the purpose,
development, derivations, and bases for applying the SCC in the
rulemaking context. These would be the essential elements of
transparency and openness as it applies to SCC. Instead, the
Administration has only narrowly sought comment on the November update
to the May 2013 TSD, an 11-page document modifying the February 2010
document. The choice of models, and their operation, has not undergone
peer review, let alone public comment.
recent response to comments
While the IWG has now offered brief response to sophisticated
comments challenging the veracity of the SCC development process, the
July 2 Response to Comments (RTC) document still forms an inadequate
basis for utilizing the SCC in the rulemaking or administrative
process.
First, IWG admits that despite the comments filed, it still plans
``to seek independent expert advice on technical opportunities to
improve the SCC estimates, including many of the approaches suggested
by commenters . . .'' This independent assessment will come from a
tasking of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, or NAS, to ``examine the technical merits and challenges''
present in the effort to improve SCC. But IWG candidly admits that the
NAS ``review will take some time'' during which time ``IWG continues to
recommend the use of the current SCC estimates in regulatory impact
analysis . . .'' The only actual revisions to the SCC are described by
IWG as constituting ``a minor technical revision.'' \19\ This gets the
comment process precisely backwards. Until the NAS has completed its
work, the SCC remains too imprecise for use in the policymaking context
and should not be utilized. As the IWG reminds readers throughout the
RTC, direct costs and benefits to proposed rules and actions may
continue to be measured outside of the elaborate artifice of SCC; there
is no need to subject the American taxpayer to the results of SCC-
driven policy when NAS review is still underway.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ IWG, Response to Comments (RTC):Social Cost of Carbon for
Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866 (July 2015) at
5, available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
inforeg/scc-response-to-comments-final-july-2015.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the RTC demonstrates continual conflating of policy
outcomes under the guise of SCC economic objectivity. For example, IWG
states that it has chosen not even to consider the typical 7 percent
discount rate that is consistent with IWG's own economic growth
projections because it believes ``special ethical considerations'' may
obtain in the context of climate change policy development.\20\ Whether
such special considerations are appropriate is clearly not a matter of
economics, but of policy consideration that of necessity must be left
to the U.S. Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ RTC at 21.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, on the matter of consideration of global benefits to carbon
reductions--even when no consideration is given to global ``dis-
benefits'' associated with perpetuating energy poverty \21\--IWG
indicates that its preference is based in part on the notion that, ``By
adopting a global estimate of the SCC, the U.S. Government can signal
its leadership in this effort.'' \22\ Again, this is a policy
assessment better left to Congress--the importance of leadership--and
not an objective economic assessment. Indeed, unilateral carbon policy
may not only fail to manifest in a copying effect overseas, it may do
the opposite resulting in ``leakage'' of energy-intensive industries to
less energy-efficient economies, resulting in greater carbon emissions
worldwide! \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ For more on energy poverty, see e.g., Rep. David McKinley,
``Powering Africa by Investing in Coal,'' The Hill, Aug. 8, 2014
(citing WH ``Next Generation'' summit, McKinley observes, ``Poverty-
stricken countries need access to all forms of energy, not just the
forms approved by the Obama administration or the World Bank . . .
Without energy, it's impossible to educate children and give them a
brighter future. Without energy it is impossible to grow businesses and
encourage entrepreneurship.''), at http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-
blog/energy-environment/214604-powering-africa-by-investing-in-coal.
\22\ RTC at 31.
\23\ For a fuller explanation of the leakage effect, see ERCC
Comments Submitted to EPA on the New Source Performance Standards for
Power Plant Carbon Emissions (June 25, 2012), at http: // www.
electricreliability.org / ercc -comments-submitted- epa -new-source-
performance-standards-power-plant-carbon-emissions (citing Maguire
Energy Institute report and other studies demonstrating that, ``Carbon
leakage means that the domestic climate mitigation policy is less
effective and more costly in containing emission levels, a legitimate
concern for policymakers.'').

Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I look forward to
working with the committee further as it completes its important
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
oversight tasks.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony,
reminding Members that we now will enter the question phase
with 5-minute time limits on the questions as well.
As usual, I am going to defer until the other committee
members have had a chance to ask questions first. So we will
start with Mrs. Lummis.
Do you have questions?
Mrs. Lummis. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to just begin by saying that I believe climate
change is real, and I like to watch programs like ``Nova''
which is on Public Television, and I recall a program that
talked about the climate changes that were going on 300 years
ago.
So let's go back to 1715. Let's think about the fact that
the Delaware River was always frozen in the winter. It was
always cooler than it is now because when Washington crossed
the Delaware, they were dodging ice chunks to get across the
river to get to fight the Hessians that were camped on the
other side.
There were years in Europe when summer never came, and it
is documented. Hence, I really do believe in climate change.
But my question is this for Dr. Dayaratna. Is it reasonable
to use 285 years' time line projecting into the future, given
what we know and do not know about climate change that was
going on in the past? Is that an appropriate time line to guide
regulators?
Dr. Dayaratna. Thank you for your question.
I do not think it is an appropriate time line because it is
difficult to envision what things would look like that far into
the future, just like our Founding Fathers would have no idea
what the American economy would look like today. So that is
exactly why, when I reran these models in my work, I actually
re-estimated them using a shorter time horizon.
And my colleague, Pat Michaels, can also chime in on that.
Dr. Michaels. Yes, could you put up the last image I
showed? That one right there.
[Slide.]
Congresswoman Lummis, this is a graphic that shows the
profound failure of the climate models that are at the basis
for the social cost of carbon calculations. It is done by Roy
Spencer and John Christy. It was presented in front of this
committee. It is the free atmosphere temperature in the dots
and the squares taken from weather balloons and satellites, and
the red is the average of the United Nations climate models
that are capable of measuring free atmospheric temperature.
This graph speaks for itself. If you think we are supposed
to be able to do 285 years, the fact of the matter is, we
cannot do 20.
Mrs. Lummis. Now, Mr. Segal, given those responses, I want
to shift and ask this question. Can you explain how this social
cost of carbon rule is impacting the cost-benefit analysis of
major rules and regulations, like vehicle efficiency standards
and the EPA's proposed carbon regulations?
And I further want to ask you: do you believe that the
automobile, the internal combustion engines that we use today
in some vehicles, will be the same 285 years from now?
Mr. Segal. Well, I will answer the last one first. It might
be a little beyond my pay grade, but my supposition is no. I
think that automobility and also the way we generate
electricity are going to be profoundly different as time
marches on.
I also think that those technologies which we will deploy
to adapt to the effects of climate change, including flooding,
ocean acidity, you know, all of the 30 endpoints that the EPA
describes as the accepted endpoints for climate change damage,
adaptation is also going to occur that does not take into
account in a straight linear progression like these models are.
But as far as the question goes to process and procedure is
concerned, we are dealing with a situation of radical
uncertainty. I mean, you have seen--not only is the nature of
your question illustrative of that, but also the presentations
that have just been made.
The choice of the very models that went into this was never
subject to notice and comment, was never subject to any type of
an analytical framework, and even when the Interagency Working
Group asked for comment, they assiduously avoided comment on
the question of are the fundamental assumptions appropriate and
do they have legal authority to utilize social cost as a
mechanism to call balls and strikes.
And what is the result? On two separate fronts, the
Environmental Protection Agency utilizes social cost and also
utilizes something called co-benefits, which I know you are
very familiar with, claiming benefits on the health side to
augment the benefits case for rules.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Lowenthal.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
I just want to check just to understand where I am and ask
each member of the panel yes or no. Do you believe there should
be any social cost of carbon value that agencies should
incorporate into their cost-benefit analysis?
Do you believe that we should be coming up with some cost,
social cost of carbon value? Yes or no?
Dr. Michaels. Yes.
Dr. Dayaratna. No.
Dr. Dorsey. Yes.
Mr. Segal. I'm a lawyer. I can't do yes or no. After an----
Dr. Lowenthal. Yes or no?
Mr. Segal. After administrative process that's sufficient,
yes.
Dr. Lowenthal. OK.
Mr. Segal. Right now, no.
Dr. Lowenthal. So you believe it, yes. You are just
saying----
Mr. Segal. Yes.
Dr. Lowenthal. So you believe that it is not. So I believe
that three of you have said yes there is some social cost, we
should be having a social cost. So we are really arguing now
about a model, not whether we should be reducing.
Do you also agree we should be reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in order to lessen the impact on climate?
Dr. Michaels. Are we going down the platform?
Dr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Dr. Michaels. Not necessarily. There are some----
Dr. Lowenthal. Not necessarily. Thank you. That is it. Next
person.
Should be we lessening, should we be reducing greenhouse
gas emissions in order to lessen the impact on climate? Yes or
no.
Dr. Dayaratna. The short answer is no.
Dr. Lowenthal. No, and this is--and the first answer was
what, maybe?
Dr. Michaels. It was not necessarily.
Dr. Lowenthal. Not necessarily.
Dr. Michaels. Negative can be a benefit.
Dr. Lowenthal. So you are saying it is a benefit also.
Dr. Michaels. It can be.
Dr. Dorsey. Absolutely.
Dr. Lowenthal. Absolutely.
Mr. Segal. Sure, I will go along. Yes.
Dr. Lowenthal. So we should be reducing it. We are only
talking about now, the formulas that we use, not that it exists
at all.
So I want to ask how you came up with these kinds of
things. Dr. Michaels, your sensitivity estimates that you have
given us which you say reflect this new scientific reality, I
just want to say that in the past you also have had a number of
other predictions. You predicted that the Toyota Prius would
never be profitable because clean energy could not be cost
effective at scale. It is now the third best selling car.
You attacked the mainstream scientific position on the
depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer, and now we
understand that the mainstream position was right.
On climate change, you wrote in 2013, it is a pretty good
bet that we are going to go nearly a quarter of a century
without warming, and now we know that 2014 was the hottest year
on record by many indicators.
So with that kind of background, I am just trying to
understand who you are. You're a member scientist of the
Advancement of Sound Science Coalition, which is an
organization that was created and funded by the tobacco
industry to fight anti-tobacco legislation.
Now you work for Cato, which is a documented climate denier
funding, and you are asking us to trust you on that.
Were you a member scientist or did you play a role in the
Advancement of Sound Science Coalition?
Dr. Michaels. That was very long ago.
Dr. Lowenthal. Were you?
Dr. Michaels. If I played a role, it was certainly minimal.
Dr. Lowenthal. Were you a member?
Dr. Michaels. I have to address----
Dr. Lowenthal. Were you a member?
Dr. Michaels. Yes, I was. I was----
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
Dr. Michaels [continuing]. Not active. May I answer your
question, your assertion about no warming for 25 years and then
you said, well, 2015 is a very warm year so you have to be
wrong about that?
Dr. Lowenthal. 2013.
Dr. Michaels. 2013, 2015, whatever. The fact of the matter
is----
Dr. Lowenthal. You say in 2013 it is going to be a quarter
of a century without warming, and we now know that 2014 was the
hottest.
Dr. Michaels. Yes, but that did not induce a significant
warming trend. The problem is that there are so many background
years where there is no warming that even if we resumed the
warming rate that occurred from 1976 through 1998 of .17 +C per
decade----
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I do----
Dr. Michaels [continuing]. We would have to go 25 years to
get to a significant warming trend.
Dr. Lowenthal. I have one. Mr. Dayaratna, you work for an
organization that not only takes fossil fuel funding, it takes
funding from the two organizations--Donors Trust and Donors
Capital Fund, which are the largest funders of climate denial
efforts.
Does this money ever end up in your pocket?
Dr. Dayaratna. Congressman, I do not interact with any of
the donors whatsoever, and in fact, on the last page of my
testimony----
The Chairman. I appreciate your willingness and desire to
answer the question. Time has elapsed.
Dr. Dayaratna. OK.
The Chairman. I understand it is somewhat unfair to ask you
those questions when you have 2 seconds left, but tough.
So as we continue our expulsion of greenhouse gas with more
questions from the committee, Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to the witnesses for being here, and I will try
to speak softly so I put out less carbon dioxide.
I am reading an article from yesterday, and it was in
numerous publications, but it is saying that the Arctic ice cap
has not, contrary to the predictions of climate alarmists,
completely disappeared. In fact, it has been growing rapidly,
increasing by almost a third just in 2013 and more since. It
would suggest that the sea ice is more resilient perhaps. If
you get one more year of cooler temperatures, we would almost
wind the clock back a few years on this gradual decline that
has been happening over the decades.
And that was what Rachel Tilling was telling the BBC, but
the Arctic ice has, indeed, chewed up a bit and it goes on to
talk about its thickness and its size. Does anybody have an
answer for what is causing the increased ice in the Arctic?
Dr. Michaels. That is something called natural variability.
If I could expand upon your question with a piece of
information the committee may find interesting, a scientist by
the name of McDonald at UCLA has done extensive work on Eurasia
and has discovered that the high Arctic in the Eurasian area
was about 7 +C warmer, that is 13 +F warmer, on and off for
3,000 years after the end of this Ice Age.
That means for 3,000 years the Arctic Ocean was likely to
be ice free at the end of summer. That was the norm, not the
exception.
I would offer you the observation that the polar bear
survived and there is much corroborating evidence that shows
evidence for the ice-free Arctic Ocean for 3,000 years.
Thank you.
Mr. Gohmert. And I do appreciate information, Dr.--tell me
how to pronounce your name?
Dr. Dayaratna. Dayaratna.
Mr. Gohmert. Dayaratna. Thank you.
Because this was something that I had been thinking about
not from a scientific standpoint, but from the standpoint that
I am in now, and that is representing 700,000-plus people in
east Texas. But talking especially to my seniors, they tell me
that there is a tremendous social cost in not being able to
warm yourself in your home in wintertime, there is a tremendous
social cost in not being able to cool yourself in east Texas in
the summertime, that there is a tremendous social cost in not
being able to heat their food to the point that it kills
bacteria, and that there is a tremendous social cost in not
having advanced emergency rooms and operating rooms to take
care of them when they have a problem.
So I appreciate you taking that social cost into
consideration because, especially my seniors, but I think
everybody in Texas appreciates what we are able to do and
improve not just our standard of living, but our ability to
live, and that should be factored in.
Dr. Michaels, I was reading here that the warming of the
late 20th century as well as the cessation of warming that
occurred since 1998 fall well within the range of natural
climate variability. That seems to be an ongoing issue.
If I understand right from history, which was my major in
college, at the time of Eric the Red and others sailing,
actually things appear to have been warmer in Greenland than
they are today, more ability to farm.
Does anybody care to comment on that?
Dr. Michaels. It was not called Greenland because it was
red.
Mr. Gohmert. Pardon?
Dr. Michaels. It was not called Greenland because it was
red.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, were they able to farm?
Dr. Michaels. Yes, they were, and then when the cooling
occurred with the initiation of the Little Ice Age, it chased
the European settlers off of Greenland.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, they obviously were not taking accurate
temperatures back then, but from what data we have, was it
warmer back in those days----
Dr. Michaels. Yes, yes.
Mr. Gohmert [continuing]. Than it is today?
Dr. Michaels. And it was also apparently as warm if not
warmer in the 1940s, 1930s to 1940s and into the 1950s in
Greenland.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes.
Dr. Michaels. A lot of people do not know that.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, apparently there were a lot of carbon
emissions from those sailing vessels that came across the
Atlantic.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I assume I am going down the road with you.
OK. Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank the Chairman and the Ranking Member
for holding this essential hearing today. I do understand
people come at this from different viewpoints, but it is a
relief finally to see Congress debating at least a partial
solution to address climate change, even if some folks continue
somehow to deny its existence.
I thank the Vice Chairman, Mrs. Lummis, for saying out loud
that climate change is real. I thank all of our witnesses,
except apparently Dr. Dayaratna, for agreeing that there should
be a value assigned to the social cost of climate change.
The social cost of carbon is going to be one tool in our
arsenal to mitigate the effects of climate change. The idea is
pretty simple. We need to account for the negative or positive
carbon-related effects that a project or a regulation may have.
Understanding the environmental impact of a project or a
regulation is the essence of the idea of NEPA. It allows us
better to understand and value a proposed project or a
regulation based on its true impact to society, a goal we
really all ought to share.
One comment was made earlier in this hearing, that the
value that the Administration has selected for the SCC is not
based on peer-reviewed information. I would like to correct
that. The SCC was estimated using three integrated assessment
models called FUND, DICE and PAGE, each of which are widely
cited in the peer-reviewed literature and which are used by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
There was also a criticism that there was a lack of public
input in this process. Look, the first SCC estimates were
released in February of 2010. Dozens of opportunities existed
for public comment about the SCC directly and about rules that
incorporated the SCC. So I did not want to let those falsehoods
go unrebutted.
Dr. Dayaratna, you began your testimony with something that
has been intoned by many witnesses from The Heritage
Foundation, ``The views I express are my own and do not
necessarily represent those of The Heritage Foundation.''
Let me ask you a couple of questions, Mr. Dayaratna.
Dr. Dayaratna. Go ahead.
Mr. Cartwright. You are an employee of The Heritage
Foundation, are you not?
Dr. Dayaratna. Correct.
Mr. Cartwright. They pay you for working there; is that
right?
Dr. Dayaratna. Correct.
Mr. Cartwright. Are you on working hours right now?
Dr. Dayaratna. I mean, I do not see how that is relevant
right now.
Mr. Cartwright. Do they know you are here?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, they do know I am here.
Mr. Cartwright. If you do not want me to tell anybody----
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, they do know I am here, yes.
Mr. Cartwright [continuing]. Your secret is safe with me.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. I could not help noticing you submitted
written testimony as well; is that right?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. And that appears to be on Heritage
Foundation stationery.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, it is right here.
Mr. Cartwright. Are you allowed to use company stationery?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes. I mean, to be quite honest, if a
professor from the university comes here and testifies, they
may submit their testimony on the university letterhead.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you. We do expect----
Dr. Dayaratna. That does not mean that they are testifying
on----
Mr. Cartwright [continuing]. You to be quite honest, Dr.
Dayaratna.
Dr. Dayaratna [continuing]. Behalf of the university.
Mr. Cartwright. What I did notice when I went on the
official Web site of The Heritage Foundation, is it says in
black and white, ``Climate policy is used too often as a
vehicle to advance special interests and politically-driven
agendas that centralize more power in Washington.''
That is the official view, and it appears to be that they
are against climate change regulations and examinations of this
sort, and I suppose that gels very nicely with your view that
we should not be appointing a particular figure for the social
cost of carbon in distinction with all of the other witnesses
here today.
Are you telling us that your views and your opinions, that
coincide nicely with the official views of The Heritage
Foundation, do so as a coincidence?
Dr. Dayaratna. Again, as I was referring to earlier, if a
professor from a university comes here and they testify, they
may submit their testimony on university letterhead. That does
not mean whatsoever that they are representing the views of the
university.
And my views, again, as in my written testimony and as I
said today, do not represent those of The Heritage Foundation.
Mr. Cartwright. All of us who believe that climate change
is happening, I think all of us understand that the longer we
wait to address climate change, the more money we will have to
spend on adaptation relative to climate change, and that is why
I have introduced the bipartisan and heavily Republican
supported bill, the PREPARE Act, that requires all branches of
the Federal Government affirmatively to prepare and plan for
climate change into the future.
With that I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to specifically question Dr. Michaels and Dr.
Dayaratna. I am a physician by training. What we do is we
evaluate things based on evidence, what we call evidence-based
science. That is why modern medicine is so far advanced just
since the 1940s, and so that is key here.
Now from the data, what I see is that there is a zero
percent accuracy in prediction of global warming, which by the
way, experts tell me that if you cannot predict it, you do not
understand it.
So we have a zero percent prediction of global warming. But
we have 100 percent accuracy when it comes to economic damage
of global warming policies in terms of shutting down coal-fired
plants, the effect on the economy, on jobs, and on electricity
rates. So we are not really doing very well in dealing with
these policies.
But it is also interesting that whenever we get into these
discussions, and I must apologize to you for my colleagues who
would rather focus on who you work for rather than what the
actual science is. I think that is very telling, rather than
really let us talk about the science, and that is what is so
important.
Dr. Dayaratna. Thank you, Congressman.
Dr. Fleming. Also, I am going to give you a chance in just
a moment to respond any way you want, but the other thing is
since when did truth in science develop out of consensus? I
don't get that.
We don't get doctors together in a room and say we don't
know the answers to these questions, but we will just take a
vote and we will decide that that is the truth and that is how
we are going to treat disease. I have never seen that happen,
but that is exactly what is happening with this global warming
policy effort.
So I would like for both of you to respond to that.
Dr. Michaels. I will give you a brief story which will tell
you that it is worse than you even think it is. Every 5 years,
the U.S. Global Change Research Program is supposed to produce
a document assessing the effect of global climate change on the
United States, and to do this, they use computer models. The
first of these documents came out in the year 2000, and I
reviewed it, and I discovered that both of the models that they
used resulted in forecasts that were worse than a table of
random numbers. They actually supplied negative information.
So I wrote to the person who was the head of the USGCRP's
effort to produce this report. His name is Thomas Carl, and he
wrote back to me and he said, ``Yes, you are right. In fact, we
have run it for more multiple periods. What you found is
correct.''
And they went forward with the report. That is like a
physician prescribing a drug that he knows is either not going
to work or is going to harm the patient.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
Dr. Michaels. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. Yes, sir.
Dr. Dayaratna. OK. So thank you for your question,
Congressman.
I am trained as a statistician, not a climate scientist. So
in terms of the peer review, my colleague, Pat Michaels, is
probably more apt to answer questions like that.
Dr. Fleming. Sure.
Dr. Dayaratna. But as I described in my testimony, I
rigorously use the social cost of carbon models in my work with
my colleagues, and we noticed that they are basically nothing
but garbage in and garbage out. You can essentially manipulate
these models to achieve any estimate of social cost of carbon
that you would like, basically.
Dr. Fleming. Right.
Dr. Dayaratna. You can achieve a negative social cost of
carbon. You can achieve a positive social cost of carbon, and
you can achieve a wide range of estimates through the Monte
Carlo simulations.
Dr. Fleming. Right. So to give you a comparison, if we were
to send a rocket, say, and try to land on the moon and we go
through all of the mathematics and computer analysis, but we
begin with incorrect assumptions, it is probably not likely we
will make it to the moon, correct?
Dr. Dayaratna. Oh, no, absolutely not.
Dr. Fleming. So you have to start with known information or
at least information that the probability is very high to be
correct. But as you point out, we make all sorts of assumptions
in these computer models. We put them in, and then we spit them
out on the other end and we say the computer somehow knows the
truth.
Dr. Dayaratna. Absolutely.
Dr. Fleming. But the computer does not know anything that
we have not told it; is that correct?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, that is correct. I mean, in these
papers they have been cited in the peer-review literature, but
I mean, just because they are in the peer-review literature, we
need to rigorously check these models and look at them. As I
mentioned, they are nowhere near reliable enough to be used for
policymaking. Interesting academic exercises, though.
Dr. Fleming. Just quickly, I get the impression that
politics is leading science rather than science leading policy.
What is your opinion on that?
Dr. Dayaratna. That may be true. I think my colleague, Pat,
might be able to answer that question.
The Chairman. Saying it is true is good enough. You've got
that. You are over time.
Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for coming and talking with us.
Dr. Dayaratna, you cited three criticisms of the social
cost of carbon models, and one of them was the use of the
discount rate.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Mr. Beyer. And argued why not 7 percent.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Mr. Beyer. In fact, if you move it to 10 percent or 12
percent, you can get a really negative cost.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, probably.
Mr. Beyer. I am not trained as a statistician but rather as
an economist, and so the discount rate is used to determine the
present value of some future value, and pretty clearly the
discount rate should be the time value of money, which should
be the real interest rate, which should be the compound rate of
interest less inflation.
So how do we ever get to 7 percent when right now we have
an interest rate of zero, which may rise to a half or a quarter
percent or 1 percent in the years to come? How do you, even
looking at stock market or economic growth over the last
hundred years, ever get to a 7 percent when you take the
compound growth rate minus the rate of inflation?
Dr. Dayaratna. Well, I am just simply----
Mr. Beyer. We are trying here so hard to get to 4 percent,
less the 1 percent inflation rate, which would give us 2\1/2\,
3 percent.
Dr. Dayaratna. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
I am not even recommending this type of discount rate be
used. I am not suggesting that the 7 percent rate be the most
appropriate rate. I just ran 7 percent simply because OMB
Circular A-4, which I have right here, stipulated that 3 and 7
percent discount rates be used as part of this type of cost-
benefit analysis.
Mr. Beyer. Doesn't 2\1/2\ or 2 make much more sense?
Dr. Dayaratna. The IWG could use whatever rate they want,
but 3 and 7 percent must be used as part of this cost-benefit
analysis, according to OMB Circular A-4.
Mr. Beyer. Having been in business for 41 years, I would
love to have a 7 percent compound growth rate.
Dr. Michaels, every day, every day there is a new article
in the scientific journal, respected, because I get them all in
the incoming month, about the observable effects today, not
what the IPCC has generated will happen 5, or 20, or 30 years
from now, not a set of models of what the EC is.
I was pleased to see the one that Judge Gohmert mentioned
about Arctic ice increasing. It was one of the few outliers,
the only outlier I have seen in a year, and if you read the
entire article yesterday in the Post and the New York Times, it
actually talked about lots of increased melting but for this
winter period in the Arctic.
Look, it is Antarctic ice, 2014, hottest year, the animal
migrations, tropical disease spread, sea level rise in the
eastern United States and in the Pacific Ocean, deforestation
by insects, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So if we do not use the social cost of carbon, how do we
quantify this tragedy of the comments where every little
business or every consumer can use carbon and it does not have
any impact, but in the large thing we are destroying the
planet?
Dr. Michaels. Well, Congressman Beyer, thank you for being
the gentleman from Virginia that you are.
One thing that you did miss is that the earth has two
hemispheres, and in the southern hemisphere the Antarctic ice
has expanded as high as it has ever been measured. We do not
know why that is, by the way, and it is very puzzling to
climate scientists.
But other measures of human welfare and health argue that
the macro effects of climate are at least minimal. We live in a
world where life expectancy has doubled since 1900 in the
industrialized world. Per capita wealth, constant dollars is 11
times what it was.
Now, if life expectancy doubles for 200 million people,
that is the equivalent of saving 100 million lives. So it is
very hard, when you look at the gross figures as opposed to
this scare story or that scare story, to deduce a net negative
effect.
And I will leave you one which will seem so
counterintuitive, but you are an economist and you will say,
``Oh, yes, I get that.'' In 2004, Bob Davis and I published a
paper down at UVA in which we found that the more heat waves
there are in urban areas, the fewer people die from heat-
related causes. So as it gets hotter, people clearly adapt in
their life style.
There is one place in the United States where more people
are dying from heat-related causes, and that would be our
coldest city, which is Seattle.
Mr. Beyer. You should write a book called ``Freakenomics.''
Quickly, Dr. Dorsey, why not a social benefit of carbon?
Dr. Dorsey. Why not?
Mr. Beyer. Yes. Why don't we also include that as we look
at the social cost, to Dr. Michael's point about doubling life
span and others?
Dr. Dorsey. Well, I think implied in the social cost is
social benefit to some degree. I mean, we do not include it
because that is the way it is framed, but the reality is that
we have to look out into the future about these damages.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you for the tone of your
questions.
Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. The obvious question that arises as we talk
about climate change and global warming is exactly how long has
the planet's climate been changing. Any thoughts on that?
Dr. Michaels. Ever since we became a planet with an
atmosphere in rotation with an uneven surface.
Mr. McClintock. I believe that predates the invention of
the SUV, does it not?
Dr. Michaels. Yes. Climate is one of those variables that
the nature of climate is changing.
Mr. McClintock. How long has the planet been warming on and
off?
Dr. Michaels. The planet has been warming on and off for
that same period of time, probably about 3 billion years.
Mr. McClintock. Well, I mean just in the recent epoch, just
in the Holocene.
Dr. Michaels. There was a warming period at the end of the
Ice Age. Again, the Arctic ice was gone for much of the three
millennium period, then it cooled down----
Mr. McClintock. My understanding that I gleaned as a grade-
schooler on our field trip to the Museum of Natural History was
the planet has been warming on and off since the last Ice Age.
Dr. Michaels. Or within the Ice Age. May I dispel a myth
here? You will like this answer.
It was warm at the end of the last Ice Age, like I said. It
looks like it was 6 or 7 +C warmer in High Eurasia. The Arctic
Ocean was ice free at the end of summer. But at end of the
penultimate Ice Age, the one before this one, it was really,
really warm. We did not know how warm it was for a 6,000-year
period until a glaciologist by the name of Dorthe Dahl-Jensen
and her team drilled to the bottom of the Greenland ice. They
drilled beyond the 6,000-year warm period, and by looking at
the isotopes in the ice and some other aspects of the ice, they
could deduce how warm it was.
It was between 4 and 8 +C warmer for 6,000 years over
Greenland for that period. Now, it was thought maybe before
that it might have been 2 or 3 degrees warmer in the summer.
Let me just put that figure in perspective. That 6 degrees
times 6,000 years, 36,000 degree-years of warmth beating down
on the Greenland ice cap, it lost 12 percent of its ice. Human
beings could only do at best 5 degrees for 500 years. That is
2,500 degree-years of heat load. Nature did 36,000 and the
place survived.
That is the end of the Apocalypse. Thank you very much.
Mr. McClintock. And in the recorded history we know that
during the medieval warm period they were growing wine grapes
in Northern Britain, and Iceland had a thriving agricultural
economy for some 500 years.
We also know toward the end of the Little Ice Age, also
within recorded history, that exorcisms were being performed on
glaciers and people being burned as witches because they were
causing this terrible period of cold.
I cannot help but see certain parallels between those days
and these. My friends on the other side of the aisle remind me
of something Ogden Nash once wrote. He said, ``The ass was born
in March. The rains came in November. Such a flood as this,''
he said, ``I scarcely can remember.''
Let me go on. Has there been an analysis of how much damage
is already being done to the economy because of all of the
regulations and fees that are being imposed in the name of
saving the planet from global warming that has been going on
since the last Ice Age?
Dr. Michaels. It is a Sisyphean task, but we are working on
it in our laboratory.
Mr. McClintock. Well, if the planet continues to warm,
isn't plentiful and inexpensive energy a good thing, not a bad
thing?
Dr. Michaels. Yes. Kevin, why don't you answer that?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, Congressman. I have actually researched
this and looked at the economic impact of actually instituting
the proposed regulations associated with the SCC by instituting
an appropriate carbon tax in conjunction with what the SCC is
estimated to be, starting at $37, and we see pretty significant
impacts to the economy.
By 2030, there would be over 1 million lost jobs, 500,000
which would be manufacturing jobs, and a marked increase in
unemployment and a decline in personal income. So the country
would be much worse off actually as a result of these
regulations or taxes.
Mr. McClintock. Well, let me ask you this. Can we not
reasonably expect that the planet is going to continue to warm
and cool as it has for billions of years, whether or not we
deliberately impoverish our economy?
Dr. Michaels. Yes, and there will be an additional
increment probably of greenhouse warming in the 21st century.
Mr. McClintock. Let me make one other--oh, I am out of
time.
The Chairman. Yes, but thank you for telling me there was a
time when it would have been easier for me to get a tan. I
appreciate that.
Mrs. Capps.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this amazing
hearing and all of you for your testimonies.
I am going to start with the premise that is abundantly
clear to me, which is that the earth's climate is changing and
human activity is influencing these changes, and I believe we
need to stop debating this reality and start working on
solutions.
Second, the fact which was very well stated by Mr. Sablan
from personal experience, that the changing climate is already
negatively impacting our economy, our environment and human
health, and these impacts will only grow worse over time.
These changes include sea level rise, destruction of our
agricultural systems and food security, increased rates of
asthma which we see in southern California, more extreme storms
and droughts, among many others. These changes will not impact
all people or places in the same ways. So while precisely
predicting future outcomes, costs, and benefits associated with
climate change is difficult, scientists and economists can
provide good estimates of some of these impacts, and these are
what are used to calculate social cost of carbon, which is
essentially a policymaking tool, not perfect, but useful, and
hopefully will improve over time.
Mr. Dorsey, certain assumptions are important for any
scientific endeavor, including the development of models such
as the one used to calculate the social cost of carbon. In this
case the assumptions used for SCC are quite conservative, are
they not?
If all the known impacts of climate change were added in,
would we not likely see the cost estimate increase?
Dr. Dorsey. I think that is absolutely the case,
Congresswoman Capps. The reality is, like I said, some in the
fossil fuel sector have an incentive to basically augment the
discount rate as Dr. Dayaratna was proposing and essentially
reduce the actual cost.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Dr. Dorsey. The real huge cost, and many of which we are
not actually accounting for, there is a great number of omitted
costs that are not actually taken into account in this
valuation. It is, indeed, as you say, a tool.
Mrs. Capps. Well, let me turn to another topic which our
colleagues across the aisle have joined with the fossil fuel
industry in claiming the social cost of carbon will be used to
open the door to limitless new regulations.
But, Mr. Dorsey, is it not true that the social cost of
carbon actually serves as a limitation tool to ensure that the
benefits of reducing carbon emissions are properly accounted
for?
Dr. Dorsey. Absolutely. I would challenge this idea that
there are adverse effects on the economy. The reality is that
when we get carbon pollution out of the atmosphere not only
does it help to abate unfolding climate crisis and climate
change. It also addresses things like you just pointed out in
terms of pollution, asthma, and so forth, and a great number of
health concerns.
I think really to put it in a nutshell, there are no jobs
on a dead planet, and so we have really got to think about what
are going to be the steps to move us to quickly reducing carbon
pollution in the atmosphere that benefit not just the economy,
but society, the polity, as well as the environment.
Mrs. Capps. Right. And by setting a consistent value for
the cost of carbon, which many companies are already doing on
their own, doesn't the social cost of carbon actually provide
some long overdue certainty for the private sector?
Dr. Dorsey. Absolutely. A great number of companies in your
district as well as in many other Members' in this committee
districts are proposing actually quite more stringent steps in
reducing emissions, their own company emissions, and because
the reality is that doing so is good for their bottom line.
Mrs. Capps. You have already said a little about this, but
we have heard so much from the Majority that the discount rate
used for these calculations should be set much higher at 7
percent. Would you like to comment?
Do you agree? Wouldn't setting the discount rate so high
essentially say we place minimum value on the quality of life
for future generations?
Dr. Dorsey. A very high discount rate would indeed do that.
I mean, there is an argument that it should be negative and
thus driving up the social cost of carbon, and such a high rate
would actually accelerate the efforts to take carbon pollution
out of the atmosphere.
Mrs. Capps. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Dorsey. Thank you.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with Mrs. Lummis. I do not disagree with climate
change. I do disagree and I am not a believer in man-made
climate change. I think the climate has been changing, as we
have heard testimony earlier, since the beginning of time.
I will say this. Trey Gowdy from South Carolina, my
colleague, says that there is a stubborn thing about facts, and
that is that they are facts. So let's talk about some facts.
Let's talk about that the earth has been a lot warmer than
it is today in the history of man. In the period known as the
Medieval Period and during the Middle Ages, it goes by both
names, but somewhere 900 to 1300, somewhere in that period of
time the earth was a lot warmer than it is today.
In fact, the facts show that grapes were at a higher
latitude, and that means the earth was warmer during that
period, showed abundant crops. In fact, man did so well that we
saw this renaissance, for lack of another term, where
cathedrals were built and there was art, and man did not have
to struggle to survive as much as they do when it is colder.
In fact, the earth was warm. They had abundant food. They
were able to do a lot of things. In fact, the facts show that a
lot of Greenland was ice free. So the Nords settled on that
area and they fished. Those are the facts that can be proven.
I believe that my qualifier when I think about climate
change is the human standard of living. Are human beings better
off by using fossil fuels or not? And I would say that they
are.
Let's talk about some facts. The facts are better than
predictions. In the 1970s and into the 1980s, we saw a lot of
folks predicting the earth would be cooler. We are entering
into a little Ice Age.
In fact, in 1975, Nature magazine said this, ``a recent
flurry of papers has provided further evidence for the belief
that the earth is cooling. There now seems little doubt that
changes over the past few years are more than a minor
statistical fluctuation.''
James Hansen at NASA in 1986 predicted that temperature
changes of .5 to 1 degree higher in the 1990s and 2 to 4
degrees higher in the first decade of the 21st century. That is
a NASA scientist who is pointed to as a climatologist.
Accordingly, actual data shows that he was way, way wrong.
So you take that data from Mr. Hansen, and Mr. Bill McKibben,
who is a leading climatologist for global warming or what is
called now climate change, he predicted then using Mr. Hansen's
prediction, and he stated confidently that the world ``will
burn up, to put it bluntly.'' That was Mr. Bill McKibben.
We have seen nothing of the fact. All these predictions of
global cooling have been wrong. All the predictions of global
warming and what we would see in the 21st century were wrong.
But I will tell you this. Fossil fuels have dramatically
improved the lives of human beings. Man does better when it is
warmer.
I go back to the Medieval Period and the Middle Ages. When
it was warm, man did well. When it got colder, which it did
after what is known as the Medieval warming period, it got
colder and we had Bubonic Plague. Man does not do well when it
is cooler. They do better when it is warmer.
Fossil fuel has increased our abilities. In fact, because
of fossil fuels, we are now seeing China and India use more
fossil fuels and we are seeing the standard of living go up. We
are seeing personal percentage of GDP go up. We are seeing life
expectancy in China and India go up. People live longer. They
are living better lives because of fossil fuels. So I think
that ought to be the standard.
So in the 1970s, earth was going to be cooler. In the 1980s
and 1990s we saw it was going to be warmer. Now it is just
called climate change. I know this. I had a premature son. He
was able to go into an incubator. He was kept alive based on
that.
There are parts of the world that do not have access to
ready, reliable, affordable fossil fuels to generate
electricity. Because of that failure to have electricity, they
cannot have incubators or generators to do C-sections. Children
die. The infant mortality rate in areas that do not have access
to cheap, reliable, predictable electricity provided by fossil
fuels have very low life expectancies. Fossil fuels work.
That is the social cost and the moral cost of not having
cheap, reliable fossil fuels.
With that I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Dr. Dorsey, is the social cost of carbon a
brand new concept?
Dr. Dorsey. Absolutely not, no.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
Before the social cost of carbon, how would the government
value economic damages in the regulatory context, like damage
from flooding, increased health care costs, or the economic
damage to the agricultural sector?
Dr. Dorsey. Well, as I said at the outset in my testimony,
the typical method was to use benefit-cost, and cost-benefit
analysis to do so, to attempt to do so.
Mrs. Torres. And if we threw away the social cost of carbon
and stopped putting those costs on the blocks, would the cost
of those damages magically go away?
Dr. Dorsey. No, absolutely not. They would still be there.
If we opted not to value the cost of carbon----
Mrs. Torres. So there is no magic eraser and a board that
we can just make all of this reality go away?
Dr. Dorsey. Absolutely not, no.
Mrs. Torres. So are we already paying for these costs?
Dr. Dorsey. Well, absolutely. I mean, you take, for
example, in Alaska where a great number of communities are
already in the process of relocating. The low end of some of
those community relocation estimates put them in the two
hundreds of millions of dollars, sort of the middle range, half
a billion dollars to relocate communities that are suffering
the effects of essentially rising sea level on the North Slope
of Alaska.
We pay a great number of costs in terms of the health
effects from carbon pollution. We do, indeed, pay these costs
whether or not we decide to make the calculation or not.
Mrs. Torres. I live about 60 miles from the beach. I am
looking forward to having beachfront property in the near
future. So if we are already paying for these costs, all we are
doing with the social cost of carbon is really acknowledging
the existence of these costs, correct?
Dr. Dorsey. Right. It is a framework for acknowledging
those costs.
Mrs. Torres. It is a framework that we ought to be
utilizing as our population continues to grow and we continue
to expand, whether it is through development or just population
growth, preparation for that, correct?
Dr. Dorsey. That is right.
Mrs. Torres. Is there anything else you would like to add
to that?
Dr. Dorsey. Well, I guess I would add since the
conversation has moved this way a little bit, that I just re-
emphasize the point that this is not a new sort of approach. It
is one that is rooted in the peer review literature, and more
importantly, it is not a static measure. It is one that we can
re-evaluate and come back to and adjust going forward as we
learn more about the severity of the unfolding climate crisis.
And my colleague and I believe that the discount rate that
is being used is somewhat high and it needs to be lower to
reflect a much larger social cost of carbon.
Mrs. Torres. So what you are saying is that these policies
are really not written in concrete. We can go back and revisit,
should climate change in the opposite direction.
Dr. Dorsey. Well, absolutely, but the tendency is not that
it is going to go in the opposite direction. It is likely to
get worse really with that issue, and we can adjust as it gets
worse as well.
Mrs. Torres. Right. What do you have to say to first
responders? Their job is a bit more challenging as they prepare
to respond to catastrophes that happen because of climate
change.
Dr. Dorsey. Not being a medical doctor, I think that,
indeed, I would concur that the challenge is difficult. They
certainly need more and more resources. We know in a great
number of places, particularly take the tri-state area--
Connecticut, New York and New Jersey--in the aftermath of
Hurricane Sandy. Tremendous additional resources could have
been used in that area.
We know the same thing in the Gulf after Hurricane Katrina.
We are looking at the 10th anniversary of that. So I would say
that we need to provide more resources to first responders
certainly.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Before I go into my testimony, I would like to have the
Iran deal placed into the record in regards to trying to take
away coal from the United States but it is good enough to sell
to Iran for their uses.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
First of all, I am extremely disappointed that the Office
of Management and Budget declined to testify today. I am not
surprised though, as apparently the Administration is just
making this stuff up as they go.
The flawed estimates and the worthless models that are of
today's topic were developed behind closed doors and are so
indefensible that it makes sense why the Obama administration
will not want to send a single person to answer on those
questions.
Just as the President has used the Department of Justice,
the IRS, and the Department of Homeland Security as a political
weapon, he now has expanded his arsenal to include a new tool
for the EPA and his regulatory henchmen.
The far-reaching application of this new climate change
model is so broad and inaccurate that there is no telling how
many jobs will be lost as the President seeks to further his
far left political agenda by any and all means necessary.
The so-called social cost of carbon will result in the
death of the conventional cost-benefit analysis utilized for
the proposed regulations. It will be replaced with a system
that employs flawed calculations that are not based on real
science and which cannot be accurately reproduced in the real
world.
If we allow this to move forward, regulatory agencies will
be able to cook the books to whatever manner they dream of.
Now, Mr. Segal, it is great to see you. Because this
Administration continues to be so secretive about the new
climate change models, 10 U.S. Senators sent a letter yesterday
demanding the EPA provide all documents and communications
relating to the SCC.
Now, as you know, the Administration refuses to comply with
requests from Members of Congress about this new model and has
done so for some time now. In your opinion, why the secrecy?
And why didn't one of the President's minions show up today
to answer questions about the application of this new climate
change model?
Mr. Segal. Well, first of all, with respect to the letter
that was sent the other day from the Senate, it raised some
very, very important points and some of which I think you have
heard on review here. It said that the Administration has only
provided general information. They have outright ignored
requests for documents. They have not even discussed who the
actual participants were in the Interagency Working Group. You
would think that would not be deliberative. You could say he
was actually in the room. That does not seem too bad.
Also if you look at the GAO, the Government Accountability
Office's report on the development of this process, they spent
an inordinate amount of time talking about how the agency which
charges us the most for carbon regulations, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, actually played a
disproportionate role in the Interagency Working Group process.
Yet that was not what Howard Shelanski at OIRA testified to
last time he was before Congress.
So I do think it is a shame that a member of the
Administration cannot be here to testify on these matters.
Second, I really do not see the Administration as being
particularly transparent. Look, President Obama himself and his
then-head of the OMB, Peter Orszag, said we were going to be
the most transparent administration ever. That has not been the
case here.
In fact, the very way this document has been rolled out,
vending machines, small engines--and by the way, when they talk
about small motors, they are talking about motors that are
smaller than household blenders, all right?--and microwave
ovens, this is where we get our indication of the changes that
were made.
If they wanted to have an open and robust discussion, then
the owner of a major utility, for example, in Arizona ought not
to have to be looking to see what the coin-operated vending
machine folks are getting in their rules. It is obviously an
opportunity to hide the ball.
Last item, I have heard some Members of Congress say, and I
heard my colleague Dr. Dorsey say, that he thinks it ought to
be a negative discount rate because it ought to drive policy
outcome. I heard two Congressmen indicate it is a policymaking
tool. Ladies and gentlemen, if it is a policymaking tool, it
needs authorization by the policymaking body, the U.S.
Congress. We must be able to point to where in legislation this
is authorized, and then we must have full and robust notice and
comment rulemaking, starting with the choice and the
administrative record about the various records. We've got to
have it all.
Dr. Gosar. I believe the Antideficiency Act is very
specific about that. It must be defined specifically in statute
and policy, and then let's define the budget to go with that
before the agency or the President can spend it.
So I thank you very, very much for your testimony.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the narrow topic of today's hearing of SCC, we could and
have talked about many other peripheral issues related to the
social cost of carbon, such as the science, the models behind
the calculations, the impact of man on greenhouse gas emissions
and things like 300-year economic investment horizons.
In thinking about this in this narrow scope, I thought of a
quote by a guy who is recognized as a pretty smart guy in
today's terms, Steve Jobs. He said that you cannot connect the
dots looking forward. You can only connect them looking
backwards. So you have to trust that the dots will somehow
connect in your future. You have to trust in something, your
gut, destiny, life, karma, whatever. This approach has never
let me down and has made all of the difference in my life.
So if we think about the social cost of carbon, we know
that manmade carbon emissions can be traced back to the
Industrial Revolution, and as carbon emissions increased, real
wages increased, meaning that they rose faster than inflation.
Agricultural production increased, meaning food supply and
quality increased. Populations increased. Life expectancy
increased, and quality of life improved. Technology and health
care improved.
At the same time, poverty rates decreased. Mortality rates
decreased, and social barriers were removed. So until the EPA
figures out how to permit and regulate acts of God, then there
is not really anything we can do about autogenic greenhouse
gases.
And in the narrow window of the social cost of manmade
carbon, please help me look back and in the words of Mr. Jobs
connect the dots. So I've got just a series of questions here.
The first one is: can the increase in manmade carbon be
correlated with the advent of the Industrial Revolution and
advancements since then? Just go down the panel.
Dr. Michaels. Yes.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Dr. Dorsey. Yes.
Mr. Segal. Of course.
Mr. Westerman. Pretty obvious, pretty common sense. We can
look back on history and see that.
OK. So also to follow up with that, can multiple indicators
of quality of life and social benefits be connected to the
Industrial Revolution and advancements since then?
Dr. Michaels. Yes.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Dr. Dorsey. Yes.
Mr. Segal. Yes.
Mr. Westerman. Again pretty self-explanatory.
I took a logic class in college, and they said, if this,
then this. So if the Industrial Revolution correlates with
increased carbon emissions and the Industrial Revolution also
correlates with increased social benefits, is it fair to say
that as carbon emissions have increased, the social benefits to
society have increased?
Dr. Michaels. I believe I said that earlier.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Dr. Dorsey. Not exactly.
Mr. Westerman. Could you explain that more?
Dr. Dorsey. Well, I mean it does not necessarily follow.
Technology is not a static thing, and you certainly must be
aware of this based on the questioning here.
So it just so happens that we have found some technologies
that have been around actually a while that do not need us to
rely on fossil fuels and do not need us to rely on increasing
emissions, and so there is an opportunity we have to deploy
those technologies. Those are technologies in the renewable
space in terms of wind energy, in terms of solar energy, and
they----
Mr. Westerman. Many of those technologies we were using
before the Industrial Revolution, such as biomass and wind.
Dr. Dorsey. Well, on the wind side we certainly were using
them, indeed, and actually the evolution of wind, it comes
before the Industrial Revolution and has picked up in a certain
way where now we have the ability to do not just terrestrial
wind but a tremendous amount of power generation from offshore
wind.
Mr. Westerman. So we have developed technologies to better
harness the renewables in the future.
Dr. Dorsey. Indeed, and so we can cut our reliance on
fossil fuel.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Segal?
Mr. Segal. Well, what Dr. Dorsey just pointed out proves
why the social cost of carbon is completely bankrupt, because
the social cost of carbon looks at a 300-year time frame and
determines that we will have continued linear recapitulation of
the harms of climate change.
But as he has just discussed, technology is verdant.
Technology alters over time, and so our ability to adapt either
by adapting to the endpoints or by bringing new technology
onboard is important.
The underlying message of your questions though is
undeniably correct, and what I would suggest is there is an
excellent report entitled, ``The Social Costs of Carbon? No,
the Social Benefits of Carbon,'' that comprehensively attempts
to identify the social benefits of carbon. It was submitted for
the record for the social cost of carbon documentation of the
Interagency Working Group, and they, of course, did not respond
to it in their response to comments.
I might suggest if the Chairman is game or if you would
like that it might be submitted to the record. It seems like it
would be useful.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit that to
the record.
The Chairman. No objection. Done, and so are you.
Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate your indulgence and allowing us to expend a
little bit of CO
2
.
I appreciate the panel being here, and the line of
questioning on both sides has been very interesting. You know,
I am a farmer by trade and always felt that we considered
ourselves, the agriculture industry, being the original
conservationists and we understand fully the need to wisely
utilize the resources that are available to us and protect them
into the future.
But certainly to do that the best, most efficient way, you
have to have information, and good information, and so that is
why the subject of today's hearing is so interesting.
Just a couple of questions in the short time I have. First
of all, for Mr. Segal, in your testimony you have given several
examples of how the SCC can be used to skew cost-benefit
analyses of Federal regulations even though the courts have
ruled that a Federal agency must provide a complete analytical
defense of its model and respond to each objection with a
reasoned presentation.
You also state that one cannot consider the development and
use of SCC as anything other than a substantive rule.
So then does the social cost of carbon on its own
constitute a rule under the Administrative Procedure Act?
And if so, could not all Federal regulations utilizing SCC
be open to judicial review and then, in turn, be overturned by
courts?
Mr. Segal. Well, every step of that analysis, of course, I
agree with. The bottom line is people tend to think of rules as
impacting the direct endpoint of behavior, but the
Administrative Procedure Act is smarter than that, and it says
that changes in accounting principles, for example, that
reflect on the ability of the Federal Government to choose
outcomes, to reject a project, to implement a new rule are
themselves rules and must be treated with the full complement
of notice and comment rulemaking. That is something we have not
had.
Every argument in favor of the social cost of carbon has
proven the point of why they want this methodology to be used
as a rule, as a mechanism to affect rights and responsibilities
of people in the regulated community.
Take the discount rate. I love this. Give me a low enough
discount rate or a negative one and give me a long enough time
period, and I will justify the Federal Government expending
money on anything you can imagine.
Independence Avenue is busy. I have trouble getting across
it because I'm not so fast. If I wanted to build a bridge over
Independence Avenue and they told me it would cost $10 billion,
if I have a low enough discount rate and a long enough period
of time to add up the traffic safety deaths that would be
avoided by it, you will build that bridge.
And if you are mandated to do so by the approval of permits
through the Council on Environmental Quality's oversight of the
NEPA process or by Federal regulation, this tool can be used to
be an incredible waster of money.
And why? Because the Interagency Working Group says we have
ethical considerations which force us to use very, very low
rates and very, very long time frames because we want to be
leaders.
But that is what Congress is about. You make those choices.
That is not for a group of bureaucrats, when they will not even
tell you who is on the list at the IWG, to make those
decisions.
That is usurpation of power. It is contrary to our
Constitution.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, the issue of time is certainly one of
the more serious challenges that we face in important
infrastructure projects.
Mr. Segal. Right.
Mr. Newhouse. We are seeing that in my own state of
Washington as we try to develop an energy future for the modern
times.
So in pursuing permits and licenses and approval from the
Federal Government, delays in the NEPA process I think are
impeding both renewable and energy projects such as oil and
natural gas, coal, as well as pipelines, rail expansions,
terminals for exporting and importing, highways, bridges, even
if it is over Independence Avenue.
So could you or any of the others discuss how incorporating
the SCC does and will impact the current and future domestic
energy development?
We just have a very short time.
Mr. Segal. I will give 1 second on that. You need permits
to build infrastructure. You need infrastructure to realize the
benefits of our new energy revolution, and incorporating SCC
into that process stifles the ability to predictably get
permits to advance energy infrastructure.
Mr. Newhouse. Anybody else?
Dr. Dayaratna. The use of the SCC in rulemaking, and if you
actually implement it in terms of regulations or taxes, will
actually increase electricity costs.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up.
The Chairman. Mr. Hice.
Dr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very interesting. I appreciate each of you being here
today. The questioning has been very, very helpful in your
answers.
Dr. Michaels, let me just begin real quickly with you. I am
assuming it is correct for us to say that carbon dioxide can
have positive impact on vegetation and crops.
Dr. Michaels. Absolutely.
Dr. Hice. OK. With that, can you elaborate somewhat on how
the positive externalities such as this are insufficiently
modeled in the integrated assessment models?
Dr. Michaels. It is very clear that only one of them even
considers the fertilization effect of carbon dioxide. The other
two do not very well. Kevin would probably give a better answer
on that.
Dr. Hice. OK.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, the FUND model out of the three models
is the only one that actually considers the fertilization
impacts and the potential benefits of carbon dioxide emissions,
which is why it allows for a negative social cost of carbon.
And as I alluded to in my testimony, under some
circumstances the social cost of carbon can actually be
substantially negative depending on the equilibrium climate
sensitivity distribution and the choice of the discount rate.
You will actually notice the probability of the social cost
of carbon being negative, close to 70 percent. So, yes, that is
the short answer to your question.
Dr. Hice. OK. So what is the outcome of not including some
of this in the SCC?
Dr. Dayaratna. What is the outcome of not including the
benefits?
Dr. Hice. Right, in the models and so forth. If it is not
included, what is the outcome? What are we going to get?
Dr. Dayaratna. The SCC becomes inflated.
Dr. Michaels. May I offer another piece of information that
may not be right in your head? We now have 20 years' worth of
satellite data that measures the greenness of the earth, called
the normalized vegetation index, and the greening of the plant
as a whole, not just the increased agricultural production, is
stunning. And where it is greening the most are the areas of
the planet that were given up as ecological hell holes, the
Sahelian region south of Africa, the semi-desert region of
Western India, Southwestern Desert, Australia. These places are
greening up dramatically.
That is not considered one lick in any one of these models;
am I not correct?
Dr. Dayaratna. I do not know. I just do know that there are
potential benefits of CO
2
fertilization included in
the FUND model. Beyond that I am not completely sure.
Dr. Hice. OK. Well, keep your mike on. Let me go back to
the Circular A-4.
Dr. Dayaratna. OK.
Dr. Hice. There were some questions on this a while ago,
and of course, the discount rates of 3 and 7 percent were
supposed to be used, and it says, as I understand it, that if
others are appropriate, that they can be used in addition to
the 3 and the 7 percent.
So was there a violation? Just explain.
Dr. Dayaratna. I do not believe that Circular A-4 was
properly adhered to in the computation of the social cost of
carbon.
Dr. Hice. All right. So there is a difference between it
being properly adhered to and violating.
Dr. Dayaratna. No, I think Circular A-4 was violated.
Dr. Hice. OK.
Dr. Dayaratna. It specifically says in here that 3 and 7
percent should be used as discount rates.
Dr. Hice. Right.
Dr. Dayaratna. In addition to whatever else they want to
use.
Dr. Hice. Right. So it is pretty clear.
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes.
Dr. Hice. Mr. Segal, did you want to respond?
Mr. Segal. Yes, I just wanted to say one thing. If you
wonder why they chose--and this is awesome. Go to the response
to comments, and the IWG says the reason they chose the lower
number is because of, ``certain ethical considerations.''
The ethical considerations they are talking about is that
future generations should be treated with more speciality. I
think we would agree that that might be an important social
policy, but here is the point. This is supposed to be an
economic assessment.
Dr. Hice. Right.
Mr. Segal. Dispassionate economic assessment. If we are
going to do ethical considerations and base public policy on
that, that is for this chamber to decide, to authorize, and
then to have notice and comment, not for the agency, not even
the agency to make it up out of whole cloth.
Dr. Hice. While you are going, just keep elaborating.
Didn't this put some of the agencies in a difficult position? I
mean we've got what was put out for them to follow is violated,
and now in place of 3 and 7, we've got 2\1/2\, 3 percent,
whatever.
Mr. Segal. Right.
Dr. Hice. This puts agencies though in an ethical and
difficult situation.
Mr. Segal. Particularly agencies that might have the job of
authorizing the construction of infrastructure of the sort Mr.
Newhouse was talking about or other projects. Those agencies
are put in a terrible bind.
Dr. Hice. Ten seconds. Do you have something else?
Dr. Dayaratna. Yes, I was just going to add if you look at
the section in Circular A-4, intergenerational discounting, the
last paragraph it specifically says, ``If your rule will have
important intergenerational benefits or costs, you might
consider a further sensitivity analysis using a lower but
positive discount rate in addition to calculating net benefits
using discount rates of 3 and 7 percent.''
Dr. Hice. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. All right. Before I ask the last set of
questions, I want to thank you for spending 2 hours of your
time with us. I know it has been fascinating for you.
Mr. Lowenthal, do you have a motion to add something to the
record.
Dr. Lowenthal. Yes, I have some unanimous consents. First I
would like to ask unanimous consent to insert five articles,
three of them peer reviewed from Science that refute the graph
that Mr. Michaels first put up.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record the
most recent scientific articles on the mythical pause in global
warming. There are two articles here from the most recent
Scientific American Journal that says there is no pause in
global warming.
And I also want to ask unanimous consent to insert three
more peer-reviewed articles to refute Mr. Michaels' assertion
that CO
2
will only have a positive effect on crop
yield and the agricultural sector.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
I would also like to ask unanimous consent to have four
papers that were co-authored by Mr. Dayaratna----
Dr. Dayaratna. Excuse me?
The Chairman. No, I am just putting your stuff into the
record.
Dr. Dayaratna. Oh, those papers, yes.
The Chairman. Without objection that is ordered as well.
Dr. Dayaratna. Thank you.
The Chairman. Let me ask as we conclude this a couple of
questions just for the two of you.
Actually I feel like with some of the questions you have
been peppered with today, I should ask the first two witnesses
on the left as I am looking at you if you are now or have ever
been a member of the Communist Party.
Dr. Dayaratna. Excuse me?
The Chairman. Nothing. Never mind. That was sarcasm.
Obviously no one got it.
I have one question for Mr. Michaels. Mr. Segal talked
about the ethical consideration concept that was in there. In
your testimony you made a point that the social cost of carbon
should reflect relative impact, i.e., as I read that, that we
would be willing to pay more today if we knew that a future
society would be impoverished and suffer from extreme climate
change than we would be willing to sacrifice if we knew that a
future society would be well off and subject to more moderate
change.
Mr. Michaels, is that what the Administration's social cost
of carbon does?
Dr. Michaels. No. It goes the other way around,
unfortunately.
The Chairman. Give me 1 minute and explain why.
Dr. Michaels. What it does is it takes money from nations
that are wealthy, large amounts of money, and charges them much
for very little effect when, in fact, it is the poor nations of
the world that are affected mainly by climate change. We are
spending the money the exact wrong way.
The Chairman. Perfect. You did that in 20 seconds.
So what we have clearly heard today is, and we have gone
far afield talking about climate change because we are really
talking about this proposed rule on a social cost of carbon.
But what we clearly heard today is the models are iffy. They
can be changed dramatically depending on what kind of criteria
you use and the assumptions that you use.
In essence, what we have is a process that is being
proposed for the government to select winners and losers in the
future based on political considerations, which is why in my
humble opinion it makes this a really dumb rule, but that is
not unusual with a lot of the rules that we have been hearing
lately.
I have one last question for Mr. Segal if you would please,
and you have reported to a couple of people here, so I just
want to re-emphasize that you believe that this rule violates
the Administrative Procedure Act, and I appreciate that.
Is there any statutory authority for OMB of which you know,
because I know of none, that would purport to act on this
social cost of carbon?
Is there a statute that allows them to do that?
Mr. Segal. See, if they followed the strictures of the
Administrative Procedure Act, the first thing they would have
to do, Mr. Chairman, is explain what is the legal basis for the
rule and what is the purpose of the rule, and these are two
things that are controversial and can be utilized in the
context of judicial review later.
They have never explained the legal basis because there is
none.
The Chairman. All right. Last question.
Mr. Segal. Yes.
The Chairman. I have a question whether there is a legal
ability to do this, and also, is there a legal ability to
statutorily enforce this, which I do not think they claim they
have that in the process?
But that is the other question. I wanted to re-emphasize
this one last time. Is this therefore a potential
constitutional issue?
Mr. Segal. Well, I believe it is a usurpation of what are
political questions wrapped up in the guise of economic
assessment and then carried off by the executive branch.
Now, we have seen this in similar contexts before. So I
believe that is the heart of the constitutional issue.
There is one other constitutional issue, too. You have a
right if you are in the regulated community to know what of
your behaviors will cause what particular result, and since
there is radical uncertainty regarding these models, you cannot
know that. That raises other constitutional concerns.
The Chairman. Which makes this simply a political exercise,
not necessarily an exercise in policy.
Mr. Segal. Correct.
The Chairman. And there is no amount of procedure that can
cure the lack of statutory authority.
Mr. Segal. Right. You can do all the notice and comments
you want, but if you lose the argument that you do not have
legal authorization to proceed, procedure will not rescue you.
The Chairman. Thank you. And that ought to be a concern of
Congress as part of the discussion.
I thank the witnesses for your testimony and for the
Members who have been here asking those questions.
And for the four of you, Members may have additional
questions, and we will ask you to respond to those in writing.
Under Committee Rule 4(h), the hearing record will be open for
10 business days for those responses.
If there is no further business by members of the committee
and since I am the only one here and I have no further
business, without objection the committee stands adjourned
with, once again, gratitude for you being here.

[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[LIST OF DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
OFFICIAL FILES]

Items submitted for the Record by Chairman Bishop

Heritage Foundation report titled ``The Obama Administration's
Climate Agenda Will Hit Manufacturing Hard: A State-by-State
Analysis''; http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2015/02/
the-obama-administrations-climate-agenda-will-hit-
manufacturing-hard -a-state-by-state-analysis

Heritage Foundation report titled ``Loaded DICE: An EPA Model
Not Ready for the Big Game''; http: // www.heritage.org /
research/reports / 2013 / 11 / loaded-dice-an-epa-model-not-
ready-for-the-big-game?ac=1

Heritage Foundation report titled ``Unfounded FUND: Yet Another
EPA Model Not Ready for the Big Game''; http: //
www.heritage.org / research / reports / 2014 / 04 / unfounded-
fund-yet-another-epa-model-not-ready-for-the-big-game?ac=1

Heritage Foundation report titled ``The Obama Administration's
Climate Agenda: Underestimated Costs and Exaggerated
Benefits''; http: // www. heritage.org / research / reports /
2014 / 11 / the- obama-administrations-climate-agenda-
underestimated-costs-and-exaggerated-benefits

Items submitted for the Record by Ranking Member Lowenthal

Food and Energy Security article titled ``How seasonal
temperature or water inputs affect the relative response of C3
crops to elevated [CO
2
]: a global analysis of open
top chamber and free air CO
2
enrichment studies'';
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fes3.44/pdf

Science article titled ``Food for Thought: Lower-Than-Expected
Crop Yield Stimulation with Rising CO
2

Concentrations''; http://www.sciencemag.org/content/312/5782/
1918.abstract

Nature article titled ``Increasing CO
2
threatens
human nutrition''; http: // www.nature.com / nature / journal /
v510 / n7503 / full / nature 13179.html

Scientific American article titled ``No Pause in Global
Warming'' http: // www. scientificamerican. com / article / no-
pause-in-global-warming/

Think Progress article titled ``Faux Pause: Ocean Warming, Sea
Level Rise And Polar Ice Melt Speed Up, Surface Warming To
Follow''; http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/09/25/2562441/
faux-pause-ocean-warming-speed-up/

Science article titled ``The Effect of Diurnal Correction on
Satellite-Derived Lower Tropospheric Temperature''; http://
www.sciencemag.org/content/309/5740/1548.abstract

Science article titled ``Amplification of Surface Temperature
Trends and Variability in the Tropical Atmosphere''; http://
www.sciencemag.org/content/309/5740/1551.abstract

Science article titled ``The Reproducibility of Observational
Estimates of Surface and Atmospheric Temperature Change'';
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6060/1232.abstract

Fact sheet for ``Human and natural influences on the changing
thermal structure of the atmosphere''; (saved electronically as
PDF)

Santer et al. Catch Christy Exaggerating; http://
www.skepticalscience.com/santer-catch-christy-exaggerating.html

Satellite measurements of warming in the troposphere; https: //
www. skepticalscience. com / satellite-measurements-warming-
troposphere.htm

Report submitted for the Record by Congressman Westerman

A report prepared for the American Coalition for Clean Coal
Electricity by Management Information Services titled ``The
Social Costs of Carbon? No, the Social Benefits of Carbon''

[all]
