- THE IMPACTS OF FEDERAL POLICIES ON ENERGY PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE GULF

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPACTS OF FEDERAL POLICIES ON ENERGY PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH IN THE GULF

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, September 15, 2015, in New Orleans, Louisiana

__________

Serial No. 114-19

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-241 PDF                        WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Vacancy

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Parker, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel
------

(II]

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, September 15, 2015......................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     4

Statement of Witnesses:
Cassidy, Hon. Bill, a United States Senator from the State of
Louisiana..................................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Davis, Lori, President, RIG-CHEM.............................    38
Prepared statement of....................................    40
Henderson, Jonathan, JD, MBA, Manager of Gulf of Mexico Field
Operations, Gulf Restoration Network.......................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    35
Herbst, Lars, Regional Director, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region,
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, U.S.
Department of the Interior.................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    19
Leimkuhler, Joseph, Vice President, Drilling, LLOG
Exploration Company, LLC...................................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Mason, Joseph R., Hermann Moyse, Jr./Louisiana Bankers
Association, Endowed Professor of Banking, Louisiana State
University; and Senior Fellow, The Wharton School..........    41
Prepared statement of....................................    43
Vitter, Hon. David, a United States Senator from the State of
Louisiana..................................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

International Association of Drilling Contractors, Houston,
Texas, Prepared statement of...............................    69

(III)

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON THE IMPACTS OF FEDERAL POLICIES ON ENERGY
PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE GULF

----------

Tuesday, September 15, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

New Orleans, Louisiana

----------

The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., at
Louisiana Supreme Court, 400 Royal Street, New Orleans,
Louisiana, Hon. Rob Bishop [Chairman of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Fleming, Westerman,
Graves, Rice, and Smith.

The Chairman. This committee will come to order.

I appreciate the opportunity of being here. I also
appreciate our hosts here, and I would like to recognize at the
beginning Representative Graves for an introduction of one of
our hosts.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am honored that we have with us today a local artist and
Harley rider who has joined us this morning. He also happens to
be a justice of the Supreme Court, Justice John Weimer, who is
a graduate of Nicholls State University and Louisiana State
University Law School, the father of three great daughters;
and, of course, his wife Penny. We are very much honored to
have Justice Weimer here.
Justice, thank you very much for your efforts to raise the
court for us today.
Justice Weimer. Thank you, Congressman.
Bonjour, and bienvenue. That is Cajun French for ``good
day'' and ``welcome.''
My name is John Weimer. I serve on the court here, and on
behalf of the Chief Justice and my fellow associate justices,
we welcome you.
Over 200 years ago, one of the Founding Fathers of our
Nation recognized the economic and strategic significance of
Louisiana to the destiny of our Nation. Thomas Jefferson signed
the Louisiana Purchase just over 200 years ago.
One who had become president recognized the economic and
strategic significance of Louisiana to the destiny of our
Nation. Andrew Jackson risked his life on the plains of
Chalmette at the Battle of New Orleans.
What Jefferson and Jackson recognized over 200 years ago
has been realized. Louisiana fuels this Nation's economy with
oil and gas. Louisiana feeds this Nation with seafood, the
crabs, shrimp, oysters, fish, crawfish, and I understand an
occasional alligator harvested here in Louisiana.
Now, in the spirit of full disclosure, Congressman Graves
and I have a relationship. Our nephew, David Clavell, serves on
his staff, and in south Louisiana, that is considered a
relationship. David was involved in ensuring that we were here
today, and I commend him for his efforts in that respect.
We are very pleased to have you in this historic venue, in
this historic city, in our state of Louisiana. Again, bienvenue
and merci beaucoup.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Justice. I appreciate that,
appreciate being in this historic building, and for your
kindness in letting us in here.
Before you go, how do you say ``you all'' in French?
Justice Weimer. ``Y'all.''
The Chairman. OK, fine.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. You did that very well. Thank you so much.
The committee is meeting today to hear testimony on the
impact of Federal policies on energy production and economic
growth in the Gulf, and under Committee Rule 4(f), all opening
statements in the hearing will be limited to the Chairman, the
Ranking Member, the Minority Member, and the Vice Chair and
designees. Therefore, I am going to ask unanimous consent that
all other Members' opening statements be made part of the
hearing record if they are submitted to the Clerk by 5:00 p.m.
today. Hearing no objection, that is so ordered.
I am also asking unanimous consent that the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Rice, and the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Smith, be allowed to sit with this committee and participate in
today's hearing.
And last, should their schedules permit, I ask unanimous
consent that former House Members Vitter and Cassidy, who have
now moved over to the dark side, be allowed to sit with the
committee and participate as well. Hearing no objections, once
again, so ordered, and we appreciate all of you for being here
with us, with our committee.
I now recognize myself for a quick opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

The Chairman. I would like to first begin by thanking the
state of Louisiana for hosting us in this Supreme Court
building.
Today's hearing will focus on the current state of the Gulf
offshore energy production.
Energy production in the Gulf of Mexico is the energy
lifeline for our entire Nation, providing 17 percent of our
domestic crude and 5 percent of our natural gas. Those
percentages, though, are insignificant. The amount that is
being produced is important. The bottom line is we could be
doing better, we should be doing better, and this Nation must
have us do better.
While production in the Gulf has remained relatively
stagnant, skyrocketing oil and natural gas production on state
and private lands has propelled the United States to surpass
Saudi Arabia and Russia to become a global leader in energy
production. This newfound role for our country could not be
achieved, though, without the Gulf. Yet, we cannot take this
position for granted. If we indeed are going to be a permanent
leader in the area of energy production, so that we can be an
asset to our allies and we can actually not be bullied by OPEC,
we need to produce more on Federal lands and offshore. Both of
those are the purview of this committee, and that is why I am
happy to be here for this hearing.
Each Gulf state manages some acreage off the coast, but the
vast majority of the acreage in the Gulf of Mexico is managed
by the Federal Government, which has massive amounts of energy
resources. So, the question is: Is it being managed well? And
that is precisely the question we are here today to explore.
Are there examples of how the Interior Department has been
dead wrong in their so-called ``management'' of Federal lands
and offshore? For example, the Obama administration's 2010
moratorium, which shut down all drilling in the Gulf for months
after the Macondo incident. Thankfully that mistake was
eventually overturned by the court, but not without having some
severe economic consequences.
Agency regulations such as the proposed Well Control Rule
threaten another virtual shutdown. Some provisions of this rule
would actually undermine safety, rather than enhance it. If we
indeed have rules that are prospective, prescriptive, and
preclude the ability of having new innovations to promote
safety, we are not actually helping the situation at all.
Interestingly, after announcing this hearing, the Bureau of
Safety and Environmental Enforcement scheduled meetings in
Washington for today to discuss these onerous provisions. That
is quite a coincidence.
It is important to note that all Gulf offshore operators,
even the agencies, have undergone significant regulatory
reforms to ensure operations are safer than ever before.
Earlier this year, our committee explored that specific issue.
The conclusion was clear: overly prescriptive regulations such
as the Well Control Rule wouldn't just harm the Gulf
economically, it would impact our Nation as a whole. A
performance-based approach will allow for increased safety,
regulatory certainty, and will allow agencies to keep pace with
the technology curve. Our hearing, I hope, will support that
premise today.
Other Federal measures, such as the crude export ban, limit
new market opportunities and U.S. production potential. EIA
reported recently that they found that lifting the crude export
ban would result in higher wellhead prices for domestic
producers, who would respond with additional production, while
potentially lowering gas prices for American families.
The same is true for LNG exports. We should encourage the
production of affordable energy, not continue policies that
force companies to shut down those resources because they are
not economic to bring to market. It is important for our
economy that we encourage affordable energy, and it is
important for people and their lives that we have affordable
energy.
What we have seen recently is two offshore lease sales that
yielded the lowest number of bids in over 20 years, natural gas
production is falling, offshore crude production only now is
showing signs of recovery since the moratorium, and the
Interior Department continues to require nonsensical
regulations. This is not the path that will keep our Nation on
a path forward through a position of energy strength.
There are thousands of employees who work off these coasts,
and they deserve better. Day in and day out, the Gulf Coast
residents go to work to support this critical energy
infrastructure. They are vested in keeping these operations
safe and to protect the beaches and the Atlantic waterways that
they visit with their families. This industry is their
livelihood. That is significant.
I look forward to hearing from witnesses on the significant
impact of the Federal Government's regulations and recognize
the importance of the Gulf's energy to the economic lifeline of
our Nation.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bishop follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rob Bishop, Chairman, Committee on
Natural Resources
I'd like to first begin by thanking the great state of Louisiana
for hosting us in their Supreme Court building. Today's hearing will
focus on the current state of Gulf offshore energy production. Energy
production in the Gulf of Mexico is an energy lifeline for our Nation--
today providing 17 percent of our domestic crude and 5 percent of our
natural gas.
While production in the Gulf has remained relatively stagnant over
the past several years, skyrocketing oil and natural gas production on
state and private lands has propelled the United States to surpass
Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the global leader in energy
production. This newfound role for our country could not be achieved
without the Gulf. Yet, we cannot take this position for granted.
While each Gulf state manages some acreage off their coasts--the
vast majority of acreage in the Gulf of Mexico is managed by the
Federal Government, and it contains a massive amount of energy
resources. The question is: Is it being managed well? That is precisely
the question we're here today to explore.
Many examples demonstrate how the Interior Department has been dead
wrong in their so-called ``management'' of Federal lands. For example,
the Obama administration's 2010 moratorium, which shut down all
drilling in the Gulf for months after the Macondo incident. Thankfully,
that costly mistake was eventually overturned by the courts--but not
without severe economic consequences.
Agency regulations such as the proposed well-control threaten
another moratorium by shutting down the majority of the Gulf rig fleet.
Some provisions of this rule could actually undermine safety, rather
than enhance it. Interestingly, after we announced this hearing, the
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement scheduled meetings in
Washington for today to discuss these onerous provisions. That is quite
the coincidence.
It is important to note that all Gulf offshore operators--even the
agencies--have undergone significant regulatory reforms to ensure
operations are safer than ever before. Earlier this year, our committee
explored that specific issue. The conclusion was clear: overly
prescriptive regulations such as the Well Control Rule wouldn't just
harm the Gulf economically--it would impact our Nation as a whole. A
performance-based approach will allow for increased safety and
regulatory certainty, and will allow agencies to keep pace with the
technology curve.
Other Federal measures, such as the crude export ban, limit new
market opportunities and U.S. production potential. An EIA report
released earlier this month found that lifting the crude export ban
would result in higher wellhead prices for domestic producers, who
would then respond with additional production--all while potentially
lowering gas prices for American families.
The same is true for LNG exports. We should encourage the
production of affordable energy, not continue decades-old policies that
force companies to shut-in those resources because they are not
economic to bring to market.
What we have seen recently is two offshore lease sales yielding the
lowest number of bids in over 20 years, natural gas production is
falling, offshore crude production only now showing signs of recovery
since the moratorium, and the Interior Department continues to issue
nonsensical regulations. This is not the path that will keep our Nation
on a path forward through a position of energy strength.
The thousands of employees who work off these coasts deserve
better. Their hard work has helped decrease our dependence on foreign
oil. Day in, day out--Gulf Coast residents go to work on rigs, vessels
or small businesses that support this critical energy infrastructure.
They are vested in keeping these operations safe--to protect the
beaches and inland waterways they visit with their families. This
industry is their livelihood.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the Federal
Government's harmful regulations and to recognize how important the
Gulf's energy and economic lifeline is to our Nation.

______

Now I would also like to introduce our first panel who is
with us today. We have both Senators from the great state of
Louisiana who are here, The Honorable Bill Cassidy and The
Honorable David Vitter.
Mr. Cassidy, on my script I have you actually going first.
Do you two care? Do I go on seniority? Do I go on who can give
me the most money?
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Seniority, then, it is.
Senator Vitter, Representative Vitter, we are happy to have
you here. We would ask you for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID VITTER, A UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM
THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Senator Vitter. Thank you very much, Chairman Bishop and
members of this committee, for being here--welcome to
Louisiana--and for holding this important hearing on the
impacts of Federal policies on energy production and economic
growth in the Gulf. And a special thanks to Congressmen Fleming
and Graves for inviting me here and hosting me here.
Mr. Chairman, in the spirit of your earlier comments, just
for the record, don't drink from the water fountains on the
Senate side. I try to maintain a strong, vibrant House
personality. So, in that spirit, I would love to join the
committee after our testimony, but unfortunately I have to go
immediately to the airport to return for votes.
It has been nearly 5\1/2\ years since the BP disaster
devastated the Gulf region. Beyond the economic and
environmental consequences--which were major, and of course we
will talk about those--I want to begin by acknowledging the
human tragedy and the loss of 11 fine men who were working on
the rig: specifically Jason Anderson, 35, of Midfield, Texas;
Aaron Dale ``Bubba'' Burkeen, 37, of Philadelphia, Mississippi;
Donald Clark, 49, of Newellton, Louisiana; Stephen Ray Curtis,
40, of Georgetown, Louisiana; Gordon Jones, 28, of Baton Rouge,
Louisiana; Roy Wyatt Kemp, 27, of Jonesville, Louisiana; Karl
Dale Kleppinger, Jr., 38, of Natchez, Mississippi; Keith Blair
Manuel, 56, of Gonzales, Louisiana; Dewey Revette, 48, of State
Line, Mississippi; Shane Roshto, 22, of Liberty, Mississippi;
and Adam Weise, 24, of Yorktown, Texas. I think it is very
important to acknowledge that horrible human loss and remember
them, and their families, in our prayers.
For 3 months after that horrendous explosion, more than 200
million gallons of crude oil spilled into the Gulf of Mexico,
resulting in billions of dollars of economic and environmental
damages that the Gulf region is still recovering from.
But, Mr. Chairman, there was additional great loss, and
that additional great loss was completely avoidable. That came
from the Obama administration's short-sighted and knee-jerk
reaction, particularly in the way they imposed a 6-month
drilling moratorium, and after that a de facto moratorium or
``permatorium'' that only compounded and multiplied the
devastation of the spill.
That is important to note because I think that is the
continuing context that some of these overly onerous
regulations are part of. It is part of a devastating pattern.
This initial moratorium was particularly noteworthy because
President Obama's White House put out statements saying,
suggesting that the panel of experts they immediately empaneled
after the spill recommended the moratorium.
That was a lie, a flat-out lie, and the experts eventually
said that and made that clear. So the Administration just used
that to justify a needless moratorium and all of the economic
costs that it brought with it.
In the years since, I have worked with many others to
ensure that this kind of tragedy and subsequent economic loss
never happens again. Certainly as a state and a Nation, we need
a clear and a strong regulatory scheme that promotes stringent
safety standards while allowing the industry to thrive and do
its business. While many important reforms have been made,
there is still important work to be done.
Louisiana's offshore oil and gas development isn't just one
of the state's largest economic drivers; it is a way of life
for so many, providing careers and livelihoods for so many in
the region. The industry has operated harmoniously alongside
other critical offshore and coastal industries, like commercial
and recreational fishing and tourism.
While the recent energy boom of the last few years in the
United States has helped Louisiana recover from President
Obama's drilling moratorium with a dramatic dip in price, I am
particularly concerned now about the continuing regulatory
avalanche coming from the Obama administration aimed at oil and
gas.
I know that this committee and others are examining the
Department of the Interior's proposed Well Control Rule, and I
encourage those determined efforts. Some stakeholders have
conveyed to me that that proposal could have substantial
economic impacts throughout the offshore oil and gas supply
chain, which our state and region cannot afford. So, we must
get to the bottom of that.
President Obama's attack on the oil and gas industry is not
restricted to offshore exploration and development. There are a
myriad of regulations coming our way that will have disastrous
effects on onshore oil and gas businesses, such as the recently
proposed methane rules for upstream oil and gas operations and
the pending proposal to reduce the standard for ground-level
ozone. These proposals, and many others that this and other
committees have looked at, are likely to impose dramatic new
economic burdens on the industry, which has been one of the few
bright spots in the economy under President Obama.
So again, Mr. Chairman, I think the key point is that this
is part of a pattern. It is a pattern we saw starting with the
moratorium which was based on lies out of the White House about
the recommendations of the panel of experts. It is a pattern
that includes many, many regulatory overreaches, significant
new burdens being placed on the economy with little or no
positive health, safety, or environmental impact.
Protecting the health of the oil and gas industry is
critical for all of us, for Louisiana and for the Nation. So,
Mr. Chairman, thank you for this opportunity to testify and for
this committee coming to the Gulf, coming to Louisiana as part
of that important effort.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vitter follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. David Vitter, a United States Senator
from the State of Louisiana
Thank you Chairman Bishop and members of this committee for holding
this important hearing on ``The Impacts of Federal Policies on Energy
Production and Economic Growth in the Gulf.''
It has been nearly 5\1/2\ years since the Deepwater Horizon
explosion and subsequent oil spill, which killed 11 men who worked on
the rig. Their names were: Jason Anderson, 35, Midfield, Texas; Aaron
Dale ``Bubba'' Burkeen, 37, Philadelphia, Mississippi; Donald Clark,
49, Newellton, Louisiana; Stephen Ray Curtis, 40, Georgetown,
Louisiana; Gordon Jones, 28, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Roy Wyatt Kemp,
27, Jonesville, Louisiana; Karl Dale Kleppinger, Jr., 38, Natchez,
Mississippi; Keith Blair Manuel, 56, Gonzales, Louisiana; Dewey
Revette, 48, State Line, Mississippi; Shane Roshto, 22, Liberty,
Mississippi; and Adam Weise, 24, Yorktown, Texas.
The leak went on for about 3 months, dumping more than 200 million
gallons of crude oil into the Gulf and resulting in untold billions of
dollars in economic damages. Our economy and environment are still
recovering from it today.
Worse than the spill itself, however, was the way in which the
Administration reacted to it by imposing a 6-month drilling moratorium
and, after that, a de-facto moratorium that had devastating economic
impacts throughout Louisiana and the Gulf Coast.
Despite the tragic events of 5\1/2\ years ago, offshore oil and gas
development has played a huge role in our economy for decades and has
operated extremely well alongside other critical offshore and coastal
industries like fishing and tourism. For example, in 2013 there were
nearly 130,000 direct and indirect jobs in Louisiana supported by the
offshore energy industry. At the same time, our state set an all-time
record for tourism, attracting 27.3 million visitors who spent $10.8
billion and contributed $800 million in state tax revenues. On top of
all that, one-third of the fish caught in the Lower 48 are landed right
here in Louisiana.
While the recent energy boom in the United States has helped
Louisiana recover from President Obama's disastrous drilling moratorium
and de-facto moratorium, I am deeply concerned about a regulatory
avalanche coming from the Obama administration, aimed toward oil and
gas.
This committee is familiar with the Department of the Interior's
proposed Well Control Rule. After Deepwater Horizon, a number of
changes were made by industry and the Federal Government to improve
offshore safety, and much progress has been made in ensuring that such
a disaster never happens again.
But what has been conveyed to me about this well control proposal
is that it will have substantial economic impacts throughout the
offshore oil and gas supply chain and could lead to another offshore
drilling moratorium. That would obviously be crippling to Louisiana and
its economy.
But there are also threats to industry onshore, such as the
recently proposed methane rules for upstream oil and gas operations,
and the pending proposal to reduce the standard for ground level ozone,
both of which are EPA regulations.
These proposals, and several others that this and other committees
have looked at, are going to impose substantial economic burdens on the
oil and gas industry, which has been one of the few bright spots in the
Obama economy. A healthy oil and gas industry--both onshore and
offshore--is critical to having a vibrant economy in Louisiana and
throughout the Gulf Coast.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for inviting me to testify today.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, Senator. We appreciate you being
here and giving us your testimony. We also wish you could stay
with us. We realize you have to go, but thank you for what you
are doing for the Nation, as well as for your home state. Thank
you very much.
Next we turn to Congressman-turned-Senator Cassidy. You are
recognized for your opening statement as well.

STATEMENT OF HON. BILL CASSIDY, A UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM
THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Senator Cassidy. Mr. Bishop, thank you for your testimony,
which I found excellent.
Representative Smith, I am glad to see you survived your
gator hunt.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cassidy. I hope it was productive.
I thank you all for being here and for holding this hearing
today, bringing greater attention to the energy production and
its economic impact along the Gulf Coast.
The energy activities in the coastal Gulf states and the
adjacent offshore waters have produced billions of barrels of
oil and trillions of cubic feet of natural gas. They have been
an important contributor to the domestic energy production
which is critical for our country's energy independence and
security. Every barrel of oil and cubic foot of natural gas
produced in the Gulf of Mexico eliminates the need for energy
from foreign sources.
Unfortunately, the actions and policy of this
Administration are counter-productive, literally. For example,
one thing that is of particular importance to us in Louisiana
is the Administration's proposal to redirect coastal
restoration funds, or GOMESA funds, that are scheduled to come
to Louisiana beginning in 2017. A little ironically, a few
weeks ago President Obama visited New Orleans to commemorate
the region's rebirth on the 10th anniversary of Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita. Yet, the sustainability of Louisiana's
recovery is being placed in jeopardy by the President's Fiscal
Year 2016 budget proposal. This proposal would redirect revenue
derived from the energy production off Louisiana's coast toward
unrelated projects. Louisiana is relying upon this revenue
because, by our state constitution, it will be used to restore
Louisiana wetlands.
Now, just to put this in perspective, Louisiana is
experiencing unparalleled land loss due to Federal engineering
decisions made nearly a century ago that have channeled the
lower Mississippi River system for the benefit of the rest of
the Nation. Louisiana's 2,300 square miles of land loss is
largely attributed to this channelization, which was abetted by
the placement of levies along the river system, and this has
converted a once-growing delta plain to the greatest source of
wetlands loss in our history.
Louisiana is counting on the revenues derived from offshore
energy production to fund a portion of the projects necessary
to restore our coast. Close to 18 percent of Louisiana's oil
production and about 24 percent of its natural gas production
originates, is transported through, or is processed in
Louisiana's coastal wetlands. This is important not just for us
but, as this shows, also for the rest of the Nation, and
Congressman Graves is the expert on this.
Over 500 tons of water-borne cargo passes through
Louisiana's system of deep draft ports and navigational
channels each year. If the present land loss rates continue,
more than 155 miles of waterways and several ports will be
exposed to open water within 50 years. This is important not
just for Louisiana, but for all those farmers in the
Mississippi Valley system who rely upon these ports to send
their products to international markets.
Now, related to this, Louisiana depends upon the revenue
from production in the Gulf of Mexico, as does the Nation, to
restore our wetlands. A second way the Obama administration's
policies negatively affect this revenue stream is by locking up
the Outer Continental Shelf's acreage which could be leased.
Under this Administration, as you noted, Mr. Chairman, less
than 2 percent of the 1.71 billion Federal Outer Continental
Shelf acreage is under lease. Over 63 million acres in the Gulf
of Mexico alone remain locked up. This lost opportunity results
in fewer jobs, less government revenue, and a greater reliance
upon foreign sources of oil.
If the draft proposed plan for offshore production is
finalized in 2016, the Obama administration will have
effectively controlled a decade of offshore oil and gas lease
planning. The draft 5-year plan for 2017 to 2022 lists 14
sales. As you noted, this is the lowest number of lease sales
in the 42-year history of the planning process.
Now, the second issue is supply constraints or access.
Despite the Obama administration's policies, according to the
Energy Information Administration, in the short term the Gulf
of Mexico is expected to defy the overall trend of decreased
production domestically because of lower oil prices, et cetera,
and will continue to produce oil.
However, these offshore fields require both surface and
subsea production equipment, and if the low oil price persists
and operators cannot develop unique ways to decrease the
capital required for these new projects and/or improve recovery
rates, production will slip, and that in turn will negatively
impact both jobs, Federal revenue through lease sales, as well
as the amount of revenue Louisiana has to rebuild its
coastline.
This is exacerbated by the excess regulations that you
noted and that Senator Vitter also noted. The estimates of the
cost of these would be as much as $10-$30 million, in addition
to the increased expenditures required under previously issued
regulations. The industry estimates the 10-year cumulative cost
of these rules to be approximately $32 billion.
In response to this problematic regulatory climate, I,
along with Senator Vitter, drafted a bill that became Title 1
of the OPENS Act, legislation that was reported out of the
Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee last month. As
from the title, the OPENS Act opens up more acreage for energy
production offshore. For example, some would open up the
Eastern Gulf of Mexico by redefining the Eastern Gulf moratoria
of 2017.
In addition to expanding energy supply, according to a 2014
study, by 2035, Eastern Gulf offshore natural gas development
would produce nearly 1 million barrels of oil equivalent per
day, generating nearly 230,000 jobs, contributing over $18
billion per year to the U.S. economy, and generating $70
billion in cumulative government revenue.
So, to conclude, the rise in production in the Gulf of
Mexico is occurring due to large reserves and production
efficiencies that streamline operational drilling costs.
Although the long lead time and significant capital investment
required to drill somewhat insulates production activity from
short-term price volatility, the Obama administration's
offshore drilling plan and proposed regulations could erode the
economic viability of future well production in the Gulf of
Mexico.
We must provide a regulatory environment to produce
offshore oil and gas in a safe, economical way, while allowing
access to the large undiscovered, technically recoverable oil
and gas revenues on the Federal lands offshore. It is critical
that production continue to grow in the Gulf of Mexico to
protect and sustain our energy independence and to create the
good jobs with good benefits for which there are far too few in
today's economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cassidy follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Bill Cassidy, a United States Senator
from the State of Louisiana
Thank you Chairman Bishop and members of the House Natural
Resources Committee for holding this field hearing today in Louisiana
and bringing greater attention to the energy production and economic
growth occurring along the Gulf Coast.
Energy activities in coastal Gulf states and adjacent offshore
waters have produced billions of barrels of oil and trillions of cubic
feet of natural gas.
Domestic energy production is critical for our country's energy
independence and security. Every barrel of oil and every cubic foot of
natural gas produced in the Gulf of Mexico eliminates the need for
energy from foreign sources. According to the Energy Information
Administration, about 27 percent of U.S. oil is imported.
Unfortunately, the actions and policies of this Administration are
counterproductive.
i. redirection of coastal restoration funds
A few weeks ago, President Obama visited New Orleans to commemorate
the region's rebirth on the 10th anniversary of Hurricanes Katrina and
Rita. Yet, the sustainability of Louisiana's recovery was placed in
jeopardy by the President's Fiscal Year 2016 budget proposal. His
budget proposed to redirect revenue derived from energy produced off of
Louisiana's coast toward unrelated projects. This money, as prescribed
by Louisiana's State Constitution, would be used to restore Louisiana's
wetlands.
Louisiana is experiencing unparalleled land loss due to Federal
engineering decisions for nearly a century that have channeled the
lower Mississippi River System for the benefit of the entire country.
Louisiana's 2,300 square miles of land loss is largely attributed to
this channelization, which abetted by the placement of Federal levees
along the river system, has converted a once-growing delta plain to the
greatest source of wetlands loss in the history of the United States.
Louisiana is counting on the revenues derived from offshore energy
production to fund a portion of the projects necessary to restore our
coast. This is important not just for Louisiana but also for the
Nation. Close to 18 percent of U.S. oil production and about 24 percent
of U.S. natural gas production originates, is transported through, or
is processed in Louisiana's coastal wetlands.
Over 500 million tons of waterborne cargo passes through
Louisiana's system of deep-draft ports and navigational channels each
year. If present land loss rates continue, more than 155 miles of
waterways and several of the ports will be exposed to open water within
50 years. Farmers and manufacturers in the Mississippi, Missouri, and
Ohio valley will lose ability to get their products exported to
international markets as this occurs.
Related to this, if Louisiana and the Nation depends upon revenue
from production in the Gulf to restore our wetlands, a second way the
Obama administration's policies negatively affects the revenue stream
is by locking up OCS acreage which could be leased. America cannot
afford policies that put our wetlands, economic and energy
infrastructure at risk.
Under this Administration, less than 2 percent of the 1.71 billion
Federal OCS acreage is under lease. Over 63 million acres in the Gulf
of Mexico, alone, remains locked up. This lost opportunity results in
fewer jobs, less government revenue, and a greater reliance on foreign
sources of oil.
If the Draft Proposed Plan for offshore production is finalized in
2016, the Obama administration will have effectively controlled a
decade of offshore oil and gas lease planning. The draft 5-year plan
for 2017-2022 lists 14 lease sales--the lowest number of lease sales in
the 42-year history of the planning process.
ii. supply constraints (access)
Despite this headwind, counter-cyclical growth is occurring along
the Gulf Coast. According to the Energy Information Administration, in
the short term, the Gulf of Mexico is expected to defy the overall
trend and increase production in the lower oil price environment, but
if oil prices remain depressed for an extended period, the long-term
outlook of the region changes drastically.
Development of offshore fields requires both surface and subsea
production equipment. The high cost of surface structures limits their
application to large fields.
Now, the Obama administration is proposing complex rules that will
increase the cost of development and erode away the economic viability
of well production, which combined with depressed oil prices, will
further hamper future production in the Gulf of Mexico.
iii. excess regulation
As an example, drilling in the Gulf of Mexico may shut down for
over 12 months until all requirements are met. The Well Control Rule
could drive up the cost per well by $10-$30 million. Industry studies
estimate that the 10-year cumulative cost of the rule to be
approximately $32 billion.
In response to this problematic regulatory climate, I, along with
Senator Vitter, drafted a bill that became Title 1 of the OPENS Act--
legislation that was reported out of the Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee last month. As one could tell from its title, the
OPENS Act opens up acreage for energy production offshore.
Our portion of the bill provides new access to frontier acreage in
the Gulf of Mexico in areas 50 miles outside the Florida coastline by
redefining the Eastern Gulf moratoria in 2017. According to current
law, the moratoria is scheduled to expire in 2022.
In addition to expanding energy supply, according to a 2014
economic study (http://www.noia.org), by 2035, Eastern Gulf offshore
oil and natural gas development could produce nearly 1 million barrels
of oil equivalent per day, generate nearly 230,000 jobs, contribute
over $18 billion per year to the U.S. economy, and generate $70 billion
in cumulative government revenue.
So to conclude, the rise in production in Gulf of Mexico is only
occurring due to large reserves and production efficiencies that
streamline operation and drilling costs. Although, the long lead time
and significant capital investment required to drill helps insulate
production activity from short-term price volatility.
The Obama administration's lackluster offshore drilling plan and
proposed regulations could erode away the economic viability of future
well production in the Gulf of Mexico. We must provide a regulatory
climate to produce offshore in a safe, economical manner, while
allowing access to the largest undiscovered, technically recoverable
oil and gas resources on Federal lands offshore in the Gulf of Mexico.
It is critical that production continues to grow in the Gulf of Mexico
in order to protect and sustain our American energy independence and to
help create good jobs with good benefits, of which there are too few of
in today's economy.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
I thank both of you for being here and for giving us your
testimony. I realize the two branches of the Congress, each
have different schedules, so the longer you can stay with us, I
would be happy to welcome you here to be a part of this panel.
But with Chairman Fleming and Congressman Graves, your state is
well represented on our committee anyway.
Once again, we appreciate your testimony. We appreciate
working with you on the wrong side of the Capitol Building.
Thank you for being here.
With that, I will now call the second panel up who will be
here to testify.
I would like to call Mr. Lars Herbst, who is the Regional
Director, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region for the Bureau of Safety
and Environmental Enforcement, the U.S. Department of the
Interior to join us.
Can we also have Mr.--actually, why don't we switch those
around? Let's have Mr. Leimkuhler being the second one, who is
the Vice President of Drilling, LLOG Exploration Company; then
Mr. Jonathan Henderson, who is the Manager of the Gulf of
Mexico Field Operations for the Gulf Restoration Network; Ms.
Lori Davis, who is the President of RIG-CHEM; and also Dr.
Joseph Mason, who is the Endowed Professor of Banking at
Louisiana State University.
If we could have you take your places up there. We
appreciate your willingness to come and speak to us about this
important issue, as we are very happy to be here in New
Orleans.
Let me remind the witnesses that under our Committee Rules,
you are limited in your oral testimony to just 5 minutes, but
your entire statement and anything you actually have that you
want printed and added to the record will be included in the
hearing record.
So, to help out, you have the timer in front of you. As you
begin speaking, the green light is there. The yellow light goes
on when you have a minute left. The red light comes on when
your 5 minutes have ended. Obey that red light, if you would,
please.
Once again, we appreciate you taking the time to be with us
here today.
Mr. Herbst, I would like to recognize you first to begin
your 5-minute testimony.

STATEMENT OF LARS HERBST, REGIONAL DIRECTOR, GULF OF MEXICO OCS
REGION, BUREAU OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Herbst. Thank you, Chairman Bishop and the Members
present here. Thank you for the opportunity to appear today to
present testimony.
My name is Lars Herbst. I am the Gulf of Mexico Regional
Director for the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement. I am a native of Louisiana, a graduate of LSU
Petroleum Engineering Program, and a registered professional
engineer.
My public service began in 1983 in BSEE's predecessor
agency, the MMS. I now lead a staff of 350 engineers,
geologists, and environmental scientists committed to promoting
safety, protecting the environment, and serving our Nation's
offshore resources.
Over the past 4 years, the Bureau has made a significant
effort to update its regulations to ensure safe and
environmentally responsible operations offshore. These updates
reflect the latest technological advancements and
recommendations resulting from the Macondo blowout. Sustained
production and robust culture of safety are not mutually
exclusive. By promoting safety and reducing risk offshore, we
are helping to safeguard the long-term viability of production
in the Gulf of Mexico.
In 2014, oil production in the Gulf region was at its
highest level since the Macondo blowout. More than 510 million
barrels of oil were produced, the third highest production
since 2005. In 2016, the Bureau expects Gulf production to
continue increasing, with several large projects expanding and
other new projects coming on-line. The Bureau estimates nearly
1.7 million barrels of oil per day will be produced in the
Gulf, bringing annual production to about 620 million barrels,
the highest in a decade.
Keeping in mind that deepwater production projects often
take 10 to 12 years from discovery to first oil, the production
trends you see in Figure 1 are expected to increase in the
years ahead as a number of projects are already sanctioned and
well into advanced planning stages. We expect two to three
large floating production projects and eight subsea tie-back
projects to come on-line in 2016.
There is a tendency to focus on oil price trends and their
effect on production levels. The market price of oil may affect
permit numbers and rig counts in some areas of the United
States, such as onshore and shallow water. However, deepwater
production, which accounts for more than 75 percent of the
offshore production, is less affected by short-term market
fluctuations or new regulations.
Low oil prices often do not have a direct impact on
deepwater exploration and development drilling. These prospects
generally involve long-term rig contracts or development
drilling of sanctioned projects. Likewise, in production, large
facilities like Shell's Olympus or Chevron's Jack-St. Malo, are
already on-line and remain economically viable. Therefore,
assumptions about the connection between deepwater production
and short-term market conditions should be avoided.
Even as rig activity in shallow water has decreased over
the years, deepwater production remains high, as shown in
Figure 2. Since the Macondo blowout in 2010, we have worked
with Gulf Coast states and industry to mitigate consequences of
blowouts by requiring immediate access to well containment
systems. Now, almost 5 years later, we must ask ourselves: Has
safety improved?
In some areas, it clearly has. Yet, a significant challenge
still faces the Bureau with respect to blowout prevention.
These issues are addressed by the Well Control Rule, which we
are finalizing. It closes gaps in blowout preventive
requirements to reflect industry's best practices, standards,
and recommendations arising from the Macondo blowout
investigations. The proposed rule helps to move the Bureau
closer to a hybrid regulatory approach, both prescriptive and
performance based, allowing for greater flexibility and a more
holistic approach.
This week, the Bureau is meeting with key industry
stakeholders to discuss their comments. We need the Well
Control Rule as loss of well control instances are still
occurring at the same frequency as before the Macondo blowout,
as shown in Figure 3. One such incident involved Walter Oil and
Gas that occurred in 2013. There was a blowout of natural gas
which subsequently caused a fire on the rig. Shortly after the
blowout, all 44 workers safely evacuated. The fire lasted 72
hours and destroyed the rig, at a cost approaching $60 million.
The situation could have been far worse, but fortunately this
did not happen.
Our ability to successfully accomplish our mission depends
heavily on recruiting and retaining qualified technical
experts. Currently, we are the leading employer of students
from LSU's Petroleum Engineering Department. Our mission is to
safeguard the people and environment of our coastal states and
ensure that all personnel make it safely home at the end of
each shift.
It is my belief as a regulator that our Bureau's work, on
behalf of the American people, is never finished. My commitment
and duty is to remain vigilant and ensure that lessons learned
from offshore incidents are integrated into our work to prevent
similar incidents in the future. The Bureau will continue to
work with the regulated community to promote best practices and
support a robust culture of safety offshore.
This concludes my formal statement. I am happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Herbst follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lars Herbst, Regional Director, Bureau of Safety
and Environmental Enforcement
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear here today to
discuss the impacts of Federal regulatory activity on oil and gas
exploration and production on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in the
Gulf of Mexico.
Over the past several years, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement (BSEE) has made a significant effort to update its
regulations to reflect technological advancements, recommendations in
response to the blowout of the Macondo well and resulting Deepwater
Horizon disaster, and the challenges posed by exploratory activities on
the Arctic OCS. These updates are a critical part of our efforts to
ensure safe and environmentally responsible operations offshore and our
recent rulemaking activities constitute a substantial step toward safe
and sustainable exploration and production of Gulf of Mexico oil and
gas resources. Safe and responsible exploration remains our top
priority. By doing things safely and ensuring that incidents do not
cause significant damage to the entire region, we are helping to
safeguard the long-term viability of production in the Gulf of Mexico.
Sustained production and a robust culture of safety are not mutually
exclusive.
In calendar year 2014, OCS leases in California, Alaska, and the
Gulf of Mexico provided 528 million barrels of oil and 1.3 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas; the vast majority of this production came
from the Gulf of Mexico. In 2014, oil production in the Gulf of Mexico
region was at its highest level since the Macondo blowout. Over 510
million barrels of oil were produced from the Gulf of Mexico in 2014,
making this the third highest production year in the span of 2005-2014.
Even with the expansion and strengthening of offshore oil and gas
regulations prompted by the Macondo blowout, the 10-year average
production rate has increased annually since 2005 (see Figure 1). Since
2010, OCS leases have provided nearly 2 billion barrels of oil and 6.2
trillion cubic feet of natural gas, fueling economic growth and
accounting for more than 19 percent of the Nation's oil production and
about 5 percent of domestic natural gas production. BSEE will continue
to support domestic energy production from the Nation's offshore
resources, while actively working to reduce risk in order to ensure
safe and environmentally responsible operations on the OCS.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1--Total Oil Production for the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf
2005-2014

In 2016, BSEE expects production in the Gulf of Mexico to continue
increasing, with several large projects expanding and other new
projects coming on-line. The Shell-operated Olympus facility is one
example of project expansion. When production began in 2014, it
produced 35,000 barrels of oil per day (BOPD). By 2016, production is
expected to increase to 80,000 BOPD. Another example is Anadarko's
Lucius field which reported first oil production on January 19, 2015
and quickly ramped up to 80,000 BOPD in the second quarter of 2015.
Lucius is also processing gas for subsea wells operated by ExxonMobil's
Hadrian South subsea project which reported first production on March
30, 2015 with production estimated to ramp up to 300 million cubic feet
of gas per day (MMcfpd) and 3,000 barrels of liquid (condensate). The
Bureau estimates that in 2016 nearly 1.7 million barrels of oil per day
will be produced from the Gulf of Mexico alone, putting annual oil
production near 620 million barrels per year--110 million barrels
higher than in 2014, and the highest rate in 10 years.
A deepwater floating production project often takes approximately
10 to 12 years to come on-line from discovery to first oil. As such,
BSEE evaluates information provided by operators many years in advance
of new production coming on-line. The production trends you see in
Figure 1 are expected to increase in the years ahead as a number of
projects are already sanctioned and well into the advanced planning
stages. We expect two to three large floating production projects and
eight subsea tie-back projects to come on-line in 2016 and start first
production. In fact, BSEE just last week completed a pre-production
inspection of the Heidelberg production SPAR that will be operated by
Anadarko and is expected to begin production in 2016. You can view
photos from the production and inspection on our Flickr
'
Web
site (https://www.flickr.com/photos/bseegov/).
There is a tendency to focus on overall trends in energy commodity
prices--such as the price of oil--and to try to tie those trends to
current production levels. Oil prices and market expectations about
future prices have varying degrees of impact on permitting demands and
production levels in different areas. For example, permit requests and
rig counts in some areas of the United States can be affected
significantly by sharp changes in oil prices. However, deepwater
production, which accounts for over 75 percent of OCS production, is
not affected in the same way by short-term market fluctuations or other
policy drivers. Deepwater prospects are planned and sanctioned many
years in advance and involve long-term rig contracts to allow the
operator to drill within the lease term. The same concept applies to
production. Large production facilities, like Shell's Olympus or
Chevron's Jack-St. Malo, are already on-line and remain economically
viable to produce for a long period of time (years) even when oil
prices are lower for a period of time. Therefore, assumptions about the
interconnectivity of deepwater production and short-term market
conditions should be avoided. Even as the number of wells has
decreased, production has remained high due to technological
advancements (see Figure 2).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 2--Gulf of Mexico Outer Continental Shelf Oil Production,
Total vs. Deepwater (Numbers Reflect Average Daily Oil Production)

Immediately following the Deepwater Horizon disaster, the
Department of the Interior and BSEE issued a series of regulations and
notices to improve safety offshore. Former BSEE Director Michael
Bromwich discussed the importance of safety and change before the House
Committee on Natural Resources in March 2011:

``Regulatory and industry reform in the wake of significant
offshore disaster has happened before. The United Kingdom and
Norway substantially changed their oversight of offshore
drilling and production following the Piper Alpha and Alexander
Kielland incidents respectively. Australia is currently facing
many of the same issues we are confronting following the
Montara well blowout, which occurred only 8 months before the
Deepwater Horizon disaster . . . .

The major challenge facing the country is to continue to
improve the safety of drilling in the GOM, particularly in
deepwater, while continuing with operations, keeping production
flowing and keeping people working.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bromwich, Michael. Statement to House Natural Resource
Committee, March 30, 2011.

Nearly 5 years have passed since former Director Bromwich's remarks
and his points are as relevant today as they were then, which is why we
must continue to ask whether the fundamental changes discussed have
occurred. In some areas, they have. BSEE discusses these changes at
length in its Annual Report. Federal regulators, state governments, and
the oil and gas industry have worked together to make significant
strides in mitigating the consequences of blowouts by implementing
requirements for immediate access to containment systems. However, the
most significant challenge facing the agency is to make similar strides
in prevention, which includes blowout prevention and well control. BSEE
and industry worked tirelessly to develop the well containment
screening tool which, along with the development of new well
containment equipment, allowed drilling to resume after the Deepwater
Horizon tragedy. These issues we addressed in the proposed rule
entitled Blowout Preventer Systems and Well Control, which was
published on April 17, 2015 (74 FR 21504).
Understanding the importance of reforming well control practices,
BSEE is reviewing public comments and developing the final rule. This
rule closes gaps in blowout preventer requirements and updates BSEE
regulations to reflect industry best practices. The proposed rule also
incorporates the latest industry standards as well as recommendations
that resulted from investigations into the Macondo blowout, the
resulting fire and loss of life onboard the Deepwater Horizon, and the
environmental disaster that followed. Specifically, the proposed rule
includes provisions that increase requirements for equipment
reliability and build upon industry standards for blowout preventers.
In a comprehensive way, the proposed rule addresses the multiple
systems and processes critical to well control operations. The proposed
rule includes more stringent design requirements for critical well
control safety system equipment and requirements concerning the
generation of traceable records regarding the manufacture, use,
maintenance, and decommissioning of blowout preventers and other well
control equipment. The proposed rule helps to move BSEE closer to a
hybrid regulatory approach--one that is both prescriptive and
performance-based. A hybrid approach grants BSEE greater flexibility
and allows for a more holistic approach to regulation. The comment
period on the proposed rule has closed and BSEE is currently meeting
with key stakeholders and industry leaders--which started yesterday and
continues today--to discuss their comments. As with all new rule
adoption, BSEE employs a robust process of public engagement and
considers all comments and feedback.
The necessity of the Well Control Rule is demonstrated by the fact
that the number of loss of well control incidents has increased in the
last 2 years and thus, these incidents are still occurring with a
frequency that is comparable to that which existed prior to the Macondo
blowout. Six of the last seven investigations completed by BSEE for
loss of well control incidents found that the root cause of each
incident was tied to equipment difficulties, in particular the design
specifications of wells. Figure 3 shows the continued occurrence of
loss of well control incidents on Gulf of Mexico facilities (see Figure
3). The proposed Well Control Rule addresses these issues.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 3--Losses of Well Control Incidents in the Gulf of Mexico
from 2008-2014

New regulations are designed to prevent blowouts like the Walter
Oil and Gas incident that occurred in 2013 when a blowout and explosion
caused a fire on the rig. All 44 workers were safely evacuated, but the
fire lasted over 72 hours and the rig was completely destroyed,
resulting in a financial loss approaching $60 million. Blowouts like
these can easily lead to much larger incidents that pose a significant
risk to human life and can cause serious damage to the environment. The
Incident Report published about the Walter blowout discusses numerous
points where things could have gone tragically wrong. Fortunately, this
did not happen, but the risk remains high in the region. By
strengthening oversight and encouraging a culture of safety within the
industry, BSEE is helping safeguard the long-term viability of drilling
in the Gulf of Mexico.
Well control is not the only area in which BSEE has proposed
significant improvements. Another major area of safety reform includes
an update to our production safety systems regulations.\2\ The section
of BSEE's regulations related to production safety systems has not been
updated since 1988 and significant technological advancements have been
made in that time. The proposed regulation addresses production safety
systems, subsurface safety devices, and provides specification for
safety device testing. BSEE is currently working to finalize this rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Proposed Rule: Oil and Gas and Sulphur Operations on the Outer
Continental Shelf--Oil and Gas and Production Safety Systems. Published
on Thursday, August 22, 2013 (78 FR 52240).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted in BSEE's 2014 Annual Report,\3\ there continue to be
issues related to aviation as well as crane safety. BSEE has issued an
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for Helideck and Aviation Fuel
Safety for Fixed Offshore Facilities.\4\ Public comments have been
received and we will be reviewing them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ BSEE Annual Report 2014--http://www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/
BSEE/BSEE_Newsroom/Publications_Library/Annual_Report/
BSEE%202014%20Annual%20Report.pdf.
\4\ Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Oil and Gas and Sulphur
Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS); Helideck and Aviation
Fuel Safety for Fixed Offshore Facilities. Published on Wednesday,
September 24, 2014 (79 FR 57008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lifting incidents involving cranes or personnel and material
handling operations are increasing. From 2007 to 2014, the average
number of lifting incidents reported per year was 167. While the lowest
number of incidents was reported in 2010, incidents have increased
since then (see Figure 4). BSEE is currently working to finalize a
Crane Safety Rule \5\ to reduce lifting incidents based on the
increased number of lifting incidents observed on the OCS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Proposed Rule: Oil and Gas and Sulphur Operations in the Outer
Continental Shelf--Update of Incorporated Cranes Standard. Published on
Monday, June 15, 2015 (80 FR 34113).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 4--Lifting Incidents per Outer Continental Shelf
Installation from 2007-2014

We are also working to strengthen our offshore oversight by
considering the use of real-time monitoring technologies and voluntary
near-miss reporting to improve and increase the regulatory oversight of
critical offshore operations and equipment. The real-time monitoring
program is intended to enhance the existing inspection and enforcement
program by using innovative technologies and risk-based inspection
criteria to supplement BSEE's current inspection program. The voluntary
near-miss reporting system, SafeOCS, was formally launched in May 2015.
It is a completely confidential system whereby the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics collects and aggregates data on behalf of
BSEE. The aggregated data will be shared with the general public
through the BTS Web site and be used to identify safety trends and
increase the understanding of offshore risk. When used in conjunction
with existing methods of collecting data and assessing risk, this
amalgamated data can be used to identify trends that will help to
reduce the risk of major incidents, loss of life, injury and negative
impacts on the environment.
Our people continue to be our greatest asset and the most essential
component of our operations. BSEE's ability to successfully accomplish
its mission depends heavily on our ability to recruit and retain a
workforce of qualified technical experts. Currently, BSEE is the No. 1
employer of students from Louisiana State University's Petroleum
Engineering program--both as summer interns and as full-time employees.
We are proud of our local connections and have found that our message
of safety and responsible exploration resonates with young petroleum
engineers from the state of Louisiana. These engineers, like BSEE, are
interested in helping safeguard the people of their state and ensure
that future blowouts do not catastrophically impact the region and
their homes. At the end of the day, our mission is to safeguard the
people and the environment of our coastal states and ensure that all
offshore personnel make it safely home at the end of each shift.
It is our belief that our work as regulators--on behalf of the
American people--is never finished. As our commitment and duty to the
American people, we will remain vigilant in instituting reform efforts
and benefiting from lessons learned from activities and incidents on
the OCS. We will continue to work cooperatively with the regulated
community to promote best practices and to support a robust culture of
safety within the offshore oil and gas industry, which produces these
resources that are so valuable and essential to our economy.
This concludes my formal statement, and I am happy to answer any
questions you have about the proposed rules or the current state of
BSEE's regulation and oversight of oil and gas operations in the Gulf
of Mexico.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Lars Herbst, Regional Director,
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement

Questions Submitted by Chairman Bishop

Question 1. The committee is concerned that this extremely
technical and prescriptive rule was written without a complete
understanding of modern drilling practices. As a result, there are
multiple provisions in the draft rule that many in the industry would
argue are technically flawed and would actually make drilling
operations offshore less safe. In-depth conversations and workshops
with industry experts in this very technical field are necessary to
create a rule that meets everyone's goal of a safer offshore
environment, while also maintaining the ability to efficiently produce
oil and natural gas.

Answer. BSEE disagrees with the assertion that the Well Control
Rule is flawed. The proposed rule contains a variety of prescriptive
and performance-based requirements and adopts 10 current industry
standards that pertain to well control. The rule was also drafted to
address recommendations from numerous investigations and reports issued
following the Deepwater Horizon disaster by the following entities:

Department of the Interior (DOI)/Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Joint Investigation Team (JIT)

National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling

Chief Counsel for National Commission

National Academy of Engineering

BSEE Blowout Preventer (BOP) Forum

Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee

Chemical Safety Board

Additionally, the rule addresses issues arising out of recent
blowouts in the Gulf of Mexico and other ``near miss'' events and
incorporates many provisions that have been longstanding Gulf of Mexico
policy. The Bureau has engaged industry, non-governmental
organizations, and other stakeholders throughout the rulemaking process
and has provided opportunities for those entities to voice questions,
concerns, and other input. The Bureau is currently working to address
industry's questions and concerns and giving careful consideration to
comments that could improve the quality of the rule.
Question 1a. Who wrote the Well Control Rule? And what were the
qualifications and experience of these people? Please list BSEE staff
and outside consultants who contributed to the writing of the rule, as
well as their relevant experience.

Answer. Subject matter experts from the entire organization--some
having more than 30 years of industry related experience--helped draft
the proposed rule, including staff from the program offices as well as
the field offices. To supplement BSEE's in-house expertise, BSEE held a
public workshop, listening sessions, and over 50 meetings with
industry, trade associations, regulators, and other stakeholders to
obtain technical input. The proposed rule is also informed by the
several investigations conducted after Deepwater Horizon, which
utilized the expertise of many acclaimed engineers, scientists, and
other highly qualified professionals.

Question 1b. When and how do you plan to further engage industry
technical experts in order to correct technical flaws and create a rule
that meets the intended goal of a safer offshore environment?

Answer. BSEE disagrees that the proposed regulation is flawed. As
mentioned in the hearing, BSEE held follow-up meetings for 2 days with
entities that submitted comments during the comment period to obtain
additional clarification on comments that addressed specific provisions
of the rule. These meetings were held on September 15 and 16.
Additionally, stakeholders will have the opportunity for further
engagement during listening sessions that will be held after the rule
is sent to the Office of Management and Budget for interagency review
under E.O. 12866.

Question 1c. What is the Bureau's rationale for including
additional provisions beyond API 53 pertaining to Blowout Prevention
Equipment Systems?

Answer. The API process results in the development of baseline
performance standards based on the consensus process. This process
often requires compromises to address domestic and international
technical and legal issues from various sectors of the industry. BSEE
staff members attended many of these meetings and discussions and were
able to identify the provisions that potentially did not provide a
sufficient level of safety for U.S. offshore operations. For the
proposed rule, BSEE requested comments on these supplemental
requirements and will consider any data or recommendations provided by
industry or third parties.

Question 2. In the hearing you mentioned that if companies
commented on the rule, they were invited back for meetings with
appropriate BSEE staff. Has BSEE reached out to all companies that have
submitted comments? What is BSEE's plan to continue to engage industry
on these technical matters? When will the next round of meetings take
place? Has BSEE considered holding workshops to gain further
information and technical expertise in a setting that allows sufficient
time and discussion to help improve the rule before it is finalized?

Answer. Bureau staff are working to finalize the rule based on
comments submitted during the comment period. BSEE staff members have
worked to ensure broad stakeholder engagement throughout the drafting
process. As mentioned in the hearing, BSEE held additional follow-up
meetings with parties that had commented on the rule to provide Bureau
staff with clarification on these comments. However, not all commenters
participated in follow-up meetings, as a majority of comments submitted
were very clear and required no further explanation or clarification.
We do not feel that further engagement is required at this time based
on the input that BSEE received during the drafting process, the public
comment period, and the follow-up meetings with commenters.

Question 3. In many comments submitted, companies stated the
proposed rule contains provisions, specifically in regards to drilling
margins as mentioned by Mr. Leimkuhler during the hearing that could
potentially undermine the safety mission through unintended
consequences. Do you believe the proposed rule contains such provisions
and what evaluations have been conducted by BSEE's technical staff to
ensure safe operating procedures?

Answer. The Bureau does not agree that the proposed rule undermines
safety. The language related to drilling margins is based on
recommendations arising out of the various investigations and reports
that followed the Deepwater Horizon tragedy. The Bureau received a
multitude of comments on the sections of the rule that pertain to safe
drilling margins and is examining those comments. Specific comments
related to drilling margins are being reviewed carefully by BSEE
technical staff and other options for maintaining safe drilling margins
are being evaluated.
Question 4. The comment period for the Well Control Rule closed in
July. What is the timing for the Department moving forward? When do you
anticipate it will be finalized? Is there a deadline either internally
or externally by which the Department must meet?

Answer. The Bureau is giving thoughtful consideration to all input
that was received during the comment period. BSEE is moving forward
with the rule in a timely manner and, once this process is completed,
will proceed to issuance of the rule.

Question 5. A study commissioned by the American Petroleum
Institute and referenced in their public comments on the Well Control
Rule estimated that the rule will cost approximately $32 billion which
is significantly higher than the $883 million cost estimated by BSEE.
Can you please explain how BSEE staff arrived at that figure and why it
is so profoundly different than the independent analysis conducted by
Blade Energy Partners and Quest Offshore?

Answer. BSEE arrived at its cost estimate by employing a careful
section-by-section analysis of the rule to identify provisions that
would result in compliance costs outside of those already incurred by
industry in conforming to the latest industry standards. BSEE disagrees
with many of the key assumptions made in the American Petroleum
Institute (API) study, which are the foundation for the higher cost
estimate of that report. Specifically, the API cost study accounts for
lost drilling activity due to the effects of the regulations pertaining
to drilling margins, which is the major cost-driver in the API study.
The BSEE economic analysis does not account for decreases in drilling
activity due to the uncertainty associated with predicting industry's
activities and advancements in technical capabilities and the ability
of operators to apply for alternative compliance. The API study also
does not include in its analysis the many benefits of the rule,
including reduced fatalities, reductions in the likelihood of oil
spills, and the significant cost savings arising out of reduced testing
of equipment.

Question 6. There are some who suggest that some of the equipment
requirements in the draft rule will require sizable changes to existing
infrastructure with little to no impact on increasing the efficacy or
ability for that equipment to operate effectively. As Murphy Oil
Company noted in their comments, ``the lack of availability of upgrade
equipment and the time estimated to manufacture and install the same
will result in a shutdown of the majority of the Gulf of Mexico rig
fleet for a substantial period of time.'' How do you respond to those
assertions?

Answer. The implementation periods for various aspects of the rule
are being analyzed based on the comments received. The proposed rule
employs a phased implementation schedule that delays the effective
dates of certain requirements. By phasing in certain requirements over
time, the rule will not have the effect of shutting down the Gulf of
Mexico rig fleet.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Fleming

Question 1. When discussing BSEE's engagement and how BSEE can put
forward regulations that don't cause a reduction in production, you
stated, ``if we can accomplish the same objective by another means
which industry has brought up I think there will be flexibility.'' How
is BSEE pursuing these alternatives and the flexibility you mentioned
during the hearing?

Answer. Each comment is analyzed to determine if the suggestion
provides an equal or better level of safety than the proposed rule
language. If it does, the rule may be modified. Furthermore,
alternative compliance is allowed under the alternative compliance
section of the existing rules, and would continue to be allowed under
the proposed rule.

Question 2. When discussing the drilling margin issue you mentioned
that BSEE often incorporates industry standards as part of BSEE
regulations. How have you fully taken into account industry standards
(such as API 92-L)?

Answer. BSEE is taking API 92-L into consideration; however, this
standard was drafted after the proposed rule went out. We are reviewing
comments related to the drilling margin issue and considering whether
or not the rule should require compliance with an industry standard or
allow for performance-based assessment.

Question 3. During the hearing Mr. Leimkuhler identified examples
of the proposed rulemaking that may make drilling operations less safe
by diverging from industry standards, such as the requirement for a 5-
year demonstration of the blowout preventer. Are you taking into
account real-world feedback on safety implications of your proposals?
Are you willing to modify the rule to account for this feedback?

Answer. BSEE is taking into consideration all feedback received
pursuant to the rulemaking process. The 5-year inspection of the
blowout preventer is currently contained within API Standard 53. In
this case, we proposed to adopt an industry recommended standard. The
comments received during the comment period as well as the input
received from BSEE's various outreach activities constitute ``real-
world feedback.'' BSEE is considering input from all sources and will
modify the rule in response to comments where doing so will improve the
quality of the rule.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Garret Graves

Question 1. BSEE is proposing new requirements for accumulator
volumes, beyond those of industry standards, which will require
additions to and reconfiguration of the BOP. Accommodating these new
requirements will add to the complexity of the BOP system and could
have an impact on the safety and functionality of the BOP. Has BSEE
looked at the safety implications that might result from this increased
accumulator volume on the other safety mechanisms contained within the
BOP? If so, please provide the analysis? If not, please explain why
not?

Answer. This section did receive considerable comment. BSEE is
still in the deliberative stages of the rulemaking process and
evaluating the comments received to ensure that safety-critical
functions have proper accumulator volumes to ensure actuation.

Question 2. How did BSEE come to the decision that the proposed
rule's quinquennial inspection scheme will produce a result superior to
that which will result from adherence to a sequential application of
the periodic maintenance and inspection requirements of API 53? Can
BSEE point to any safety data that supports its decision?

Answer. BSEE believes that the proposed language will result in a
comprehensive and traceable inspection scheme. The lack of an industry-
wide database related to equipment reliability has made assessing the
effectiveness of current inspection schemes difficult. BSEE will review
the information and data received during the comment period before
making any decisions.

Question 3. In the Well Control Rule, BSEE Approved Verification
Organizations (BAVOs) will be charged with interpretation of the BSEE
regulations, such industry standards as are incorporated by reference,
and recognized engineering practices. However, no indication is given
as to how BSEE would provide the BAVOs with the guidance and oversight
necessary for rendering such interpretations. Just as there is a need
for consistency among BSEE Regional and District offices, there will be
a need for consistency among BAVOs. How does BSEE plan to ensure there
is a transparent system for provision of interpretations as needed?

Answer. BSEE has initiated a formal process for issuing
interpretations on regulations that will help to ensure consistent
application of the requirements across the agency, industry, and third-
party verification organizations. BSEE will also certify that BSEE-
approved verification organizations (BAVO) have previous experience
with BSEE requirements and procedures as well as the technical
expertise to perform verifications based on the regulations as written.

Continued Engagement

Question 4. During the hearing I asked you why interested parties
were only provided a total of 3 months (initial 2 months with a 1 month
extension) to comment on a proposal that BSEE took several years to
write and you explained that that decision was outside your call but
that BSEE is still working with industry. You also mentioned that with
the proposed provisions outside of the codification of industry
standards that BSEE is ``continuing to work with those commenters.'' As
I also stated at the hearing, I'm very concerned that this rule is done
right, which is why I am particularly concerned that this technical
engagement continues and I asked BSEE to commit to public meetings so
we can get this rule right. Please explain how BSEE will continue its
engagement with industry through the end of the year.

Answer. BSEE staff are working to finalize the rule and to address
the over 5,000 pages of comments submitted during the comment period.
BSEE staff have worked to ensure broad stakeholder engagement
throughout the drafting and comment process. The Bureau conducted over
50 meetings with various companies, trade associations, regulators, and
other stakeholders during the open comment period as part of the
process of moving from proposed to final rule. The Bureau also met with
organizations after the closure of the comment period in those cases
where the Bureau required clarification of the written comments that
were submitted within the comment period. Those discussions were
restricted to the substance of those timely submitted comments. We do
not feel that additional technical engagement is required at this time,
based on the input that BSEE received during the drafting process and
in the public comment period. The Bureau is currently working to
address industry's questions and concerns and giving careful
consideration to comments that could improve the quality of the rule.

Our current regulations do not account for the more than 160
recommendations that the Bureau received following the tragic events of
the Deepwater Horizon disaster or reflect lessons learned from other
loss of well control events that occurred thereafter. It took several
years for the studies and investigations to be concluded. The proposed
Well Control Rule incorporates the findings of those studies and
investigations.

BSEE Regional Office Expertise

Question 5. To what extent have you and your staff been involved in
the development of new regulations by BSEE headquarters and to what
extent were you involved in the development of the proposed Well
Control Rule?

Answer. We utilize the collective experience of all of our BSEE
subject matter experts, regardless of their location, for any new rule
or regulation that is being developed and finalized. GOM Regional
Office staff have been thoroughly involved throughout the entire
process, including drafting the rule, reviewing technical comments from
industry, and meeting with commenters at BSEE Headquarters in
Washington, DC.

Question 6. Please describe the amount of input that headquarters
requested from the Gulf Region on offshore regulatory matters, and
please describe if and how much this has changed since 2010.

Answer. BSEE regulations are developed by subject matter experts
throughout the Bureau, regardless of their being in a regional or
headquarters location. We utilize the collective expertise of a range
of experts to develop regulations. Subject matter teams were
specifically engaged to assess the technical comments that were
received. The GOM Regional Office was thoroughly involved in drafting
the proposed rule and was a part of the subject matter expert team
assembled to review technical comments from industry. Content
development and participation in each rule is different based on the
topic and expertise needed for each individual rule.

Question 7. Is it safer for drilling decisions to be made by the
drilling personnel on the rig or offshore facility or by onshore based
personnel?

Answer. All urgent decisions related to safety should be made by
qualified competent personnel on the rig. However, real-time monitoring
can elevate safety by having a ``second set of eyes'' to catch
something that one person may miss. The proposed rule would not change
current industry or operator practices regarding decisionmaking.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Westerman

Question 1. BSEE's pending well control regulation has been under
consideration within the Department of Interior for over 4 years. The
scope of this Federal rule has expanded over the years from a focus on
blowout preventer systems to the broader issue of well control. In the
Agency's own words, this regulation represents ``one of the most
substantial rulemakings in the history of the BSEE and its predecessor
organizations.'' Given the extremely technical nature of this
regulation, there is a limited number of industry experts who fully
understand the consequences and feasibility of many provisions included
in the rulemaking.

Question 1a. Who did the Bureau consult with during the drafting of
this rule?

Answer. We utilize the collective experience of our BSEE subject
matter experts--which includes engineers with over 30 years of industry
experience--for any new rule or regulation that is being developed and
finalized. BSEE also held over 50 meetings with external stakeholders
including technical experts, industry groups, academia, and the members
of the regulated industry. The rule also incorporates technical
recommendations from numerous investigations and reports issued
following the Deepwater Horizon incident including:

Department of the Interior (DOI)/Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Joint Investigation Team (JIT)

National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling

Chief Counsel for National Commission

National Academy of Engineering

BSEE Blowout Preventer (BOP) Forum

Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee

Chemical Safety Board

Question 1b. More specifically, within BSEE, who was tasked with
writing the technical provisions of this rule?

Answer. The rule was developed by BSEE subject matter experts
throughout the Bureau from both regional and headquarters locations. We
utilize the collective expertise of a range of experts to develop
regulations. Subject matter teams were specifically re-engaged for
assessment of technical comments that were received.

Question 1c. Were outside consultants and/or drilling engineers
familiar with the latest technologies and drilling processes involved
in drafting the rule?

Answer. The Bureau has engaged extensively with external
stakeholders and technical experts, beginning as early as 2012 with the
blowout preventer public workshop. Additional sessions were held
following that workshop with members of the regulated community,
including the American Petroleum Institute and many of its members.
Since then, engagement has continued with numerous meetings (over 50)
with industry, academia, and other technical experts prior to
publishing the rule. More recently, additional meetings were held after
the closure of the comment period in cases where the Bureau required
clarification of the written comments that were submitted within the
comment period. Those discussions were restricted to the substance of
those timely submitted comments. Since we have held many meetings and a
public workshop in the past 4 years, we do not feel that there have
been any time constraints placed on our stakeholder engagement.

Question 1d. I am concerned that a regulation this technical--with
significant safety, production, and cost impacts--may not have been
exposed to the level of engineering expertise necessary to draft the
best possible, and technically feasible, rule.

Answer. The provisions in the rule have been fully discussed and
carefully considered. We utilize the collective experience of our BSEE
subject matter experts--which includes engineers with over 30 years of
industry experience--for any new rule or regulation that is being
developed and finalized. BSEE also held over 50 meetings with external
stakeholders including technical experts, industry groups, academia,
and the members of the regulated industry. The rule also incorporates
technical recommendations from numerous investigations and reports
issued following the Deepwater Horizon incident including:

Department of the Interior (DOI)/Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Joint Investigation Team (JIT)

National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling

Chief Counsel for National Commission

National Academy of Engineering

BSEE Blowout Preventer (BOP) Forum

Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee

Chemical Safety Board

Question 2. During the hearing you stated that BSEE is trying to
push the bar as it relates to the provisions in the proposed rule
beyond API Standard 53. What analysis did BSEE use to determine when
and how the bar should be raised above API 53? The API uses an open and
transparent process to set industry standards following the
requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Did
BSEE use a similar process when determining the rule's proposed
requirements above and beyond API 53? Please explain how BSEE
determined these requirements.

Answer. Differences between the proposed rule and API 53 can be
attributed to specific recommendations arising from the Deepwater
Horizon investigations and analyses. The proposed Well Control Rule
represents an effort by the Bureau to codify the recommendations of the
several investigative bodies commissioned to determine the causes of
the Macondo blowout. In contrast, the API employs a consensus process
that results in the development of minimally acceptable performance
standards. This process often requires compromises to address domestic
and international technical and legal issues from various sectors of
the industry. BSEE staff members attended many of these meetings and
discussions and were able to identify the provisions of API 53 that
potentially did not provide a sufficient level of safety for U.S. OCS
operations. In the proposed rule, BSEE requested comments on these
supplemental requirements and is considering the data and
recommendations provided by industry or third parties.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, I appreciate that.
Mr. Leimkuhler, I will recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH LEIMKUHLER, VICE PRESIDENT, DRILLING, LLOG
EXPLORATION COMPANY, LLC

Mr. Leimkuhler. Good morning. Chairman Bishop and members
of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify on
behalf of LLOG Exploration Company. LLOG welcomes this
opportunity to provide what we see as improvements to Federal
policies on oil and gas activity in the Outer Continental
Shelf.
LLOG is the largest privately-owned oil producer in the
United States, headquartered in Covington, Louisiana. Our focus
is the deepwater U.S. Gulf of Mexico, where we apply a targeted
approach to subsea wells and floating production systems to
safely and efficiently develop the Nation's deepwater oil and
gas resources.
Unlike the major integrated oil and gas companies, our area
of focus is limited. However, the level of expertise and
capability we bring to those areas is state-of-the-art. There
is additional information about our company in your addendum,
but I would like to highlight two main points.
The first is safety. At LLOG, we, and especially myself
personally, hold it as a core value. Priorities change, but
values do not. In scope, we have 16 deepwater developments to
date, with 8 fields currently in the OCS under development. We
are a small company that does big things.
Depending upon where a subsea well is drilled in the Gulf
of Mexico, anywhere from 9 to 11 permits or plan approvals are
needed to move a prospect from leasing into production. These
approvals come from BOEM, BSEE, and the EPA. In your slide pack
is a simplified version of the process, which is shown on Slide
4. Within that regulatory protocol, I would like to highlight
three areas where LLOG feels there are improvement
opportunities, as well as other issues not addressed on the
slide.
The first improvement area is the appropriate balance of
prescriptive- versus performance-based regulations. In the
past, the technical regulatory staff at the regulators had an
appropriate degree of professional judgment that they could
apply to approve permits and operations. Over time, that
balance has moved to a more prescriptive approach. Of
particular note, based on our analysis and review of the
proposed Well Control Safety Rule, the application has become
so prescriptive in the proposed rule, relative to well design
and real-time monitoring, that it is likely to be counter-
productive to safe operations. LLOG strongly encourages BSEE
and BOEM to take a balanced approach to regulatory enforcement
using prescriptive- as well as performance-based regulations,
especially in those two areas. I would be more than happy to
provide examples in the follow-up Q&A.
Second is the exploration plan and well permit approval
process. I have worked my entire career offshore in the Gulf of
Mexico since 1987, and the technical professionals and regional
management at the regulatory agencies that I have worked with
over that time were and are consistently professional, capable,
and dedicated. In my opinion, the Bureau just needs more of
them. We are now 1 month away from the 5-year anniversary of
the end of the moratorium, yet we continue to see our well-
related permits and even exploration plans approved just in
time. This is not due to a lack of effort by the staff but, in
my opinion, an understaffed situation, despite the best efforts
of district and regional management to recruit and retain good
talent. I am encouraged that they appear to be taking advantage
of the current downturn to add experienced staff, and that
should be encouraged.
Third is the commingling process. LLOG strives to make all
the wells we drill commercial by utilizing smart well
technology to open up multiple zones in adjacent reservoirs
within the same well. We have never drilled an expendable well.
As long as Mother Nature cooperates and we find the reservoirs
in the expected location and depth, we can file for a
commingling permit in advance. However, zones often do not come
in as expected and we need to file an initial commingling
permit or modify an existing one.
With a rig on location costing $1 million a day in capital,
we need to evaluate the ability and likelihood to obtain
commingling permit approval in time, versus the impact of
costly delays. Under such conditions, the added burden or risk
of a regulatory delay has actually made some zones uneconomic
to produce. This hinders the industry's ability to bring
American energy to U.S. consumers and provide a robust supply
of affordable, reliable energy.
Among the additional improvement opportunities are the
impact of rigid application of the Jones Act to offshore
facility installation, and the impact of obtaining Clean Air
permits.
With respect to the Jones Act and the heavy-lift vessels
required to install offshore facilities, LLOG encourages the
U.S. Customs and Border Protection to adhere to the prior
historical application of the law with respect to the use of
heavy-lift vessels. LLOG feels application of the Jones Act to
the heavy-lift vessels forces us to possibly transfer jobs
overseas and away from U.S. Gulf Coast fabrication yards. On
this issue, LLOG commends a letter sent by BBSE Director Brian
Salerno to the U.S. Customs and Border Protection earlier this
month supporting the industry position to return to the
historical application of the Jones Act with respect to heavy-
lift vessels used in offshore construction.
Regarding the air permits, the Clean Air Act compliance is
incorporated into the exploration plan approval process, as
required by BOEM, except for the Eastern Gulf of Mexico, where
the EPA air permit protocol is quite different. The EPA permits
take 12 to 18 months to secure and, in our view, relative to
the BOEM protocol, adds operational complexity and delays with
no actual benefit relative to Clean Air Act compliance. LLOG
urges you to consider BOEM for the Clean Air Act compliance
across the Gulf of Mexico.
Thank you for the opportunity to present the views of LLOG
and myself on these issues. The safe, efficient production and
use of our Nation's resources in the OCS continues to be
critical for our Nation's energy, and I am happy to answer any
questions the committee may have or raise additional issues
beyond which I could cover in my 5 minutes.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Leimkuhler follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph Leimkuhler, Vice President, Drilling, LLOG
Exploration Company LLC
introduction
Chairman Bishop and members of the committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify today on behalf LLOG Exploration Company. LLOG
welcomes this opportunity to provide what we see as improvements to
Federal policies on oil and gas activity to further America's energy,
economic and national security by strengthening the development of
America's resources in the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS). My goal is to
provide you a snapshot of LLOG's current operations, how those
operations are conducted within the regulatory processes of the Gulf of
Mexico, and what we see as improvement opportunities.
a snapshot of llog
LLOG is one of the largest privately-owned oil and gas firms in the
country and is the largest private oil producer in the United States.
Our focus is the U.S. Gulf of Mexico where we apply a targeted approach
using floating production systems and subsea wells to safely and
efficiently develop the Nation's deepwater oil and gas resources.
Unlike the major, integrated oil and gas companies, our areas of
focus are limited; however, the level of expertise and capability we
bring to those areas is state-of-the-art. There is additional
information about LLOG in the addendum to my testimony, but I'd like to
highlight two main points:

Safety--At LLOG we hold safety as a core value--priorities
may change but values do not. Recognition of that value is
LLOG being awarded the SOAR award in 2008, which was the
last year this award was given for Safe Operations and
Accurate Reporting.

Scope--We have 16 deepwater developments to date with 8
fields in the OCS currently under development.

offshore permitting process and opportunities for improvements
To portray the various and numerous regulatory processes and
permits a company must execute and achieve during the offshore
exploration and production process, I have attached a diagram (Slide 4
in Attachment) called the Simplified Permit Process Overview for a
Subsea Well Tie-In. This flow chart shows how the process of lease
acquisition to first production plays out within the regulatory
framework for a Subsea Well Tie-in. While this particular diagram is
specific to the subsea well tie-in permit process, it is indicative of
the types of approval processes that companies are required to go
through before projects can begin or be altered in the Federal waters
of the Gulf of Mexico (GOM).
Subsea wells, tied back to a floating production platform, are
LLOG's basic focus area for our offshore operations. Depending on where
a subsea well is drilled in the Gulf of Mexico, anywhere from 9 to 11
permits or plan approvals are needed to move a prospect from leasing to
production. For most of the Gulf of Mexico, those permits and plan
approvals are split between the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
(BOEM) (red text on Slide 4) and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement (BSEE) (blue text), both within the Department of the
Interior. However, for the eastern portion of the central gulf planning
area, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (bold black text) has
that authority. Among all of these approval processes, I wish to
highlight three where LLOG feels there are improvement opportunities
and address other issues not indicated on this process diagram.

Application of Regulations--Prescriptive Versus Performance

The first improvement area is achieving the appropriate balance of
prescriptive versus performance based regulations and application of
the regulations. In the past, the professional technical staff within
BSEE (and before BSEE's creation, its predecessor agency the Minerals
Management Service) had a greater degree of professional judgment that
they could apply to approve permitted operations. Permits were approved
when the operator's plans met the regulatory requirements, and for any
gray areas, operators provided a justification for why the submitted
plan met the intent of the regulations and provided the necessary
safeguards to manage and mitigate hazards.
Over time, that mixture of prescriptive and performance based
regulatory approval protocol has moved to a more prescriptive based
regulatory approach. Of particular note, based on our analysis and
review, the proposed well control safety rule has become so
prescriptive the actual application of that proposed rule to well
design and real time monitoring is likely to be counterproductive to
safe operations. LLOG strongly encourages BSEE and BOEM to take a
balanced approach to regulatory enforcement using a balance of
prescriptive as well as performance based regulations, especially in
these two areas. I will be more than happy to follow up with examples
in the follow-up Q&A.

Drilling Permit Approval Process

Second is the Application for Permit to Drill (APD), or generally,
the drilling permit approval process. I have worked my entire offshore
career since 1987 in the Deepwater Gulf of Mexico and the technical
professionals and Regional Management at the MMS, BOEM, and BSEE that I
have worked with over that time were and are consistently professional,
capable and dedicated . . . in my opinion BSEE just needs more of them.
We are now 1 month away from the 5-year anniversary of the end of
the moratorium, yet we continue to receive our well related permits
(drilling and well as completion and workover) just in time. This is
not due to a lack of effort by the BSEE and BOEM staff, but in my
opinion an understaffed situation at BOEM and BSEE, despite the best
efforts of BSEE and BOEM district and regional management to retain and
recruit talent. The overall approval cycle could be improved with an
increase in agency technical capacity.
We are finding that the more knowledgeable staff are retiring which
leaves the current staff short-handed, and overworked, not to mention
the lack of experience among the younger staff. This is part of the
larger ``Big Crew Change'' and is a challenge not only for industry but
also for BSEE's District Managers and BOEM's Regional Supervisors.
Because of this situation, permits are being approved with a short
window prior to commencement of operations, which makes it difficult
for operators to conduct operations that require a long lead time for
planning and sequential approvals.
Additional capable agency staff = additional permit approvals,
additional production revenue and additional economic development. An
innovative compensation/recruitment plan as well as the current
industry downturn is likely to provide an opportunity for BSEE and BOEM
to recruit experienced staff and should be leveraged to increase the
permit approval capacity of the bureaus.

Commingling Approval Process

Third is the commingling approval process. LLOG strives to make all
the wells we drill commercial by utilizing smart well technology to
open up multiple zones in adjacent subsurface reservoirs within the
same well. To make such projects economically viable we normally
request to commingle downhole the production from those zones. Our
deepwater rigs often drill development wells in subsea fields where the
completion and subsequent production from the wells immediately follows
the drilling and casing of the well in a continuous operation. As long
as Mother Nature cooperates and we find the reservoirs in the expected
location and depth, we can file for our commingling permit with plenty
of time for approval. However, we often find zones that do not come in
as expected and we need to either file for an initial commingling
permit or modify an existing permit. With a rig on location consuming
over $1 million a day in capital, we need to evaluate the ability and
likelihood to obtain commingling permit approval versus the impact of
costly delays to the project profitability. Under such conditions the
added regulatory burden adds cost and actually makes some zones
uneconomic to produce. This hinders industry's ability to bring
American energy to U.S. consumers and provide a robust supply of
affordable, reliable energy.
additional regulatory improvement opportunities
Additional improvement opportunities related to operations are in
the areas of Containment Response, the impact of rigid application of
the Jones Act to offshore facility installation, the impact of
revisions to supplemental bonding requirements, and the impact of Clean
Air Act permits.

In containment response, those needs are met by two providers: the
Marine Well Containment Corporation (MWCC) and HWCG. Both are very
capable organizations that together provide a diversity of suppliers,
operator expertise, and response capabilities. This diversity of
response should be encouraged and continued. However, in LLOG's view,
this response capability is at risk of being compromised if Responder
Immunity is not improved. We urge the passage of the Senate Coast Guard
Authorization Bill (S. 1611) covering improved Responder Immunity.

With respect to heavy lifts associated with offshore facilities
installations and the Jones Act, LLOG encourages the U.S. Customs and
Border Protection to adhere to the historical application of the law
with respect to transport and heavy lift vessels. Current rigid
application of the Jones Act to heavy lift vessels for the minimal
distances that these vessels move the suspended load (in most cases
hundreds of feet or less) is resulting in increased lift complexity and
scope and adding risk. In addition LLOG feels continued application of
the Jones Act to heavy lift vessels has the potential to transfer work
and jobs away from Gulf Coast Fabrication yards. On this issue LLOG
commends the letter sent by BSEE Director Salerno to the U.S. Customs
and Border Protection supporting the industry position to return to the
historical application of the Jones act to heavy lift vessel use in
offshore construction.

With regard to the management of Plug and Abandonment liabilities,
it is LLOG's understanding that revisions to the supplemental bonding
requirements are to be released in an upcoming Notice to Lessee (NTL).
LLOG requests that serious consideration be given to the scope of the
proposed changes. If the changes are more than a refinement or
clarification of the existing regulations, then the rulemaking process
should be followed.

Regarding the issuance of air permits required to be compliant with
the Clean Air Act (CAA). For wells drilled in the OCS in the Western
Planning area, the CAA compliance is incorporated into the Exploration
Plan approval process required by BOEM. This also applies to the
majority of wells drilled in the Central Gulf Planning Area with the
exception of the eastern portion of the Central Planning Area where EPA
jurisdiction applies. The EPA air permit approval process and protocol
is quite different from the BOEM protocol and takes from 12-18 months
to secure. This EPA permit is actually individual rig specific versus
rig type specific in the BOEM protocol, and in our view adds
operational complexity and delays with no actual benefit relative to
CAA compliance. LLOG urges you to allow BOEM to assume CAA compliance
across the GOM and at a minimum allow BOEM to administer CAA compliance
for the full western and central Gulf planning areas.

Finally with regard to the interface between Regulators and
Operators LLOG would like the Department of the Interior to perform an
After Action Review--of the allocation of work scope between BOEM and
BSEE. LLOG understands and supports the split of the revenue function
to BOEM and the operational enforcement role to BSEE. However, in
LLOG's view the full permitting and plan approval function after the
lease sale through the full operational cycle should fall to BSEE.

Thank you for the opportunity to present the views of LLOG and
myself on these issues. Safe, efficient production and use of our
Nation's resources from the OCS continues to be critical for our
Nation's energy, economic, and national security. I am happy to answer
any questions the committee may have.

Attachment: Powerpoint Slides

ATTACHMENT

Slide 1
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsSlide 2
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsSlide 3
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsSlide 4

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsSlide 5

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6241.009

.epsSlide 6

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6241.010

.epsBack-Up Slide

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Henderson.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN HENDERSON, JD, MBA, MANAGER OF GULF OF
MEXICO FIELD OPERATIONS, GULF RESTORATION NETWORK

Mr. Henderson. Thank you. We continue to hear about
reducing our dependence on foreign oil, but we cannot import
clean air, water, food, and soil. The BP disaster of 2010 and
decades of oil extraction has led to severe environmental,
social, and political impacts.
To remind this committee of just a few, hundreds of
millions of gallons of oil have leaked into the Gulf; the
destruction of sensitive fish habitat like coral reefs;
countless dead marine mammals and sea turtles; contaminated
beaches and wildlife refuges; deployment of harmful
dispersants; discharging of fracking chemicals; 27,000
abandoned, unmonitored, and possibly leaking wells; the
devastation of communities and loss of cultures; shrimp with no
eyes, fish with lesions and tumors; destroyed family businesses
and devastated families; suicides; sick, dead, and dying
cleanup workers; and a distrust of our government. In addition,
regulatory capture and the hijacking of our democracy, not to
mention that roughly 600 square miles of Louisiana's wetlands
have been destroyed by the oil and gas industry, which is very
much a threat to the existence of my hometown of New Orleans,
and the very building that we sit in today.
In the fall of 2010, I filed my first official pollution
incident report with the National Response Center (NRC) for an
oil slick leaking out of a wellhead in a bay known for very
productive and economically important oyster beds. To date, I
have filed approximately 100 NRC reports for leaks, including
offshore and onshore platforms, pipelines, wellheads, and tank
batteries--most recently, on August 17, 2015, for a suspected
ruptured gas pipeline in Lafourche Parish, and that same day a
roughly 15-mile-long rainbow sheen well offshore.
There are very few people who do this kind of proactive
monitoring work in this region, but the need is great. My
reports to the NRC have led to numerous successful
investigations by the U.S. Coast Guard, which in turn has led
to mutual respect and trust between myself and the leaders of
various sectors and their incident management personnel.
Since July of 2010, the NRC has recorded approximately
10,000 spills of crude oil, petrochemicals, and other
contaminants into Gulf of Mexico waters.
The BP disaster highlighted the flawed process by which oil
discharges are reported and cleaned up, and for which companies
are held accountable. It revealed how the official channels of
reporting and cleaning up oil pollution rely on the polluters
themselves. Little information is made available to the public,
and the information that is presented could be considered
untrustworthy. These massive reporting gaps make it impossible
to determine how much oil pollution is actually being released
into the Gulf.
One particularly egregious example of underreporting
involves the Taylor Energy leak. For over 10 years this chronic
oil leak has been spewing oil into the Gulf waters every day,
with no end in sight. The discharge began in 2004 when an
undersea landslide caused by Hurricane Ivan damaged a Taylor
platform and 28 wells. Our work monitoring the Taylor leak and
a recent AP investigation published in April shed light on the
underreported flow amount and led to revision of the estimates.
In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Isaac in 2012, I,
along with my partners at the Gulf Monitoring Consortium, took
several monitoring trips and documented leaks. Our findings,
from a review of NRC reports, indicated that there were 130
accidents resulting from the storm that were reported to the
NRC.
Based on my experience in the Gulf region and my
participation in the New Orleans area contingency plan meetings
and exercises, I am greatly concerned that government and
industry are not adequately prepared for a worst-case scenario.
An ongoing blowout in the Gulf of Mexico hit by a Category 5
hurricane would cause the response to be put on hold, and we
could very likely be hit by another hurricane shortly
thereafter. This would be an environmentally chaotic situation
that is not being planned for and that threatens our homeland
security.
This committee should introduce and pass a Gulf of Mexico
Regional Citizens' Advisory Council. Attached to my testimony
is a draft bill that was attempted to be introduced in 2014. A
Gulf of Mexico Regional Citizens' Advisory Council will enhance
engagement, communication, collaboration, and trust among the
Gulf oil industry, Federal and state governments, and citizen
stakeholders potentially impacted by Gulf oil operations.
Five years after the BP disaster, attempts are being made
to open up the Eastern Gulf of Mexico and the Mid-Atlantic.
This should not happen. At the same time these attempts are
being made, investigations by New Orleans-based WLTV have
raised serious concerns that the new post-BP safety standards
may not be taken seriously enough at existing Gulf operations.
The bottom line is that Congress needs to act. Congress
needs to pass a Regional Citizens' Advisory Council. It can
raise the liability limit for offshore drilling, and it needs
to make the Federal Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund available
for Federal agencies when incidents occur.
Congress must start taking our oil, air, and water
seriously. It is our homeland security. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Henderson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jonathan Henderson, Manager, Gulf of Mexico Field
Operations, Gulf Restoration Network
brief bio
Jonathan Henderson manages the Gulf Restoration Network's field
operations in the Gulf region. By air, sea and land, he searches for,
documents and reports pollution incidents such as leaking pipelines,
well heads, platforms, and ongoing BP disaster impacts. He also
documents the extensive O&G industry destruction of Louisiana wetlands.
Jonathan is a founding member of the Greater New Orleans Water
Collaborative of which he serves on the interim steering committee and
as co-chair of the Advocacy working group. Jonathan is the Founding
President of Vanishing Earth, Advocacy + Consulting + Photography. Born
and raised in New Orleans, Jonathan grew up fishing and canoeing in
Louisiana's bayous and creeks, visiting family along coastal
Mississippi, and vacationing on beaches in Alabama and Florida.
Jonathan has a Bachelor's degree in Theater from LSU, a Master's of
Business Administration from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
and a JD from Southern University Law Center.
brief description of gulf restoration network
Founded in 1994 and headquartered in New Orleans the Gulf
Restoration Network is non-profit environmental conservation and
advocacy organization committed to uniting and empowering people to
protect and restore the natural resources of the Gulf of Mexico region
for future generations. For more information about GRN, visit
www.healthygulf.org.
reporting pollution incidents in the gulf
My work documenting pollution incidents began in late April, 2010
just a few days after the Deepwater Horizon exploded and sank.
Throughout 2010, I took approximately 50 trips by air and sea to
document the environmental impacts as they were unfolding offshore in
the Mississippi Canyon and on barrier islands, beaches, bays and
wetlands throughout the Gulf Coast. Given its exclusive focus on the
Gulf region, GRN quickly became a go to source for information for the
public, media, scientists and researchers. With my local knowledge and
connection to the Gulf region, access to planes and boats to carry me
into the field, many of the trips I took involved guiding and educating
media about the situation. Today, much of my work involves doing the
same thing though I have added to my focus areas many of the Gulf's
other environmental problems including but not limited to the
extractive industry's severe impact on Louisiana's wetlands.
In the Fall of 2010, I filed my first official pollution incident
report with the National Response Center (NRC) for an oil slick leaking
out of well-head in a Bay known for very productive and economically
important oyster beds. To date, I have filed approximately 100 NRC
reports for pollution incidents including leaks from offshore and
onshore platforms, pipelines, well-heads, tank batteries, etc. Most
recently, on August 17, 2015, I filed Incident Report #1125932 for a
suspected ruptured gas pipeline in Lafourche Parish, and Incident
Report #1125933 for a roughly 15-mile-long rainbow oil sheen. There is
rarely a trip that I take where I don't find and report some sort of
pollution incident. Knowing what to look for and how to document and
report an Incident is a skill that I learned from having spent
thousands of hours in the field; reading various oil spill response
manuals; talking with leading government and industry experts; spending
time in the field with some of the world's top experts from the
scientific, academic, and environmental NGO communities; flying with
the most experienced pilots in the Gulf region; and, dozens of trips
with captains of charter, shrimp, and oyster boat captains. Still,
there are a lot of trainings that would assist this work and that I
would pursue if they were not so cost-prohibitive. Moreover, financial
constraints also limit the number of monitoring trips that I can take
and thereby the number of NRC reports I am able to file. There are very
few people that do this kind of proactive monitoring work in the Gulf
region, but the need is great. My reports to the NRC have led to
numerous successful investigations by the USCG which, in turn, has led
to mutual respect and trust between myself and the leaders of various
USCG sectors and their Incident Management personnel, and other
response agencies. Especially in the immediate aftermath of hurricanes,
as I was told by USCG Sector New Orleans, having extra eyes in the sky
is a very valuable source for the Unified Command as I am able to
provide direct intel to the Unified Command for any problems I
discover, and what geographic areas I searched.
chronic offshore pollution in gulf
Since July of 2010, the National Response Center has recorded
approximately 10,000 spills of crude oil, petrochemicals, and other
contaminants into Gulf of Mexico waters. This shocking animated map \1\
created by Skytruth.org illustrates where each of these incidents
occurred between July 2010 and April 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://blog.skytruth.org/2015/04/the-other-gulf-oil-
disaster.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To make matters worse, a 2010 Associated Press investigation
reported 27,000 abandoned oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico--each a
potential source of leaking oil.\2\ Very few of these abandoned wells
are being monitored by Federal officials or industry for well-integrity
and it is unknown how many are slowly leaking oil and/or gas into the
marine environment on a daily basis. While natural seeps on the Gulf
floor are known to exist and have been mapped out, an investigation
into the cause of a leak should not be written off as naturally
occurring given the high number of abandoned wells.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.cbsnews.com/news/27000-abandoned-gulf-oil-wells-may-
be-leaking/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lack of transparency
The BP disaster in 2010 highlighted the flawed process by which oil
discharges are reported and cleaned up, and through which companies are
held accountable. It revealed how the official channels of reporting
and cleaning up oil pollution rely, to an inordinate degree, on the
polluters themselves. Little information is made available to the
public, and the information that is presented could be considered
untrustworthy. Whenever oil, hazardous materials and other pollutants
are released into a body of water, the Clean Water Act requires the
responsible party to file a report with The National Response Center, a
Federal communications center staffed by the Coast Guard. From October
2010 to September 2011, a total of 2,903 oil release reports were filed
with the NRC from the Gulf region, but 77 percent of those reports did
not include an estimate of the amount of oil spilled, according to a
2012 report \3\ by the Gulf Monitoring Consortium (GMC), of which GRN
is a member. The NRC reports that did include a spill estimate account
for a combined 250,000 gallons of crude released into the Gulf during
the 1-year period. Consortium estimates the actual total amount spilled
during the period to be between 1.5 million and 2.2 million gallons.
These massive reporting gaps make it impossible to determine how much
oil pollution is actually released in the Gulf of Mexico.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://skytruth.org/gmc/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Gulf-
Monitoring-Consortium-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One particularly egregious example of underreporting involves the
Taylor Energy leak, which I have documented and filed numerous NRC
reports over the last few years. For over 10 years, this chronic oil
leak has been spewing oil into the Gulf waters every day, with no end
in sight. The discharge began in 2004 when an undersea landslide caused
by Hurricane Ivan damaged an offshore platform and 28 associated wells.
Taylor has yet to stop the daily flow of oil from the site and oil is
still leaking to this day. A recent AP investigation \4\ published in
April 2015 shed light on the underreported flow amount and led to the
USCG revising its estimates significantly. The Taylor leak gives the
impression of a broken system, where oil production is prioritized over
concerns for the environment. Recently, a settlement agreement between
Taylor and a group of GMC member organizations was announced. The
lawsuit sought information about Taylor's response efforts which have
been hidden under a `veil of secrecy' by Taylor.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3WHe0C9lj30.
\5\ http://www.gulfmonitor.org/taylor-settlement/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
hurricanes and oil don't mix
In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Isaac in 2012, I along with
other GMC members took several monitoring trips by boat and plane to
search for, document and report any possible resulting leaks. GMC
announced our findings from a review of NRC reports that occurred
during and immediately after Hurricane Isaac. A total of 130 accidents
resulting from the storm were reported to the National Response Center.
Those accidents dumped at least 12.9 million gallons of pollutants and
contaminated water into the environment. You can read more about our
Key Findings \6\ or jump right in and read the full report.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ http://www.gulfmonitor.org/gmc-isaac-report/.
\7\ http://www.gulfmonitor.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/
Isaac.GMC_Pollution.Report.Final_ 1.2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on my experience in the Gulf region and my participation in
the New Orleans Area Contingency Plan meetings and exercises, I am
gravely concerned that government and industry is not adequately
prepared for a worst case scenario. Imagine for a moment a BP type
blowout that has been gushing for months. Then, a Category 5 hurricane
comes through disrupting the containment and response effort. If the
hurricane hits port facilities where the response equipment was
evacuated to, it could be weeks or months before the assets are fully
resourced and redeployed. Then the process of trying to contain the
leak would start again. Like Hurricane Rita followed Katrina in 2005,
what if then we get hit by another major storm again? In this scenario,
for months on end oil would be spewing unimpeded into the Gulf only to
have that oil mercilessly pushed onshore with what would be a massive
storm surge. The possibility of having oil completely washing over
coastal communities is very real, especially given the loss of wetlands
that act as a buffer.
hnrc should introduce and pass a gulf of mexico regional citizens'
advisory council
Congress identified complacency on the part of the oil industry and
government regulators as a root cause of the Exxon Valdez spill. The
Oil Pollution Act of 1990 was passed by Congress in response to the
1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill. In it, Congress mandated citizens'
councils for Prince William Sound and Cook Inlet. The purpose of these
councils is to promote partnership and cooperation among local
citizens, industry and government, and to build trust and provide
citizen oversight of environmental compliance by oil terminals and
tankers
A GoM RCAC will enhance engagement, communication, collaboration,
and trust among the Gulf oil industry, Federal and state governments,
and citizen stakeholders potentially impacted by Gulf oil operations.
These citizen stakeholders include fishermen, tourism businesses,
indigenous peoples, conservation groups, scientists, and local
governments and communities. The GoM RCAC will fund its own research on
issues of importance to citizens--spill prevention and response,
dispersants and their alternatives, human health, ecosystem impacts,
tanker safety and vessel traffic risks, fisheries protection, and more.
Through its research, consultative, and deliberative process, the
Council will provide informed advice to industry and government, and
citizens will gain a better understanding of the complex realities of
offshore oil. Importantly, the Council will operate autonomously,
rather than under the direction of government or industry.

In 2011, the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil
Spill and Offshore Drilling endorsed the citizen call for a GoM RCAC.

In 2013, citizens requested the introduction and passage by
Congress of the Gulf of Mexico Regional Citizens' Advisory Act of
2013.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ http://www.onwingsofcare.org/gomrcac/GoMRCAC-
ProposedLegislation2013-07-29.pdf.

In September 2014, a letter was sent by citizens asking Secretary
Jewel to use her administrative powers to establish a GoM RCAC. A copy
of this letter is included. Also included with my testimony is a copy
of our proposed legislation titled: Gulf of Mexico Regional Citizens'
Advisory Council Act of 2014. On behalf of Gulf citizens, I urge the
members of this committee to introduce this bill and get it passed.
five years later, serious concerns remain, safety audits, staffing
Although there have been improvements in offshore drilling safety
and government oversight since 2010, we still have a long way to go to
make it as safe as possible. At the same time attempts are being made
by the oil industry to open up the Eastern Gulf, the Mid-Atlantic, and
now the Arctic to drilling, investigations by New Orleans based WWLTV
\9\ raise serious concerns that the new post-BP safety standards may
not be taken seriously enough at existing gulf operations, and a lack
of transparency is impeding Gulf citizens' ability to be informed. A
similar problem is occurring in Alaska where a FOIA suit was brought
against BSEE for failing to release safety documents for the Shell
offshore drilling project currently underway in the Arctic Ocean.\10\
Also, a recent DOI Inspector General report determined that BSEE still
does not have enough trained staff to conduct timely investigations
into safety incidents and leaks. These issues need to be fixed
immediately and further support the need for a GoM RCAC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ http://www.wwltv.com/story/news/local/investigations/david-
hammer/2015/04/20/5-years-later-industry-responds-regulators-lag-
behind/26108425/.
\10\ http://www.peer.org/news/news-releases/shell-arctic-offshore-
safety-data-still-under-wraps. html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
congress needs to act
Although there have been improvements in offshore drilling safety
and government oversight since 2010, we still have a long way to go to
make it as safe as possible. Congress needs to get far more serious
about this issue. While the Administration has taken positive steps in
offshore safety post-Deepwater Horizon, Congress has done almost
nothing (other than RESTORE Act). The Oil Spill Commission Review in
2013 gave the Administration actions a grade of ``B'', industry a ``B-
'', and Congress a ``D+''.
Congress needs to pass a GoM RCAC bill; it needs to raise the
liability limit for offshore drilling (which a is still at only $75
million as per OPA90); and it needs to make the Federal oil spill
fund--the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund--available to Federal agencies
for spill prevention efforts, without having to go through the
cumbersome appropriations process. The OSLTF is now at about $4
billion, gains about $500 million/year (from an 8 cent/barrel oil tax
nationwide) and this money can and should be available to agency spill
prevention needs.

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplements to Mr.
Henderson's testimony. These documents are part of the hearing record
and are being retained in the Committee's official files:

--September 2014 letter sent by citizens to Secretary Jewel asking
her to use her administrative powers to establish a GoM
RCAC

--Proposed legislation titled: Gulf of Mexico Regional Citizens'
Advisory Council Act of 2014

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Davis, can you pull that right up to your mouth so we
can hear you?

STATEMENT OF LORI DAVIS, PRESIDENT, RIG-CHEM

Ms. Davis. Thank you, Chairman Bishop and committee
members, for giving me the opportunity to share my comments.
RIG-CHEM was formed in 1980 as a small oilfield service
company that supported the energy industry. In 1984, my father,
at the age of 50, was forced into early retirement by the
downturn in the industry, much like what we are facing today.
With his $25,000 severance after 21 years of service with
Schlumberger, he invested his and his family's future in RIG-
CHEM. By doing so, my parents created an opportunity for their
children with the hope that the company would grow and support
our family for many years to come, which it has. The days of
modest investment and hard work are not as easily come by.
Times are different, and $25,000 will not afford the same
opportunities that were possible in 1984.
Our company employees 16 people across Louisiana and Texas,
with an average tenure of 16 years of company service. We are
proud to say that the average annual income of our dedicated
employees is $66,000 per year. We also provide company-paid
health insurance, 401(k) and profit sharing, and have never
laid anyone off despite the cyclical highs and lows of the
energy industry.
Over the last 30 years, our company has weathered through
tough times, business challenges, increased competition,
industry fluctuation, hurricanes, a moratorium, the Great Crew
Change, and now a terrifying revisit of the early 1980s with
the decline in the price of oil. Many other small, family-owned
companies face these same challenges, but today our battle is
not just managing economic market fluctuations; we now also
have the impending obstacles of continued tightening of
government regulation. These regulations will limit
opportunities and squeeze small businesses out of the market,
out of business today.
Our daily focus is to remain competitive, safe, and
efficient in a shrinking industry, where the ability as a
small, diverse company that has to compete against the majors
is becoming increasingly difficult. There was a time that oil
and gas operators welcomed small business to help develop new
technology and keep competition healthy. Since Macondo, the
moratorium, slow recovery, government interference, and record
low oil prices, the value of diverse business is becoming
extinct as companies do what is necessary to survive the times.
Speaking on a local level, the community where RIG-CHEM is
located, Terrebonne Parish in Louisiana, last February had the
lowest unemployment rate, at 2.8 percent, in the country. This
week we were advised that our parish has been added to a credit
rating watch list due to the rising unemployment and reduced
sales tax collections, which are down by 15 percent. These
uncertain times are more reason to work closely on regulation
to prevent this from becoming a grave reality for many energy
municipalities.
My plea to you is to allow industry to work collaboratively
with government to address the needs of safety and
responsibility together. Let the experts in their respective
fields guide the decisions that impact our energy future and
ultimately energy independence. When regulations are mandated,
require that these burdens that are being leveraged upon our
Gulf of Mexico operators be the same for those we import from
into the United States, to level the global playing field.
I am not a technical expert, but a business owner who is
concerned about the impact that the proposed Well Control Rule
will indirectly have on RIG-CHEM, our employees, and the many
small companies like ours. Let us together protect our future.
I stand behind the oil and gas operators and state that the
proposed Well Containment Rule does not provide substantial
improvements to safety or build on post-Macondo progress, will
hinder offshore oil and gas development, will eliminate jobs
and hurt our energy security in the future, and I advise that
the rule be rewritten.
We cannot control OPEC or the forces of nature, but we can
stop imposing more regulations that will drive us out of
business. There was a saying back in the 1980s--``the last
person to leave should turn off the lights.'' Folks, the lights
are dimming, and we will have no one else to blame but
government for refusing to work toward a reasonable solution.
Let's work together. Let's work to keep the lights on.
Thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Davis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lori Davis, President/CEO, RIG-CHEM, LLC
Thank you Chairman Bishop and committee members for giving me the
opportunity to share my comments with you today regarding ``Economic
Impact of Federal Policies on Energy Production and Economic Growth in
the Gulf.''
My company, RIG-CHEM has been impacted and will face more
challenges should government continue to impose more regulations on an
industry already burdened by challenging economic times.
RIG-CHEM was formed in 1980 as a small oilfield service company
that supported the energy industry. In 1984, my father at the age of 50
was forced into early retirement by the downturn in the industry much
like what we're facing today. With his $25,000 severance after 21 years
of service with Schlumberger, he invested his and his family's future
in RIG-CHEM. By doing so, my parents created an opportunity for their
children with the hope that the company would grow and support our
family for many years to come, which it has. The days of modest
investment and hard work are not as easily come by, times are
different, and $25,000 will not afford the same opportunities that were
possible in 1984.
Our company employees 16 people across Louisiana and Texas with an
average tenure of 16 years of company service. We are proud to say that
the average annual income of our dedicated employees is $66,000. We
also provide Company Paid Health Insurance, 401K and Profit Sharing and
have never laid anyone off despite the cyclical highs and lows of the
energy industry.
RIG-CHEM is a longstanding member company supporting industry
organizations that help educate, improve technology, and develop best
practices. These organizations are: the Society of Petroleum Engineers
(SPE), American Association of Drilling Engineers (AADE), American
Petroleum Institute (API), South Central Industrial Association (SCIA),
Louisiana Oil and Gas Association (LOGA), Women's Business Enterprise
National Council (WBENC) and the Women's Energy Network (WEN).
Over the last 30 years our company has weathered through tough
times, business challenges, increased competition, industry
fluctuation, hurricanes, a Moratorium, The Great Crew Change, and now a
terrifying revisit of the early 1980s with the decline in the price of
oil. Many other small family owned companies face these same challenges
but today our battle is not just managing economic market fluctuations,
we now also have the impending obstacles of continued tightening of
government regulation. These regulations will limit opportunities and
squeeze small businesses, (the backbone and largest tax contributors of
the United States) out of the market. Our daily focus is to remain
competitive, safe and efficient in a shrinking industry, where the
ability as a small-diverse company that has to compete against the
majors is becoming increasingly difficult. There was a time that oil
and gas operators welcomed small business to help develop new
technology and keep competition healthy. Since Macondo, the Moratorium,
slow recovery, government interference, and record low oil prices the
once value of diverse business is becoming extinct as companies do what
is necessary to survive the times.
Speaking on a local level, the community where RIG-CHEM is located,
Terrebonne Parish in Louisiana, last February had the lowest
unemployment rate, at 2.8 percent, in the country. This week we were
advised that our parish has been added to a credit rating ``watch
list'' due to the rising unemployment and reduced sales tax collections
which are down by 15 percent. These uncertain times are more reason to
work closely on regulation to prevent this from becoming a grave
reality for many energy municipalities.
I support and defend the industry that is committed to a safe
working environment where families and friends leave for their jobs
that provide national energy and return home safely. This industry has
been commanded to work safer, while working smarter and now more
efficient.
My plea to you is to allow industry to work collaboratively with
government to address the needs of safety and responsibility together.
Let the experts in their respective fields guide the decisions that
impact our energy future and ultimately energy independence. When
regulations are mandated require that these burdens that are being
leveraged upon our Gulf of Mexico operators be the same for those who
export into the United States to level the global playing field.
I am not a technical expert, but a business owner who is concerned
about the impact that the proposed Well Control Rule will indirectly
have on RIG-CHEM, our employees as well as many small companies like
ours. Let us together protect our future. I stand behind the Oil and
Gas Operators and state that the proposed Well Control Rule:

1.  Does not provide substantial improvements to safety or build on
post-Macondo progress;

2.  Will hinder offshore oil and gas development;

3.  Will eliminate jobs and hurt our energy security and future; and

4.  Advise that the rule be rewritten.

We can't control OPEC or the forces of nature but we can stop
imposing more regulations that will drive us out of business. There was
a saying back in the 1980s, ``the last person to leave should turn off
the lights''--folks, the lights are dimming and we'll have no one else
to blame but government for refusing to work toward a reasonable
solution.
Let's work together; let's work to keep the lights on.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
Our last witness, but certainly not the least, is Dr.
Mason.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH R. MASON, HERMANN MOYSE, JR./LOUISIANA
BANKERS ASSOCIATION, ENDOWED PROFESSOR OF BANKING, LOUISIANA
STATE UNIVERSITY; AND SENIOR FELLOW, THE WHARTON SCHOOL

Dr. Mason. Good morning, Chairman Bishop and members of the
committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this
very important topic.
Unfortunately, little has changed in the Gulf region since
my July 2010 study on the economic costs of a moratorium to the
Gulf region. That study predicted a roughly $2 billion slowdown
in economic activity in the Gulf states following the 6-month
drilling moratorium in May 2010.
While it is difficult to disentangle the effect of just the
moratorium after the fact, real GDP from oil and gas extraction
in the four Gulf states measured in that study fell by $16
billion in 2009-2010, and remains $11 billion below 2009 real
GDP in 2011.
Not much has changed for Louisiana in recent years. In
2012-2013, Louisiana real GDP from oil and gas extraction fell
16 percent, and in 2013-2014, it fell another 6 percent. States
with more onshore focus grew considerably in 2014, but even the
states that did well in recent years can be expected to slow in
2015 due to persistent low oil prices.
Amidst this industry difficulty, the Department of the
Interior's BSEE recently published new requirements and
procedures related to blowout prevention systems and well
control. In strict economic terms, those requirements pose new
costs for the offshore oil and gas industry at a time when
high-cost production is being pushed out of the industry.
It should come as no surprise, therefore, that a recent
American Petroleum Institute study of the potential impact of
the proposed rule concluded that, ``Under the new regulations,
approximately 690 fewer wells are projected in the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico between 2017 and 2030, a 26 percent decline in drilling
activity.''
From a pure economic perspective, increased costs should
result in lower supply. Regression results in my written
testimony suggest, however, that production declines associated
with additional regulation may be costlier if there already
exists a significant regulatory burden.
The direct results of production declines are, inevitably,
fewer jobs, decreased wages, and lower economic growth. These
effects will exacerbate competitive pressures in higher
education as students, whether studying oil and gas,
alternative energy, or compliance, are left without job
prospects, and university programs without funding. Those
funding shortfalls hurt research into new energy sources. The
majority of Louisiana State University's externally-funded
energy research is not associated with fossil fuels, but
renewables. Moreover, that energy research funding is nearly
equal to the total budget provided to the relevant colleges by
the state of Louisiana. That research money is plugged back
into course development and student support for education and
workforce training and related fields.
LSU offers a number of degree majors and minors that are
relevant to energy issues. Estimates suggest that almost 3,000
LSU undergraduate and graduate students study in energy-related
fields. But program enrollment alone may severely understate
the importance of workforce development to students in our
region.
For instance, even without a dedicated program, some 18
percent of LSU business school grads go on to work in the oil
and gas and energy sectors. Moreover, the college reports that
LSU business graduates boast the highest mid-career earnings
among peer institutions largely due to that energy industry
employment. As a result, the College of Business, like many
other academic units at LSU, is launching a variety of programs
to prepare students for the opportunities and challenges
presented in today's energy sector.
LSU also provides energy-related workforce development in
the form of worker safety, continuing education, and various
energy specialization programs focused on fossil fuels, as well
as renewables. As noted by Mr. Herbst initially, LSU's
workforce development programs are a vital component of safety
and efficiency in today's energy industry.
In summary, LSU is inextricably intertwined with the energy
industry and the Gulf of Mexico. Higher production costs will
reduce grant funding, class offerings, and student placements.
Further declines in higher education in Louisiana and similar
states will be unavoidable. And ironically, a chief casualty of
the slowdown will be research into clean and efficient energy
sources to replace fossil fuels. I respectfully ask the Members
present to please think hard about these dynamics before
layering new offshore regulations on Gulf energy production.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Mason follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph R. Mason, Louisiana State University \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Views expressed in this testimony are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect official positions of Louisiana State
University.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this very important
topic.

Unfortunately, little has changed in the Gulf region since my
initial study on the ``The Economic Cost of a Moratorium on Offshore
Oil and Gas Exploration to the Gulf Region,'' in July 2010. Economic
activity in the region is still moribund and the outlook for
exploration and development remains subdued.
Now, more than 5 years after Deepwater Horizon, further
restrictions are being considered for Gulf drilling operations. Those
regulations, like the ones before them, will decrease production
activity and the economic growth of the region.
Families will be impacted by lost jobs and wages and students--
whether studying oil and gas, alternative energy, or compliance--will
be left without job prospects. Such effects will continue to drag down
growth in the Gulf Coast region relative to the rest of the country
during this crucial period or economic uncertainty when the Federal
Reserve is trying to get the economy back on track. Thus, imposing any
new regulations at this time will have to be undertaken in a careful
and thoughtful fashion in order to preserve jobs and livelihoods during
a period of tenuous economic uncertainty.
the state of the gulf oil and gas industry
My July 2010 study predicted a roughly $2 billion slowdown in
economic activity in the Gulf states following the drilling moratorium
in May 2010. While it is difficult to disentangle the effect of just
the moratorium after the fact, real Louisiana GDP from Oil and Gas
Extraction fell by $1.6 billion in 2010 remained another $1.3 billion
below 2009 real GDP in 2011.
The reason for the slowdown is straightforward. The effects of
regulatory actions taken after April 2010 were dramatic and long-lived.
Pre-April 2010 rig counts in the Gulf of Mexico did not exceed April
2010 levels until July 2013, more than 3 years later.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsEven after July 2013, however, rig counts in the Gulf of Mexico
were not sustained and production has remained relatively flat. As a
result, the Gulf of Mexico is still not back to pre-April 2010
production trend levels, measured relative to April 2010 as the
midpoint to today.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsWe continue to see the impact of the post-April 2010 slowdown
and more recent trends in local economic activity. Louisiana real GDP
from Oil and Gas Extraction fell 15.9 percent in 2012-13 and another
6.3 percent in 2013-14.
Overall, states with offshore exposures are growing at a slower
pace than those with more onshore focus. Preliminary 2014 GDP data from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis shows that GDP from Oil and Gas
Extraction slowed by 6.64 percent in Alaska and 6.30 percent in
Louisiana, while activity grew by almost 10 percent or more in the
other major oil-producing states with more onshore reserves.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsEven the states that did well in 2014, however, can be expected
to slow considerably in 2015 due to persistent low oil prices.
The Federal Reserve's September Beige Book, released September 2,
2015, noted that the energy industry has been flat in all of the
regions its surveyed.

Since January 2015 to today, the Gulf of Mexico rig count has
almost halved.

In its most recent report, the International Energy Agency now
forecasts that oil production outside OPEC can be expected to decline
by nearly 500,000 barrels a day next year, with the United States
bearing some 80 percent of that decline. According to the IEA, ``Oil's
price collapse is closing down high-cost production from Eagle Ford in
Texas to Russia and the North Sea . . . [The OPEC effort] to defend
market share regardless of price appears to be having the intended
effect.''

Clearly, this is a difficult period for Louisiana and the U.S. Oil
and Gas sector.
anticipated effects of new regulations
Amidst this difficulty, the U.S. DOI Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently published new requirements
and procedures related to the proposed rule ``Oil and Gas and Sulphur
Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf--Blowout Preventer Systems
and Well Control.'' In economic terms, those requirements pose new
costs for the offshore oil and gas industry at time when high-cost
production is being pushed out of the industry.
A recent American Petroleum Institute (API) study to evaluate the
potential cost and economic impact effects of the proposed rule on oil
and gas drilling operations in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico concluded that,
``[u]nder the new regulations, approximately around 690 fewer wells are
projected to be drilled from 2017 to 2030, a 26 percent decline, with
similar water depth distributions. Over the 10-year 2017 to 2026 period
the projected number of wells projected not to be drilled equals around
470, with an average of 20 fewer exploration wells per year and 29
fewer development wells.'' (``BSEE Proposed Well Control Rule Cost and
Economic Analysis,'' API, July 2015, at p. 26)
Such conclusions should come as no surprise. Quite simply,
increased costs should result in lower supply. In order to demonstrate
the universality of such a relationship, I regressed the percent growth
in (real) state GDP from oil and gas extraction on the percent growth
in (real) state GDP from waste management and remediation as a
proportion of that from oil and gas extraction in the top 10 oil and
gas-producing states annually, from 2000-2013.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The states used in the model are Alaska, Colorado, Louisiana,
New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas, West Virginia,
and Wyoming. Data from 2000-2014 yields 140 observations. Data are from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is important to keep in mind that waste management and
remediation comprises a wide range of activities, not just those
related to oil and gas extraction.\4\ Such breadth, however, should
make it more difficult to find a significant relationship with oil and
gas extraction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Businesses engaged in the collection, treatment, and disposal
of waste materials. Includes businesses engaged in collecting and/or
local hauling of waste and/or recyclable materials; operating waste
treatment or disposal facilities (except sewer systems or sewage
treatment facilities); operating materials recovery facilities (those
that sort recyclable materials from the trash stream); providing
remediation services (those that provide for the cleanup of
contaminated buildings, mine sites, and soil or ground water); and
providing septic pumping and other miscellaneous waste management
services, such as portable toilet rental services.'' (See http://
www.bea.gov/industry/pdf/2012_industry_code_guide.pdf)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The results, displayed below, are striking. On an annual basis, the
growth in economic activity devoted to waste management and remediation
has a strong and statistically significant negative effect on oil and
gas production. The coefficient on waste management and remediation's
effect on oil and gas production is just over 0.8, suggesting that an
additional percent of economic activity related to waste management and
remediation (as a percent of oil and gas extraction) reduces activity
in oil and gas extraction by 0.8 percent.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsOne might expect, however, that if the source of growth in
waste management and remediation is new regulation, then the effect on
oil and gas extraction would strengthen with a longer time lag. That is
exactly the result we see below, where instead of measuring the effect
with annual changes to both variables I use changes over a 5-year
period (resulting in 100 observations rather than 140).
The results below show that the coefficient magnitude in the
relationship from 0.8 to just under 1.3, suggesting that a 5-year
period captures more of the hypothesized effect.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsLast, I examine how the relationship between economic activity
in waste management and remediation and oil and gas extraction may have
changed over time. The last panel suggests that in recent years, the
relationship may have strengthened considerably, with the coefficient
rising from just under 1.3 to 3.1, so that an additional percent of
economic activity related to waste management and remediation (as a
percent of oil and gas extraction) reduces activity in oil and gas
extraction by 3.1 percent.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe results above cannot be considered a complete analysis of
regulatory dynamics, but may constitute a set of results suggesting
that each dollar of regulatory cost imposed upon the oil and gas
industry may result in a larger cost than the last. In economic
parlance, the marginal cost of additional regulation may rise with
existing regulation, rather than remaining constant. If that is the
case, policymakers would want to be cognizant of existing costs before
adding new ones.
higher education and workforce impacts
Like economic growth, employment growth in oil and gas extraction
has lagged in Alaska and Louisiana relative to other oil-producing
states. From 2009-2013, employment in oil and gas extraction has grown
27.84 percent in Louisiana and 30.76 percent in Alaska, relative to
43.03 percent in the other major oil producing states (Colorado, North
Dakota, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas, Wyoming, and West
Virginia).
Still, the oil and gas extraction sector is an important employment
base in all of these states. Such importance is heightened by
educational programs devoted to energy and the environment in all such
states, as well as elsewhere in the United States.
Recently, Louisiana State University (LSU) reviewed the scope and
extent of energy-related education and research at LSU. Like many
universities, LSU's energy-related research spans a wide range of
topics including upstream oil and natural gas drilling and production
topics (including hydraulic fracturing), geology, solar, wind, biomass,
geothermal, materials, efficiency, electrical conductivity, nuclear,
environmental impacts, and socioeconomic impacts.
Research
While LSU is typically associated with oil and gas, the majority of
LSU's externally funded energy research is not associated with fossil
fuels but renewables.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsLSU's renewable energy research, estimated at close to $43
million over the past 7 years, accounted for almost half (44 percent)
of all energy-related research. Materials science-based energy research
accounted for close to $19 million, or 19 percent, of LSU's total
energy research funding over the past 7 years. Research associated with
energy and the environment is estimated to be the third-largest
research topic, accounting for close to $17 million in externally
funded energy projects over the past 7 years. Fossil fuels research
come in last, behind those three areas.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe academic units involved in such research vary widely, as
well. LSU's College of Agriculture accounted for 39 percent of energy-
related research funds ($38.6 million) in the past 7 years. The College
of Engineering has generated the second-largest level of externally
funded energy research. The School of the Coast & Environment generated
the third-largest level of externally funded energy research at $12
million over the past 7 years.
The College of Science is estimated to have generated over $6.3
million in external funding for research projects in the past 7 years,
while the Center for Energy Studies has been awarded approximately $4.5
million in externally funded research.
LSU's School of Art & Design contributes to work on coastal
sustainability and the E.J. Ourso College of Business maintains a
variety of programs related to Environmental Economics and Emissions
Trading.
The table above also shows that external funding for energy
research approximately equals all of the University funding, in the
aggregate, for the colleges involved.
Teaching
Much of that money is plugged back into course development and
student support for education and workforce training in those fields.
LSU offers a number of degrees and minors/concentrations that are
relevant to energy issues. Relevant degrees include those in
engineering (petroleum, electrical, chemical, agricultural and
biological, and mechanical), law, geology, basic sciences,
environmental science, and oceanography/coastal sciences.
Energy-relevant undergraduate and graduate courses are taught in
the areas of fossil fuels, renewable sources, electricity, nuclear
energy, and law. Most fossil fuels courses are taught in Engineering,
Geology & Geophysics, and similar departments. Courses on renewables
are taught in Agricultural Economics, Civil Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Economics, Environmental Sciences, Petroleum Engineering,
and the School of Renewable Natural Resources. Electricity-related
courses are offered in Chemical, Mechanical, and Electrical
engineering. Nuclear classes are in the Department of Mechanical &
Industrial Engineering and the Nuclear Science Minor in the College of
Science. Finally, courses on energy law are taught at both
Environmental Science and the Law Center.
Enrollment in energy-related courses is strong. Estimates suggest
that roughly 10 percent (almost 3,000) LSU Undergraduate and Graduate
students study energy-related fields. About half of those engaged in
such study do so through the Petroleum Engineering program, with the
remainder distributed across Agriculture, Art & Design, Gulf Coast &
Environment, Science, Law, and Business.
Many new initiatives are taking shape at LSU, as well. The College
of Business is launching a specialization in energy studies, including
courses such as Energy Economics Policy, Petroleum Accounting, and
Product Lifecycle Management, plus courses offered in the College of
Engineering, College of Science, and School of the Coast & Environment.
Similarly, the Law School offers a Graduate Certificate in Energy Law
and Policy to officially recognize students who have demonstrated
substantial competence in the study of energy law and related subject
matter.
Enrollment in energy courses and certificates and majors related to
energy, however, may severely understate the importance of workforce
development to students in our region. For instance, even though the
College of Business energy courses are relatively new to the
University, Bloomberg reports that 18 percent of LSU business school
grads go the oil & gas and energy sectors. In contrast, the next
highest sectoral concentration, 15 percent, goes to financial services.
The top recruiters of LSU business grads are reported to be Ernst &
Young LLP, Postlethwaite & Netterville APAC, ExxonMobil, and Shell. The
College of Business reports that their graduates boast the highest mid-
career earnings among peer institutions, largely due to energy industry
employment.
Workforce Development
LSU also undertakes many energy-related initiatives focusing on
workforce development, worker safety, continuing education, and various
energy specializations.
For instance, the Petroleum Engineering Research and Technology
Transfer (PERTT) Laboratory conducts training at an industrial-scale
facility for future oil industry employees. The Donald and Gayle Keller
Building provides a classroom and computer lab for professional
training. In 2009, in partnership with Entergy Corporation, LSU
initiated a Nuclear Power Workforce Development Program. The Nuclear
Power Workforce Development Program works in conjunction with the
Medical Physics and Health Physics program, which offers classes in
radiation protection, exposure evaluation, and nuclear facility safety.
LSU also offers continuing education programs to professionals in a
variety of energy-related fields. For example, LSU's Continuing
Education office offers a Certified Occupational Safety Specialist
program for which participants receive a 10-hour Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) completion card. The Mineral Law
Institute's annual symposiums offer continuing education credits for
lawyers and other professionals, such as certified engineers and city
planners. A large number of sessions at conferences held by the Center
for Energy Studies are also registered for continuing legal education.
The Department of Petroleum Engineering works with the Society of
Petroleum Engineers to offer short courses and continuing education
credits, including Professional Ethics for Petroleum Engineers and
Mechanical Tubing Forces: Temperature, Ballooning, Piston, and Buckling
Effects. The Department of Chemical Engineering also offers an online
course Essentials of Chemical Engineering for Non-Chemical Engineers.
Thus, LSU is inextricably intertwined with the energy industry and
the Gulf of Mexico. Higher production costs will reduce grant funding,
class offerings, and student placements. Existing professionals who may
be laid off will not need certifications or continuing education.
Further declines in higher education in Louisiana and similar states
will be unavoidable.
summary and conclusions
Energy production in the Gulf of Mexico is still hobbled by the
drilling restrictions put in place after April 2010. Since then, OPEC's
competitive strategy continues to depress oil prices worldwide,
resulting in the current state of the industry in which the economics
of production are expected to break within the next year.
As I have testified previously, any regulatory policy that raises
pecuniary and/or nonpecuniary costs will slow production. Production
will inevitably decline in response to higher costs and greater
political uncertainty. In both cases, that means less jobs, lower
wages, and lower GDP growth than would otherwise occur. Those immutable
laws of economics will bind whether policymakers like them or not. And
in today's competitive environment, higher U.S. production costs will
drive more market share to OPEC, just as their leaders hope.
Slow economic growth hurts further development of clean energy.
(After all, why make it if nobody can afford it?) The stress of higher
costs put upon local economies like that of Louisiana actually hurts
the development of new clean energy sources. University research like
that at LSU is driving the next generation of clean energy. We need a
smooth regulatory and research policy path to a clean energy world,
lest we stay stuck in the mire of economic recession that prevents the
conversion to the new energy sources we all hold dear.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
I appreciate the testimony of all the witnesses. I
appreciate you coming here. I was going to say I appreciate you
coming so far, but I realize I came a lot farther than all of
you to be here. But I thank you for your testimony.
We are now going to turn to the committee for questions.
The committee members, once again, each have 5 minutes to ask
questions, and we will go through as many rounds as we can
possibly fit in today.
I will go last. I will start with Chairman Fleming, if you
would like to ask the first series of questions.
Mr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the panel for being here today.
Mr. Leimkuhler, I would like to ask you some questions. My
personal background is that I am a physician from the private
sector, but also I have been serving in Congress since 2009. I
have observed that regulations, increased regulations, and more
complicated or expensive regulations, don't necessarily
translate to more safety.
So, what I would like to ask you about is this. In your
testimony, you differentiated between performance-based
regulations and prescriptive regulations. For example, real-
time monitoring sounds like a good thing to have. But many of
those who commented on the rule believe it will make operations
less safe.
What do you have to say about that?
Mr. Leimkuhler. First off, I think that is a good point.
When it comes to real-time monitoring, I fully support it. But
I feel that all the companies should be challenged to perform
and demonstrate to the regulator how do we effectively use
real-time monitoring to ensure we are running a safe operation,
and the current regulatory proposed rule has in it the mandate
that you----
The Chairman. Mr. Leimkuhler, can I just ask you to pull
that microphone right to your mouth?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I'm sorry.
The Chairman. Yes, it is much better to hear you that way.
Mr. Leimkuhler. So, real-time monitoring I think is a great
example to demonstrate how performance-based regulations should
be applied, as opposed to prescriptive. The proposed Well
Control Rule requires us within 3 years to build a brick-and-
mortar, on-site center, or lease one, and staff that with staff
who will monitor the data feed coming in from offshore. That
absolutely should be done. Real-time monitoring I think should
be a requirement. But the companies should be given the
challenge to show the regulator how do you perform to meet that
standard.
At LLOG, we have real-time monitoring. We employ mud
loggers offshore, on-site for every one of our----
Mr. Fleming. Well, let me be clear. I want to clarify. Do
you believe that real-time monitoring is better than
prescriptive requirements, or do you think a combination? I
just want to be clear where you stand on that.
Mr. Leimkuhler. I am in favor of real-time monitoring, but
I don't like the prescriptive nature of how I am directed to
achieve it. I should be given the latitude to demonstrate to
the regulator that we monitor operations properly, we monitor
continuously, we have back-up. We do that. But we don't use a
brick-and-mortar real-time center. We have data streams, feeds
that come in to myself, my whole entire staff. We have the
capability to properly monitor operations, and I would like to
demonstrate that.
Mr. Fleming. OK. Let me interrupt you because I have
limited time, but I have other questions. I appreciate your
answer there.
Can you describe the current safety standards for blowout
prevention and the BSEE new regulation? How does the BSEE
regulation increase risk?
Mr. Leimkuhler. Relative to BOPs, I feel one of the bigger
impacts is at places that exceed API-53, which is the new BOP
standard. I think that should be a requirement in the
regulations. But in places where it exceeds it, with respect to
BOPs, would be the 5-year demonstration of integrity of the
system. Right now, the way the regulation is written, we have
to take the BOPs fully out of commission. And rather than
ensure every single component in that system has a valid
certificate of inspection from the original manufacturer within
5 years, we have to take the whole system out of service every
5 years, which could potentially take rigs out of service for
up to 6 months to get that work done.
Mr. Fleming. The report I have is, if finalized as written,
110 of the 175 wells, or 63 percent, that already have been
safely drilled post-Macondo in the Gulf would fail to be in
compliance with provisions. Is that what you are referring to?
Mr. Leimkuhler. No, I am not. That is in reference to the
drilling margin portion of the rule rather than in reference to
the BOP systems themselves. With regard to the drilling margin
rule, API has come up with a document called 92L, which was
developed rather quickly in response to the request of the
regulator to regulate drilling margins. It encompasses the best
practices that industry experts have come up with as to how you
drill safely in the Gulf of Mexico, which is a rather unique
drilling environment, rather than the prescriptive margin of
always maintaining a certain distance between the weight of
your fluid and the strength of the rock.
Mr. Fleming. OK. Real quickly, I want to shift to Professor
Mason.
You said your research shows an economic impact of
increased regulation in the Gulf following 2010. In your
opinion, what actions were most devastating that were taken in
terms of economic effect?
The Chairman. And you have 15 seconds to do it.
Dr. Mason. I only measured the shutdown and drilling
activity as a result of the moratorium. I didn't go beyond
that.
Mr. Fleming. OK. Thank you.
My time is up and I yield back.
The Chairman. That was within 15 seconds. I am impressed.
Let me turn to another co-host here today, Congressman
Graves, for the next round of questioning.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Herbst, thank you for being here. I have a couple of
questions for you. But first of all, I want to talk briefly
about the macro perspective.
We have seen energy prices at record lows right now
relative to previous performance, and obviously the cost of
producing energy in the offshore is a substantial investment
and one, as you noted, that is often determined in excess of a
decade in advance of actual production.
When you combine what is going on right now--OPEC nations,
led by Saudi Arabia, are continuing to flood the market. When
you look at some of the other actions of this Administration,
with regard to the Iran agreement, that is going to allow for
hundreds of millions of barrels of additional oil to be put on
the market.
I want to make note, Mr. Chairman, that I don't remember
seeing a greenhouse gas evaluation by this Administration in
regard to the Iran agreement, as was done with the Keystone
Pipeline.
The point here is you are seeing extraordinary price
pressures. We are seeing right now folks getting pink slips all
over the Gulf of Mexico, and Senator Vitter and Senator Cassidy
noted all the associated employment opportunities related to
offshore oil and gas production. Importantly, I have heard the
statistic over and over again that offshore energy production
is the second-largest revenue stream for the U.S. Treasury
outside of taxes, a big revenue stream for the U.S. Treasury.
And as I recall, we are approaching nearly $200 billion in
funds for the U.S. Treasury from offshore energy production,
the majority, the far majority of which, you are well aware, is
produced offshore the coast of Louisiana.
As Senator Cassidy noted, the implications of this are not
limited to just taxpayers, not limited to the U.S. Treasury.
The implications of this rule, if it continues to cause a
reduction in offshore energy production--and I remind you, in
2009, 30 percent of all the domestic crude produced in the
United States was produced in the Gulf of Mexico. Today, it is
down to 17 percent. Historically, I believe it was 11 percent
of all the domestic gas production was in the Gulf of Mexico.
It is down to 5 percent today.
As Senator Cassidy noted, these revenue streams are
actually coming back to the state of Louisiana to restore our
coast, to help protect our environment, our ecological
productivity here. This rule is going to prevent those
investments in the environment. As Dr. Mason noted, in addition
it will prevent our investment in higher education.
The first question I have for you is this. As I understand
it, the offshore industry, on their own, voluntarily worked on
over 100 changes, updates, and safety procedures since the
Macondo disaster. Can you just rattle off about five of those
for me?
Mr. Herbst. Again, it is a good question, and a big part of
this rule is about adopting those changes that industry did
move quickly on as far as making changes to API and----
Mr. Graves. Could you just rattle off about five of them
for me?
Mr. Herbst. The RP-53 went to Standard 53. That was a
change. I believe the API-11 document was also changed.
I have them right here--1 minute.
Mr. Graves. My point is this, Mr. Herbst. I can pull out a
document and rattle off all 100 of them if I wanted to. Here is
the point I am trying to make. We have an industry that has
hundreds of billions of dollars in investment. As was noted by
one of the witnesses, in some cases, the rental rates of these
platforms go for $1 million a day. These are the folks that are
out there on the ground understanding the implications.
If you have to pull out a list--and again, I can do it too,
and read off all 100 of these things--it indicates a lack of
intimate understanding or knowledge of what the industry is
actually doing. My concern is that the Department of the
Interior--and I know you didn't do this, I know that this came
from DC, I have known your work for years and appreciate your
service--but the frustration or the concern I have is that you
have folks sitting in an ivory tower who are sitting and
writing these regulations, that have no understanding of what
is actually happening on the ground, the implication to our
environment here in Louisiana, the implications to our
workforce here in Louisiana. I think that disconnect is very,
very dangerous, and I urge you to take that back.
Mr. Henderson, I actually want to commend you. You may be
surprised to hear that, but I want to commend you, because I
actually agree that we need to ensure and we need to work with
the Department of the Interior. We need to make sure that we
have the safest regulatory environment that we can possibly
have. I also think it is really important to point out, though,
Mr. Henderson, that the judge in the case of the Macondo spill
determined that there was gross negligence, willful misconduct,
determined there was a climate of profit-driven decisions, OK?
When you look historically at the trends, you have seen a
trend of a decrease in the total number of spills that have
occurred in the Gulf of Mexico, and you have seen a decrease in
the total volume of oil that has been spilled. I agree with you
that OPENS needs to be updated; a lot of changes from Macondo
have resulted. But whenever you went out--you noted all the NRC
filings that you did--when you went out and monitored these
areas to find the spills, how did you get out there?
Mr. Henderson. Sometimes by plane, sometimes by boat, and
sometimes by foot.
Mr. Graves. And those boats and planes were solar powered?
Mr. Henderson. No, absolutely not.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Henderson. That is not my fault, though.
The Chairman. Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the panel for the informative presentations today.
I am from Arkansas. We don't have much offshore exploration
in Arkansas, but I am trying to get up to speed on this as much
as possible. I have been reviewing the process, and I notice
that BSEE has collaborative agreements with at least 12 other
agencies through Memorandums of Understanding, Memorandums of
Agreement, and interagency arrangements. It seems like a very
cumbersome and complicated process in a lot of areas where
regulation takes place on the industry.
Mr. Herbst, you said you were a chemical engineer and a
professional engineer. I am also a professional engineer, so I
understand a little bit about how technology works. Also, I
know as a professional engineer, one of our foremost objectives
is to protect the public safety, health, and welfare.
It has been interesting in committee meetings in DC when
EPA comes in, who is one of your collaborators in the Federal
agencies. They always talk about public health, safety, and
welfare. Last week, we had a hearing on the Animus River
chemical spill. Through the hearing it was pretty obvious that
the EPA was very negligent of their responsibility in
protecting the public health, safety, and welfare; and I
believe had it been a private company that was as negligent as
EPA was, that there would be a huge outcry over that.
When we look at this Well Control Rule, the blowout
prevention regulations, they are very prescriptive. To my
understanding, there is technology there that is not even
proven yet, and these rules were developed by you guys. We
heard testimony about how the industry has increased their
safety requirements through API rules.
When I was in engineering school, they taught us that when
you are writing specifications, you specify results and you
don't get real descriptive in your specifications, because when
you specify very descriptively, you are actually specifying the
design of this equipment. It sounds like you are doing that on
the blowout preventers. So with that, you take on the liability
of the design.
So, is BSEE prepared to fully warrant or fully back up the
blowout preventer designs that they are proposing in the well,
and to take full liability for those in case they are put into
place and they happen to fail or there are problems with them?
Mr. Herbst. Well, let me answer it this way. Again, the
recommendations that came in after Macondo were from various
groups--one of those was the National Academy of Engineers,
various other groups, and industry input. This rule reflects
that input. Much of the rule, again, reflects industry changes.
We mentioned API Standard 53. Many of the requirements, if you
think of them as prescriptive, come from that Standard 53.
Now, clearly there are other ones where we are trying to
push that safety bar a little bit further, realizing we deal
with 80 different operators, everything from a super major to
small--I call them mom and pop type organizations. It is
important to set some bar, whether it is prescriptive or not,
so that they can meet that bar.
Now, again, some of the requirements in here have dates of
implementation further out--3 years, 5 years, 7 years--and some
of them are performance based. So, yes, we want a BOP stack to
be able to center the pipe so it can be sheared properly. We
did not tell them how to center the pipe. We did not tell them
that another requirement is that you must shear everything in
the hole. We didn't tell them that that has to be a shear ram.
It could be some other type of device, explosive device that
can shear the pipe.
So, we did leave areas open, and that is what my remarks
said, that it is both prescriptive and performance.
Mr. Westerman. I am running short on time here.
Mr. Leimkuhler, do you believe the industry or BSEE has
more expertise in well design? And, can you briefly share some
examples of how provisions in the Well Control Rule actually
undermine safe operations rather than enhance the current
safety culture that we see in the Gulf? Also, do you feel like
BSEE has worked as closely with industry on these rules as they
should?
Mr. Leimkuhler. That's quite a few questions there. To
answer the first question----
Mr. Westerman. Fourteen seconds.
Mr. Leimkuhler. I feel like industry obviously has a
greater level of expertise when it comes to well design. When
it comes to how that design actually applies to the regulations
that are in place, they are certainly the experts there. We
worked jointly together to really come up with, in my view, a
very good product.
With regards to the regulations and impacting our business,
I think the drilling margin is probably a good example, whereby
if we apply our conventional standards that we have applied
throughout our learnings of deepwater drilling in the Gulf of
Mexico, I think those have all been codified quite well in API-
92 versus the prescriptive half-pound per gallon drilling
margin rule.
The Chairman. I do need to cut you off here. Your answer
should have just been yes.
Mr. Leimkuhler. OK.
The Chairman. You are out of time. I am sorry. We will come
back again here.
Mr. Smith, it is good to have you back with our committee.
You are recognized now for some questions.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure to be
here. It is a pleasure to just be south of the river. I am up
from just north of here, in southeastern Missouri. We are right
along the Mississippi about 200 miles, so we just have to float
down and we are right here.
I am very curious, Mr. Herbst, what is the projected
compliance cost of the proposed rule?
Mr. Herbst. You are talking about BSEE's cost in the rule?
I believe, just under $1 billion was the estimate.
Mr. Smith. Just under $1 billion?
Mr. Herbst. Yes. That is over a 10-year period, I believe.
Mr. Smith. Over a 10-year period? How do you respond to, I
believe it was Senator Cassidy that started in the first panel
that said, that industry has calculated a cost of nearly $32
billion over 10 years?
Mr. Herbst. Right. So, part of moving from proposed rule to
final rule, we asked for comments specifically on costs. We are
looking at those costs, and I can tell you that one of the
costs for industry came up with $32 billion; $10 billion of
that alone is tied to the drilling margin issue. So, obviously,
that is one this week that we are meeting with industry in
Washington to try to see if we can still meet that objective,
but maybe in a less prescriptive manner.
There are tremendous costs that industry has pointed out
there, so we are working to see those costs. Again, they may be
the experts on some of these costs. We will have to sit and
look at that. We will have to look at the final rule. Again, I
expect there will be some changes from proposed rule to final
rule. When that occurs, we have to look at those cost impacts
again.
Mr. Smith. To me, between $32 billion and $1 billion, that
is a lot of billions that are out there in trying to figure out
an estimated cost.
Would you accurately say that the $1 billion proposal
projected cost is appropriate and necessary for the rules that
you are trying to implement?
Mr. Herbst. Again, our $1 billion cost does take into
account the benefits of the rule as well. Some of the costs are
offset by the benefits. So, those safety benefits of a blowout
incident such as Macondo and the lives lost and the
environmental damage, that is taken into account on the benefit
side of our analysis. I don't believe that industry's analysis
took that into account.
Mr. Smith. Would you say you do believe it is appropriate
and necessary?
Mr. Herbst. Again, we will have to look at the final rule
and what the final costs are before we can make that
determination, or I could make the call on that.
Mr. Smith. OK. So right now, we are trying to decide if it
is between $880 million or $32 billion in the cost.
I do want to point out to the agency that I would remind
them to look at Justice Scalia's opinion in Michigan v. EPA,
which was a Supreme Court case this June. In that decision,
Justice Scalia was writing the opinion of the court, and it
stated, ``The agency must consider cost, including, most
importantly, cost of compliance, before describing whether
regulation is appropriate and necessary.'' That is the supreme
law of the land that was decided in the last week in June of
this year, and I hope your agency can decide and understand
whether it is $880 million or whether it is $32 billion and
whether it is appropriate and necessary when you are looking at
the offshore production just here in the Gulf of Mexico being
roughly 17 percent, as what my colleague, Mr. Graves from
Louisiana, was saying.
I have been here the last few days. We don't have offshore
oil drilling in Missouri, but we are very glad that we have it
here in the Gulf of Mexico, because it drastically affects the
economy for the Nation, and it affects the economy for the
world, for that matter. We need to make sure that we have a
fair balance between the environment and safety and industry.
I can tell you just from a fishing perspective, being here
over the weekend, I have not seen such a great production of
fishing. Whenever you look at the No. 1 commercial fishing
industry in the continental United States, right here next to
the oil rigs, I would say environment and industry is going
hand in hand. I would hope that your agency would promote that
and not hinder that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rice, good to have you here. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rice. Thank you so much. It is my great honor to be
here, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having me.
Mr. Graves, thank you for having me.
I am not on this committee. I am from Myrtle Beach, South
Carolina, which is a big tourism area, and we are considering
opening the Atlantic offshore for drilling. My community is
very concerned about it, which is why I am here, to learn a lot
more.
Mr. Henderson, I want to start with you. Is it your
position that no offshore drilling is safe? A really quick
answer.
Mr. Henderson. No, sir, it is not.
Mr. Rice. OK.
Mr. Henderson. I am not naive enough to dismiss the
importance that oil and gas exploration has meant for the
United States.
Mr. Rice. Is there anybody who----
Mr. Henderson. My grandfather protected oil in World War
II. I understand the importance of it.
Mr. Rice. All right. Is it your position that there is no
deepwater--that we should shut off deepwater drilling?
Mr. Henderson. Absolutely not.
Mr. Rice. OK, good.
Mr. Herbst, I want to talk to you for just a few minutes.
You say that increased production and increased safety are not
mutually exclusive. I think I heard you say that, right?
Mr. Herbst. That is correct.
Mr. Rice. So, you think we can do this, and we can do this
in a safe manner.
Mr. Herbst. Certainly.
Mr. Rice. Ms. Davis, certainly you believe that there needs
to be a little more control to prevent, I would think, the
Macondo-type incidents from occurring. Would you not agree with
that?
Ms. Davis. I agree there was a loss of life, and that is
something you can never get back. I think, respectively, we
know we have to do things in a safer manner. But we have always
worked in this industry and we have been very safe. When that
occurred, it was a terrible, terrible accident. We hope we
never have to do it again.
Mr. Rice. Are you saying that we should just leave it to
industry to self-impose additional safety measures, that the
government should have no role in that? Is that what you are
saying?
Ms. Davis. No, sir. I think industry and government should
work collaboratively together to come up with solutions that
are going to be viable for the industry.
Mr. Rice. So, you agree that there should be some
additional level of oversight, but the proposed rule is far
beyond what you agree with?
Ms. Davis. I don't know that it needs to be additional
oversight. I think there needs to be some clarity in the
ruling.
Mr. Rice. OK.
Mr.--I can't say your name--Leimkuhler?
Mr. Leimkuhler. That is closer than most get.
Mr. Rice. Would you agree with that, that there should be
some additional oversight after Macondo?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I think so. I think, clearly, and it has
happened. Clearly, it should have been, and it happened.
Mr. Rice. OK.
Mr. Leimkuhler. We have----
Mr. Rice. Do you think that we can do this drilling, and do
it in a safe manner, protect the environment with reasonable
protections for people, and still continue to increase
production?
Mr. Leimkuhler. Absolutely.
Mr. Rice. Mr. Herbst, this Well Control Rule, is this your
graph here--the losses of well control incidents in the Gulf of
Mexico 2008? Is this your graph?
Mr. Herbst. Yes, that is BSEE's graph from the annual
report.
Mr. Rice. That is a little scary to me. From 2008, we have
eight loss of well control incidents. In 2013, we had eight;
and in 2014, we have seven. Are you saying that even with these
additional measures that have been imposed, that we are
continuing to have loss of control of wells at the same rate as
before?
Mr. Herbst. Not to be too alarming, you have to look at the
definition of loss of well control. That can be a very small
release where the well is not under control. We are not talking
about the things like Macondo where there was only one----
Mr. Rice. So, when you are speaking of losses of well
control, in orders of magnitude, there has been nothing that
approaches Macondo; correct?
Mr. Herbst. Nothing to the loss of life or pollution.
Mr. Rice. OK. All right.
Mr. Henderson. Mr. Rice, if I may clarify my response to
your question, if I were in your position----
Mr. Rice. A very short time.
Mr. Henderson. Yes, very short. I would absolutely not
support deepwater drilling off the coast of South Carolina.
Mr. Rice. OK. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Leimkuhler, do you agree with that? Do you think the
Atlantic should be opened to offshore drilling?
Mr. Leimkuhler. No, I do not agree with that. I think it
should be opened to offshore drilling. I think there needs to
be allowances made, given the population density on the
coastline. There ought to be a certain offset that should be
enforced.
Mr. Rice. Ms. Davis, do you agree with that? Do you think
the Atlantic should be opened to offshore drilling? Yes or no?
Ms. Davis. I think opportunity should be allowed.
Mr. Rice. Dr. Mason, I have 13 seconds left.
Dr. Mason. Yes.
Mr. Rice. Mr. Herbst, do you think the Atlantic should be
opened to offshore drilling?
Mr. Herbst. I believe with input from the states, yes.
Mr. Rice. Thank you.
Mr. Henderson. One last comment, if I may.
Mr. Rice. I yield my time. My time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Henderson. All it takes is one disaster to destroy the
beaches in Myrtle Beach.
The Chairman. Let me ask a couple of questions.
Ms. Davis, if I can zero in on you--apologies for that, but
there has been a general consensus from public comments we have
had that a Well Control Rule could lead to another shutdown of
the kind in the Gulf if it was enacted as it is currently
written.
You kept your business afloat during the last shutdown.
What would be the business impact if there was another shutdown
so close on the heels of the last one?
Ms. Davis. Mr. Chairman, we lost 70 percent of our business
as a result of the shutdown the last time with the moratorium,
70 percent, because we worked in deepwater primarily, and our
company was a small business that felt that was a great place
to work in the future. If you worked there, you were in a
really good position.
If that were to happen today with the low price of oil,
compounded with a tragedy, I just don't know what the
implications would be. But we are survivors. We have worked
through many, many challenges. I think we would still be here.
We would find a way to work.
The Chairman. In your testimony, you also talked about the
diverse business environment that fosters small entrepreneurs
and that could become extinct. Could you just expand on that?
Explain how Federal regulations could actually be threatening
to small business.
Ms. Davis. Well, in my experience, small business, we work
under different programs because of government allowances for
small, minority, women-owned business opportunities. It gives
us a great leverage to be able to work in the industry. It is
not the primary reason you work in the industry, but it is
considered. Small business is a big part of this great country.
So I think, from my perspective, we have to be able to
continue to be allowed to work. We are reinventing ourselves
today as things change. We are looking for new opportunities,
new product lines to explore, and new ways to do business. We
will continue to operate. Small businesses will suffer, but
people are resilient. They will find a way to work through it.
The Chairman. I appreciate that optimism in what the future
can bring. Unfortunately, sometimes when we have prescriptive
rules that lock in a procedure, it doesn't allow for change
even if that change is positive. I know Dr. Mason realizes
this. I am in education as well. Education is very slow to
change. Government is a whole lot worse; so we need to do that.
Mr. Leimkuhler, if I could ask you about these changes.
By the way, it is a good German name. I understand it, a
good German name.
Offshore operators have undergone a myriad of changes and
new safety requirements. How would the Well Control Rule be
different from the other regulations you have had to go through
in the last 5 years?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I think the biggest challenge would be,
once again, to get us back to that drilling margin. If you take
a look at that margin and you apply that to the operational
procedures LLOG has used in our wells in the past, I apply that
to the next 5 years and I've gotten with the reservoir
engineers and said, OK, if we can no longer drill these
depleted zones, we can put a well into a zone as soon as it
starts to deplete, putting in additional wells would be an
extreme challenge to us. Our estimates are that that would
remove 12 sidetracks from our approved plans, as well as four
new wells. The total production of those five would be a
reduction in Federal royalty money of about $900 million over 5
years.
The Chairman. What about the concept, though, of safety
here? Could this rule undermine safe operations rather than
enhance them?
Mr. Leimkuhler. It is possible. You can, because what that
is going to do, it is going to encourage operators to resist
raising your mud weight to maintain that margin. In the past,
when you would have gone into that area and ran it that close,
you are going to increase the probability that you will take a
kick, and decrease the probability you will take loss per
turns.
The Chairman. I have a limited amount of time here. I would
like to talk about how OPEC is playing around in this area and
the impact that it is having, both in the real world and the
private sector. Dr. Mason, let me just talk to you very briefly
here about what LSU is doing and what you were saying about the
workforce.
As I understand it, the workforce off the coast is an aging
workforce. It needs to be replaced. These are good-paying jobs,
but we need to have Americans that are trained to be able to
take this, and that is what you are trying to do. I understand
part of your argument was if we cut the production by
regulation, which is, as you said, as viable as market forces,
what we are doing is stopping the amount of money that we can
invest in education to produce that workforce. Is that what you
are saying? This becomes a vicious cycle.
Dr. Mason. Yes, it becomes a vicious cycle, and as you
noted earlier, it creates an entire career track and industry
in compliance, with compliance being the new growth industry
rather than the actual production.
The Chairman. I would just say, I have 15 seconds. You said
the LSU funding comes from renewable energy sources? Did I
mishear you?
Dr. Mason. The funding goes primarily toward research in
renewables.
The Chairman. Goes to research. Thank you.
Dr. Mason. Although it does come from renewable and other
sources that are usually not fossil fuels.
The Chairman. That is OK. I just misheard.
We have time for another round of questions here.
Dr. Fleming.
Mr. Fleming. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to drill down a bit on what we have learned,
amalgamate the baseline of information today, and I want to
focus on Mr. Leimkuhler and Mr. Herbst.
Mr. Leimkuhler, based on the regulations as we know them to
be today, and they are not finalized, at least we don't know
for certain that these are going to be the final rules, is this
going to affect your ability prospectively to drill more wells
productively and economically?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I believe it will. I think it will probably
take from 15 to 20 percent of the wells that are currently in
my approved plans and restrict my ability to execute and drill
those wells.
Mr. Fleming. OK. Do you see that having a negative impact
on price; that is, causing increase in prices to consumers?
Mr. Leimkuhler. In the past, to be honest with you, I don't
think it has. But what we are seeing right now is the U.S. oil
price totally dominated by supply and demand, and if you are
going to take that production off the market, then it is going
to be oil that is not there. In the past, I thought that oil
was dominated by OPEC, but that the rise in U.S. oil
production, reaching the levels it has, that if we restrict
U.S. production, I think we will see an increase in price.
Mr. Fleming. Mr. Herbst, we are really talking about
prospective versus real-time evaluation and regulation. How
flexible, how compliant do you think BSEE will be going forward
to take the input from the industry's real experts, the
engineers who are expert in this, and to fashion those
regulations in the final written draft in a way that is not
going to cause 10 or 15 percent reduction in viable sites?
Mr. Herbst. Let me answer that this way. Since we have
received the industry comments and other comments, I have
assigned three staff members, two of those with over 30 years
of experience, industry and regulatory experience, to work on
those and try to understand those comments and see if there are
other ways to accomplish the same thing through those industry
comments.
They have worked numerous meetings through this. I am
getting that feedback. I am speaking directly with Director
Salerno weekly on this. I think if we can accomplish the same
objective by another means which industry has brought up, I
think there will be that flexibility.
Mr. Fleming. How receptive are you to real-time rules and
regulations--that is to say, constant input and adjustment to
be both safe, protective of the environment, and safe for
humans, especially people on the rigs; and then at the same
time accommodating the viability of those sites that need to be
drilled in order to maximize and exploit natural resources?
Mr. Herbst. If I get your question right, an important part
of our regulations, which this new rule does not impact at all,
is alternative compliance. So again, if industry can come up
with a better mouse trap, a better way of reaching that same
objective, that regulation is there now and will continue.
Mr. Fleming. OK.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Herbst, I want to highlight the chart that was
referenced, the one on the right side there. Having spent
several months every single day out on the Gulf of Mexico
during some of the period covered here, would you agree that
there was more vigilance in the Gulf of Mexico during the 2010-
2014 period, where you see the spike, than any other period in
our Nation's history?
Mr. Herbst. Are you talking about vigilance from----
Mr. Graves. In terms of the number of people that were
simply out on the Gulf of Mexico in boats looking for oil.
Mr. Herbst. Right. I am not sure if I get the question.
Those reports are mandatory by regulation that they must report
loss of well control events.
Mr. Graves. My point is this: you had the moratorium, which
froze some aspects of energy production; correct?
Mr. Herbst. Yes.
Mr. Graves. OK, and the permatorium as well. That spike, I
am going to guess, also corresponds with when the spigot was
turned back on, the moratorium/permatorium was largely lifted.
In addition, you had more vigilance out there in the Gulf of
Mexico, in that I have never in my life seen so many boats and
people out there. I understand there are mandatory reporting
requirements, but if people aren't out there to see it, are
they going to know that the things have actually spilled? So, I
think it is an important distinction to make there.
Number two, I also want to point out, and following up on
Congressman Rice's comments, you can look--I believe it is
1973. There were 2,200 separate spills in the United States
related to waters, coastal and river waters in the United
States--2,200. The cumulative volume of oil that was spilled in
those 2,200 spills was like one-tenth of the oil that was
spilled in the Deepwater Horizon. This thing was absolutely
one-of-a-kind, the only type scenario in its universe. I would
remind you of what I said about the Judge's comments--gross
negligence, willful misconduct, and all sorts of other one-of-
a-kind type scenarios.
Dr. Mason, let me ask you a question. If this Well Control
Rule, BOP rule, as anticipated, does cause a reduction, a
continued reduction in the Gulf of Mexico's production relative
to the remaining public lands in the United States, is that
going to cause a decrease in demand or utilization of oil and
gas in the United States?
Dr. Mason. No, absolutely not.
Mr. Graves. So, we are going to end up supplying that, in
some cases supplementing it with additional foreign oil. Would
that be----
Dr. Mason. That is correct.
Mr. Graves. One of the producers that is here, could you
tell me, do you think that the United States has a more robust,
a safer regulatory regime here than, for example, Venezuela,
Nigeria, other countries? Or do you think those countries, that
are some of the major suppliers to the United States, have a
better or safer regulatory regime?
Mr. Leimkuhler. Relative to the countries you mentioned, I
think we absolutely have a better regulatory regime.
Mr. Graves. OK, thank you.
Mr. Henderson, are you a proponent of the global
environment, or just the environment in Louisiana or the United
States?
Mr. Henderson. All three.
Mr. Graves. All of them. OK, thank you.
Mr. Herbst, let me go back and ask you a question. BSEE
took, as I recall, 3 to 4 years to write this rule, and they
initially proposed a 2-month comment period, and then a 3-
month. I will say it again. The complexity of this--and I sat
through briefing after briefing, I sat through the BP trial,
trying to get my head around all this stuff--incredibly,
incredibly complex activities here, and obviously getting it
right is critical.
In some of the meetings I have had with some of the
operators, it has been said to me that they are concerned that
some of the proposed rule implications could cause less safe--
less safe--operating conditions than we currently have today.
Do you think that, considering the fact that it took Interior 3
to 4 years to actually write this rule--that it is appropriate
to have a rule that has such profound economic consequences,
such profound potential impacts on our environment here in
Louisiana, as Mr. Smith noted, the most productive commercial
fisheries in the continental United States, one of the most
productive ecosystems on the continent--Do you think it is
appropriate to only give industry 3 months to comment on
something that it took the Department 3 to 4 years to write?
Mr. Herbst. That is personally outside of my call, but it
is a very complex rule. It took a lot of input from a lot of
different people. As mentioned before, standards were a big
part of incorporating into this rule. Industry shouldn't be
surprised by that part of the rule. The other pieces, that is
why we are continuing to work with those commenters, to get the
best----
Mr. Graves. I believe Interior asked the National Academy
to look at the real-time monitoring to provide a report back to
Interior, to BSEE, on that aspect of the connectivity, the
real-time monitoring. Has that report from the National Academy
been received by Interior?
Mr. Herbst. I am not aware. I would have to get back to you
on that question.
Mr. Graves. I don't believe that it has, and I am just
wondering if you could follow up for the record, if you can
please explain to the committee why you would ask for a report,
not get it back, and yet go ahead and finalize or issue your
proposed rule without being informed by the National Academy's
feedback on that issue, which could cause cyber threats and
other safety issues in the Gulf.
Mr. Herbst. I will get back to you on that.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we have gone through this discussion and the things I
have read about in the past, the term ``drilling margin'' comes
up. It seems to be one of the key issues here, and obviously
the safe drilling margin has to do with pressures in the
drilling rig and in the pipe. But there is also another kind of
margin that is an economic margin, that I think Dr. Mason has
talked about, and it seems like this drilling margin may create
such a small economic margin that it is going to hurt the
industry in such a way that even the research at LSU can be
affected into coming up with new renewable kinds of energy,
which I am a big proponent of as long as they are economical.
So, Dr. Mason, in your research, have you looked at the
relative economics of fossil fuel energy versus renewable
energy in our current state?
Dr. Mason. That is something of tremendous interest to
researchers like myself. We are trying to work that out right
now. One thing that I do see from this type of proposed
regulation, very large regulation coming through in big chunks,
as Mr. Fleming referred to earlier, is that it creates an
uncertainty on the part of companies bidding for lease rights
in the Gulf, an uncertainty that the economics of what they are
bidding on may change significantly after the fact. Those
bidders will rationally bid down prices, potentially below
reservation prices at which the Treasury and the Department of
the Interior would be willing to grant such leases.
In the meantime, we have Mexico becoming active in the same
Gulf and looking for prices to exploit their own reserves, and
it is fairly easy for companies to just move right across the
line within that Gulf, within the same ecosystem to, as others
noted, a less safe drilling environment. So, I think we are
right on that margin.
Mr. Westerman. The last two Western Gulf and Central Gulf
lease sales had the lowest number of bids in 20 years. What are
the causes for such low industry interest in purchasing leases?
Dr. Mason. I think we are seeing the economics of the Gulf
go south due to over-regulation and other influences, low oil
prices, a confluence of factors right now; so this is probably
a bad time to move.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Leimkuhler, what do you believe are some
reasons for the drop-off in interest?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I think that basic economics is part of the
driver in that respect. That is the primary driver, the overall
economics and the projection forward of those not improving for
some period of time.
Mr. Westerman. Do you think we will see similar results in
the recently announced lease sale for next spring?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I haven't taken a look at what has actually
been proposed. I am unfamiliar with that, so I can't comment on
it.
Mr. Westerman. OK.
Ms. Davis, your company is not conducting any offshore
drilling operations and would not fall under any of these
regulatory provisions, yet you are adamant about the negative
consequences this rule will have and how it will impact your
business. I know in Arkansas it can even impact business. It
can impact the economy across the whole country.
Were you invited to meet with BSEE this year and share any
of your views?
Ms. Davis. No, I have not been.
Mr. Westerman. To your knowledge, did BSEE conduct any
listening sessions in the Gulf region to hear about possible
unintended consequences of the rule?
Ms. Davis. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Herbst, can you address that?
Mr. Herbst. If you are talking about the invites for this
week, those were for folks that commented on the rule. The rule
as proposed is open to all for commenting. But if they
commented on the rule, they were invited back, from what I
understand, to clarify those points in their comments.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Herbst, as I understand it, the rule requires the
establishment of the BSEE-Approved Verification Organization,
or BAVO. Has that been defined?
Mr. Herbst. It has not been finalized at this point, but
the concept of having a verification organization is in the
rule.
Mr. Smith. When will it be defined?
Mr. Herbst. I am not certain on that. I will have to get
back to you.
Mr. Smith. OK. How would industry or the public comment on
something that hasn't even been defined in a proposed rule?
Mr. Herbst. Again, they can comment on how it is
implemented. They can comment on the idea of having a
verification organization, not having one, who may be the best
to do that type of work, and those comments then would be taken
into account.
Mr. Smith. So, they can public comment based on what
possibly might be in a rule, but not even suggested that is in
a rule, but a possibility?
Mr. Herbst. Again, the requirement of a verification
organization to verify the BOPs is in the proposed rule, and
again they could comment on how that is implemented.
Mr. Smith. Could this verification organization be industry
leaders?
Mr. Herbst. I believe, as it is written or intended, it is
third party.
Mr. Smith. So, it could be environmentalists?
Mr. Herbst. It would have to be someone with the expertise,
that would have to have that expertise, especially around BOPs,
to be that verifying organization.
Mr. Smith. But there is nothing in the proposed rule that
explains possibly who this third party is?
Mr. Herbst. No. We have similar rules in place now for
third-party verification, and those areas are clearly defined.
This is still open at this point.
Mr. Smith. How many other requirements established in the
proposed rule may not be defined in various other provisions?
Mr. Herbst. I am not sure how I would be able to answer
that. If we think we have defined it, but again as we meet with
industry, if there are questions or concerns, or it needs
clarification, that is what would be built into the final rule.
Mr. Smith. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rice.
Mr. Rice. Just a couple more questions.
I am looking at the map here put out by LLOG of the Gulf,
the coast of the Gulf, and this issue about Mexico piques my
interest. How far offshore does our U.S. Government
jurisdiction go in regulating this offshore oil, Mr. Herbst?
Mr. Herbst. It is out to the economic exclusive zone. It is
200 miles. With Mexico, the United States has a trans-boundary
agreement, and we have worked through that. We have continued
to work with the Mexican regulators, originally CNH, now SIA,
as far as how operations along that border will proceed.
Mr. Rice. All right. And that 200 miles would apply in the
Atlantic as well?
Mr. Herbst. Yes, it would.
Mr. Rice. OK. So, a foreign country could come and drill
201 miles off our shore?
Mr. Herbst. I am not the expert on that, but I would
believe so.
Mr. Rice. OK. Mr. Herbst, I am going to pick on you for a
little while. Is there more risk in deepwater drilling than
there is in shallow water drilling?
Mr. Herbst. The risks can be there for both depending on
how the operations are conducted.
Mr. Rice. Mr. Leimkuhler, would you say there was more or
less risk in deepwater or the same?
Mr. Leimkuhler. I would say the risk is very project
dependent. The safest well I've ever drilled was in 9,000 feet
of water, the most risky was in 32,000 feet of water. It all
depends upon the subsurface rocks you are drilling through in
that environment, and that is not water----
Mr. Rice. These pressures that oil comes out, the pressure
the oil is under, is that necessarily related to the depth of
the water, or is it somewhat related to the depth of the water?
Mr. Leimkuhler. It is related to the depth of the well and
the regional geology in which it sits.
Mr. Rice. OK.
Ms. Davis, do you think deepwater drilling is less or more
risky than shallow water drilling, or the same?
Ms. Davis. I don't think there is any more risk in
deepwater.
Mr. Rice. All right.
What is deep, Mr. Herbst? How do you define what deepwater
is?
Mr. Herbst. It has been defined differently over the years.
Currently it is 500 feet of water depth is deepwater, the way
we define it.
Mr. Rice. OK.
I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I have a couple of quick questions for a few people.
Mr. Herbst, let me start with you. You said to one of the
questions that if companies commented on the rule, they were
invited back. So, all companies who made comments would be
ensured of meeting with BSEE?
Mr. Herbst. From what I understand, if there was interest,
BSEE asked if they needed to clarify their comments. Again, you
had to have commented before, and this was an opportunity to
clarify those comments.
The Chairman. So, all companies who commented are going to
have a meeting, or at least be invited to a meeting?
Mr. Herbst. I don't know for sure. I was not the one who
sent out the invites.
The Chairman. All right.
Look, I had a great Aunt Bessie. You guys need to change
your acronym. I liked her.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Dr. Mason, universities like LSU obviously
adjust their curriculum. I was interested in your testimony
that asserted that the Federal regulatory environment is
essentially migrating the job opportunities to compliance,
rather than exploration and production. Is that accurate, and
can you expand on that for just a couple of minutes, or less?
Dr. Mason. Sure. That is a well-known dynamic in regulated
industries. We are seeing that in financial services now in
response to Dodd-Frank, where we are not seeing banks lend to
consumers or businesses. We are seeing them beef up compliance
in all different areas to meet these thousands of pages of new,
unknown regulations that are still not even written. So, we are
bound to do the same thing here in oil and gas. It is pretty
straightforward.
The Chairman. So, traditionally then, market forces usually
drive what the job market becomes. It seems like in the Gulf,
the biggest market force now is the Federal Government.
Dr. Mason. Yes. The Federal Government and state
governments can become part of the market force, creating job
opportunities in what I would view as a somewhat perverse
fashion at times, if it is not driving safety on the margin,
and we have seen this before.
The Chairman. All right. That could or could not be good. I
would appreciate Mr. Herbst saying that you are actually going
to be soliciting industry's comments again. That is essential.
That is very important.
Maybe to Ms. Davis and Mr. Leimkuhler again. OPEC is
purposely depressing oil prices with their policies, and it
seems to me it is having a real impact on both small and large
businesses, especially here in the Gulf. Ms. Davis, can you
just tell me personally how this has impacted the current
hiring trends and the business investments in the Gulf?
Ms. Davis. It makes it very difficult to plan anything. To
the point we talked of earlier, with all these regulations,
things that are changing the environment, and all the things
that are happening with OPEC, a company like RIG-CHEM can't
sustain for much longer. We will go away, and small business
will be hurt.
To your point about OPEC, we don't know, we have no way to
predict what is going to happen for the future. All I can do is
tell my employees every day that we have to keep looking for
new opportunities; but with more regulation, that will not
happen.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. This area of discussion is
so broad, we didn't have a whole lot of time to go into a lot
of things. We didn't even go into the exporting ban. But it
seems very obvious that OPEC has a unique strategy that they
are using to see if they can drive our country into a
particular pattern. What scares me is, I think they are
successful right now, which is worrisome to me, especially for
the potential this country has as far as energy production and
the significance of affordable energy in the ability of the
entire economy to go forward, as well as how it helps people in
their daily lives. If we do not have affordable energy, we
don't have a lifestyle that is worth living, and that becomes
extremely significant.
Mr. Lukeheimer--Leimkuhler. I am sorry; I am dyslexic. Mr.
Leimkuhler--I am not dyslexic, by the way. I just say that.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. And I forgot the question. No, the same
question.
Mr. Leimkuhler. It creates that condition quite often.
The Chairman. I am running down your time. Just OPEC's
impact on the business climate here in the Gulf.
Mr. Leimkuhler. Right now, with the decline in oil prices,
our net margins have been basically reduced by somewhere on the
order of 70 percent. Therefore, right now, we are not really
looking to expand. I currently manage the drilling contracts at
LLOG. We are going to live up to the contracts we signed. But
are we going out and looking to sign up more rigs? Not at this
time. We need to see an improvement in the economic conditions
to expand our rig count back to where it was about 2 years ago.
The Chairman. Thank you. That is not a positive sign, but I
appreciate that answer very much.
The committee does have a couple of other assignments here.
If anyone wants a 2-minute final question? If not----
Mr. Graves. Can I just do----
The Chairman. You can do a 2-minute wrap-up, and then let
me do a wrap-up.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I want to thank all of you for being here. I think that all
your perspectives are certainly helpful; and I want to be
clear, I have spoken to every Member here. I think that
everyone wants to get this right, that we want to improve
safety. Looking at BP alone, I believe they are going to end up
spending in excess of $50 billion.
There is a huge incentive for companies to get this right,
a financial incentive, and I think that is important to keep in
mind.
Looking at it a little bit more parochially--this is part
of our economy, it is part of our culture. Senator Vitter
talked about that earlier. It is a big part of what we do here,
and I am concerned about the global environment. I think it is
important to keep in mind that you don't just change rules
here, and all of a sudden everywhere else the same thing
happens. We are going to increase our dependence on foreign
energy where it is produced less safely. So, we lose the jobs,
you get an adverse impact to the environment, and I think that
is wrong.
We have to get this right. Showing the disparity that
Congressman Smith talked about in the cost estimate, $800
million to $32 billion, there is a huge disparity there in
terms of what industry is estimating and what the Federal
Government is estimating. I think I even read something saying
the Federal Government thought this could save money, which I
don't get. We have to reconcile these.
Mr. Herbst, I want to ask you if BSEE would commit to doing
public meetings and not just to meet with companies that have
submitted comments, to meet with everyone who wants to meet on
this. We have to get this right, and I think that is very, very
important.
Last, I just want to say that, ultimately, this is critical
for the U.S. energy security, as the Chairman noted, so we are
not subject to the whims of OPEC to the degree we are today;
and I think it is critical for our environmental security.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you all. I want to thank everyone who
has been involved in this particular hearing. The city and the
state has been very kind and gracious to us in holding a
hearing down here. I am happy we were able to be here.
I appreciate the fact that the two Senators from Louisiana
were able to be here as part of this hearing.
The current Members who are here, thank you for your
attendance and thank you for your thoughtful questions.
I thank the witnesses who came here for your time and
effort.
I noticed I was able to meet former Congressman Johns,
appreciate you being here as well. I think after this hearing
you are grateful that you are no longer here, right?
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. You made the right choice there.
With all of that, I thank the witnesses for your testimony,
both written and oral testimony.
Members of the committee may have additional questions for
you. We are going to ask that you would respond to those in
writing. Under Committee Rule 4(h), the hearing record is open
for 10 business days for those responses to get to you and be
returned to us.
If there is no further business, without any objection, I
just pounded the gavel and we are now in adjournment.

[Whereupon, at 10:55 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Prepared Statement of the International Association of Drilling
Contractors
Thank you for the opportunity to submit written comments for the
record. The International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC) is
a trade association representing the worldwide interests of the onshore
and offshore drilling industry since 1940. With over 1,800 members,
IADC membership reaches nearly every state in the United States. Our
members operate the vast majority of onshore rigs in the United States
and offshore, our drilling contractor members operate all the Mobile
Offshore Drilling Units (MODUs) operated in areas subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States. These comments are offered without
prejudice to communications that may be offered directly by IADC member
companies.
As a trade association, IADC's purpose is to advance drilling and
completion technology, improve industry health, safety, environmental
and training practices; and champion sensible regulation and
legislation which facilitate safe and efficient drilling. Through 17
Committees and 15 global Chapters, IADC creates the space for members
to connect, collaborate and create solutions aimed at addressing the
industry's most critical issues.
Current Industry Landscape and Industry Outlook for the Drilling
Contractor
At the leading edge of the oil and gas industry, only the drilling
contractors build, own, and operate the rigs without which no well
could be drilled, completed, produced or worked-over. The drilling
industry is in the midst of a major recapitalization as currently 230
new offshore units are being built for future delivery. The costs of
these units range from about $200 million for a shallow-water jack-up
unit to nearly $1 billion for a deepwater drillship. Similar
recapitalization has taken place with onshore drilling contractors in
order to provide equipment to drill wells to be hydraulically
fractured: these units cost from $20-$40 million. Both onshore and
offshore, the latest design drilling units are more effective, safer
and more environmentally efficient than earlier units.
The demand for secure and affordable energy is clearly the driver
for drilling activity. In August 2015,\1\ amid high uncertainty in the
global oil market, the U.S. Energy Information Agency (EIA) lowered
crude oil price forecasts in the Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO),
anticipating benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices to
average $49 per barrel (b) in 2015 and $54/b in 2016, $6/b and $8/b
respectively lower than forecast in the previous month's STEO. Such
lackluster price forecasts reflect in a similarly lackluster demand for
oil and gas, which in turn depresses current drilling activity and
near-term outlook.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=22572.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Changing market conditions, both in the United States and
internationally, have dramatically impacted the oil industry as a
whole, creating an environment of caution and uncertainty for the
drilling contractor. Baker Hughes has issued the rotary rig counts \2\
as a service to the petroleum industry since 1944, when Hughes Tool
Company began weekly counts of active U.S. and Canadian drilling
activity. On September 4, 2015, Baker Hughes' reported 33 offshore
units in U.S. waters compared to 65 in October 2014; a market reduction
of almost exactly 50 percent within a 12-month period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=79687&p=irol-
reportsother.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The decline in offshore rig count continues in spite of some
stability in the oil price in the 2nd/3rd quarters 2015--albeit at a
low level. The majority of drilling companies, both onshore and
offshore, have been forced to decommission rigs and shift priorities
from future investments to address internal financial constraints. One
U.S.-headquartered offshore drilling contractor that has focused on the
shallow water sector, where well productivity is lower than the deeper
Gulf, filed for bankruptcy this summer and the company's stock has been
delisted from the NYSE and is now trading on the OTC market.
The reduced rig count is reflected in drilling-related employment.
According to an August 19, 2015 Rig News Article, 50,000 energy jobs
have been lost during the months of June, July, and August, on top of
100,000 employees laid off since oil prices started to decrease in fall
of 2014.
The U.S. Gulf is one of the highest cost basins in the offshore
sector in which U.S. companies operate. Uncertainty in oil and natural
gas markets, which will likely continue over the next several years, is
clearly a major factor in declining rig count in U.S. waters. However,
in addition to this market uncertainty, the U.S. oil and gas industry
is contending with layers of new regulatory proposals that further
increase uncertainties and, if implemented, will impose further costs
on the U.S. industry, rendering it less competitive in the global
marketplace.
Harmful Regulations Impede Economic Growth and Threaten Survivability
IADC will never object to regulations that are necessary or enhance
safety and operational integrity. And, as in any business, drilling
contractors require confidence in and consistency of new regulations,
with sufficient lead time to fully implement them.
Throughout IADC, our members share the belief that for the
prevention of blowouts, explosions and fires, well control is the most
critical area. IADC and member experts from across all areas of the
industry are working together, and ahead of governments everywhere, on
the improvement of competency programs and technical solutions in well
control performance.
A powerful example of this is the recent creation of the Well
Control Institute (WCI). The WCI is a unique industry oversight body,
comprising the most senior representatives from operators, drilling
contractors and equipment manufacturers in the industry. The WCI is
committed to developing solutions to issues such as blowout preventer
equipment reliability and rig crew competency.
Within the context of well control, IADC recently launched
WellSharp
TM
, a root and branch overhaul initiated by
industry to redefine how well control training and assessment is
delivered with the goal of keeping wells in a safe state throughout
their life span, and avoiding blowouts. IADC accredits training
institutions, whether commercial or company in-house, to conduct
training that meets or exceeds the curriculum requirements set forth in
WellSharp
TM
. The new standard requires trainees to be more
engaged in the learning process and to undergo individual skills
assessments appropriate to their specific well control roles and
responsibilities. The knowledge-assessment database identifies specific
knowledge gaps and allows instructors to review and close these gaps
with each trainee before the completion of training. The system
provides metrics regarding the alignment between the course taken and
the trainee's job position and affords analysis of instructor
performance. It is a truly unique, multifaceted program developed to
accomplish a step-change in well control competency, enhancing crew
capabilities and eliminating errors.
A current joint industry effort is a blowout preventer (BOP)
reliability and performance improvement program. IADC and the
International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP) and their
members are collaborating to develop significant and continuous
enhancements to BOP operability and reliability. This is an
unprecedented collaboration between oil and gas producers, equipment
manufacturers and drilling contractors that began in the U.S. Gulf. It
will give far greater assurance that BOP's across the world will
function on demand whilst also driving out cost related to equipment
being out of service.
U.S.-based offshore drilling contractors first initiated the data
sharing project that underpins the BOP reliability program, supported
by the recommendations for reporting of equipment malfunctions and
failure in API Standard 53, Blowout Prevention Equipment Systems for
Drilling Wells, Fourth Edition (API 53). The BOP reliability program
establishes a permanent performance improvement tool that will track
and capture performance of BOP equipment.
The Macondo incident provoked the assemblage of the largest ever
collaboration of well control subject matter experts and principals to
create solutions to, and apply continuous improvement in, well control
performance. A major focus of these efforts has been the API standards
program and other international standardization platforms. IADC has
connected its members to work collaboratively as subject matter experts
on a vast number of standards committees.
Industry has taken its own lead to fulfill the responsibility to
secure safer, cleaner and more efficient drilling operations and IADC
also strives to support and work with government agencies to develop
regulations that are targeted, relevant and proportionate. Regrettably,
recent U.S. offshore regulatory initiatives could actually lead to a
less safe drilling environment.
IADC believes the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement's
(BSEE) new proposed regulation on well control and blowout prevention
is precisely the type of overly prescriptive regulation that restrains
best industry safety practice and its subsequent benefits: innovation,
jobs and economic growth.
IADC readily acknowledges and commends the efforts of BSEE staff to
produce such a major draft rule. We also appreciate the tremendous
external pressures applied to the Bureau by opponents to the U.S. oil
and gas industry, many of them uninformed and inexpert in the matters
of well control and offshore operational integrity. However, the
(undoubtedly) unintended consequences of BSEE's inflexibly prescriptive
Well Control Rule fails to account for and to encourage substantial
industry improvements post-Macondo. In some cases, the requirements of
the rule are simply unfeasible, requiring industry to operate sub-
optimally. In addition, the measures in the rule differ widely from
international standards and will negatively impact the market for U.S.
MODUs.
IADC's formal response to the BSEE draft BOP rule, minus its
detailed technical annexes, is attached to this statement for the
committee's convenience. The committee should note that IADC, and other
key organizations and associations, have urged BSEE to continue to work
with industry to jointly analyze ``respective sections of the proposed
rule in order to reach mutual understanding of the proposal, to correct
fundamental flaws in the proposed rule, and allow constructive
development of rules that are ultimately both workable and effective.
We further request that the comment period be reopened during the
workshops and that the presentation and discussion be part of the
official record.'' \3\ We sincerely hope the Bureau will respond to the
unanimous call from industry experts and leaders in this respect.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Industry's joint comments submitted to the Department of
Interior in response to BSEE's proposed rulemaking entitled, ``Oil and
Gas and Sulphur Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf--Blowout
Preventer Systems and Well Control.'' Comments were submitted via
electronic submission to: http://www.regulations.gov/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Positive Policies to Spur Safer Energy Production:
As this committee works to develop new policies and legislation,
IADC recommends, among other things, the below changes to existing law
to spur energy production:

1.  Narrowly targeted amendments to Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
(OCSLA)--We urge, on behalf of both industry and the
agencies involved, an amendment to OCSLA to allow BSEE &
USCG more flexibility to undertake risk-based (rather than
mandated annual) inspections in line with other leading
jurisdictions in Europe, Canada and Australia. We encourage
the proposed reforms by Director Salerno of BSEE to secure
for the Bureau the goal of targeting risk and allocating
scarce specialist resources where they are most needed.

2.  Increased offshore access--Based on the latest Federal estimate,
the U.S. OCS contains approximately 90 billion barrels of
oil and over 404 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
However, over 85 percent of the OCS remains off limits for
leasing. The only areas open to OCS production lie in the
west of the Gulf of Mexico, a few legacy leases off
California, and areas in Alaska. New areas in the Atlantic
off Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia should be included
in the 5-year plan for 2017-2022. In order to continue the
development of our Nation's offshore resources, Congress
should ensure new areas are included for continued
development on the OCS.

In particular, it is important that all 26 OCS regions are made
available for full exploration, utilizing the latest
seismic technologies to delineate oil and gas potential.
The Atlantic OCS contains an estimated 4.72 billion barrels
of oil and 37.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, while
the Eastern Gulf of Mexico holds an estimated 5.07 billion
barrels of oil and 16.08 trillion cubic feet of natural
gas. Those amounts represent more than 20 times the 2012
Federal offshore oil production and over 94 times the 2012
Federal offshore natural gas production. It is
strategically important for the United States to confirm
the availability of these resources and their potential for
economic development.

In the Arctic, it is vital that the United States maintain and
accelerate opportunities to develop offshore oil and gas in
the resource-rich Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. The region
holds an estimated 23.6 billion barrels of oil and 104
trillion cubic feet of natural gas. The United States must
assert its economic interests in the Arctic at a level
commensurate to the initiatives of its Arctic neighbors and
competitors.

3.  Clarification of contractor liabilities/responsibilities under
BSEE regulations--IADC has raised concern many times
regarding uncertainty in contractor liabilities and
responsibilities under BSEE's regulations. These result
from post-Macondo changes to agency policy reinterpreting
assignment of regulatory responsibility for their entire
suite of regulations, without the benefit of administrative
rulemaking as provided for by the Administrative Procedure
Act. IADC has addressed this situation in responding to
rulemaking proposals issued after the policy change.
Unfortunately, no rules have been made under APA and thus
it is not possible to anticipate how the agency policy may
have changed, particularly when anticipating the proposed
BOP rule.

4.  Lifting the Crude Oil Export Ban--IADC lends its support to other
organizations representing the oil and gas industry for
lifting export restrictions on crude oil as it would
bolster price growth for domestically produced oil and
facilitate job creation. IADC wishes to emphasize that the
oil and gas industry, which includes drilling contractors,
accounts for 5.3 percent of total U.S. employment. The
number of jobs supported by the upstream segment alone in
2010--2.2 million--is larger than the populations of 15
states.

Every new oil and gas exploration and production job supports
three new jobs in the supply chain and another six jobs in
the broader economy. The supply chain extends beyond the
oil producing regions into every state in the union. A new
IHS study finds that lifting the ban would introduce an
annual average 124,000 jobs into the supply chain and that
394,000 jobs annually would be created economy-wide between
2016-2030.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ http://www.energy.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/files/
serve?File_id=4d087117-d0ac-4446-9610-73f19c6592e8.

The crude oil supply chain would add $26 billion to the GDP per
year 2016-2013. Labor income would rise by more than $21
billion per year, on average, which translates to an
additional $158 per household. Cumulative government
revenues from corporate and personal taxes attribute to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
supply chain industries would increase by $429 billion.

Closing
Overall, the next 3 years will be challenging for the drilling
contractor due to uncertainty over oil prices and Federal regulations.
History shows that, with the ebb and flow of the oil market, industry
should expect continued decline in U.S. crude oil production before it
resumes growth again in late 2016 as EIA estimates.\5\ It remains to be
seen how industry fares in the upswing as a result of the impacts of
potentially deleterious regulation such as those that are currently
proposed. The U.S. industry has, by its innovation and advanced
technology, secured both an energy price miracle for Americans, and the
world's top spot in oil production. The question U.S. policymakers must
decide is whether their ambition is for the United States to
responsibly develop these resources and to continue to set an
outstanding world example, or bequeath that to another jurisdiction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/steo/report/.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Submitted by:

Stephen Colville

*****

The following document was submitted as an attachment to Mr. Colville's
testimony. This document is part of the hearing record and is being
retained in the Committee's official files:

--IADC letter to BSEE
