- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4366, TO AFFIRM AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT DATED SEPTEMBER 15, 2015, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "SAN LUIS UNIT DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT"; H.R. 5217, TO AFFIRM "THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT" DATED SEPTEMBER 15, 2015, "THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES, SAN LUIS WATER DISTRICT, PANOCHE WATER DISTRICT AND PACHECO WATER DISTRICT", AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "SAN LUIS UNIT DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT"; AND DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R., TO AUTHORIZE AND IMPLEMENT THE WATER RIGHTS COMPACT AMONG THE BLACKFEET TRIBE OF THE BLACKFEET INDIAN RESERVATION, THE STATE OF MONTANA, AND THE UNITED STATES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "BLACKFEET WATER RIGHTS SETTLEMENT ACT OF 2016"

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 4366, ``SAN LUIS UNIT DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT''; H.R. 5217, ``SAN
LUIS UNIT DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT''; AND DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R.
____, ``BLACKFEET WATER RIGHTS SETTLEMENT ACT OF 2016''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, May 24, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-44

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-277 PDF                           WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

JOHN FLEMING, LA, Chairman
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                        CNMI
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Norma J. Torres, CA
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Debbie Dingell, MI
Thomas MacArthur, NJ                 Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio

---------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, May 24, 2016............................     1

Statement of Members:
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..............................................    13
Fleming, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Napolitano, Hon. Grace F., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................    11
Valadao, Hon. David G., a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................    12
Zinke, Hon. Ryan K., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Montana...........................................    20

Statement of Witnesses:
Barnes, Hon. Harry, Chairman, Blackfeet Nation, Browning,
Montana....................................................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Bezdek, John, Counselor to the Deputy Secretary, U.S.
Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Questions submitted for the record.......................    38
Birmingham, Tom, General Manager/General Counsel, Westlands
Water District, Fresno, California.........................    48
Prepared statement of....................................    49
Questions submitted for the record.......................    53
Brown, Jerry, General Manager, Contra Costa Water District,
Concord, California........................................    44
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Ellis, Steve, Vice President, Taxpayers for Common Sense,
Washington, DC.............................................    39
Prepared statement of....................................    41

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Bishop, Rob, February 26, 2015 Letter to Departments of
Justice and Interior.......................................     2
Connor, Michael L., Deputy Secretary of the Interior, April
21, 2016 Letter to Representative David Valadao............    14

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4366, TO AFFIRM AN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT DATED
SEPTEMBER 15, 2015, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``SAN LUIS UNIT
DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT''; H.R. 5217, TO AFFIRM ``THE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT'' DATED
SEPTEMBER 15, 2015, ``THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES,
SAN LUIS WATER DISTRICT, PANOCHE WATER DISTRICT AND PACHECO
WATER DISTRICT'', AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``SAN LUIS UNIT
DRAINAGE RESOLUTION ACT''; AND DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ____,
TO AUTHORIZE AND IMPLEMENT THE WATER RIGHTS COMPACT AMONG THE
BLACKFEET TRIBE OF THE BLACKFEET INDIAN RESERVATION, THE STATE
OF MONTANA, AND THE UNITED STATES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES,
``BLACKFEET WATER RIGHTS SETTLEMENT ACT OF 2016''

----------

Tuesday, May 24, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:35 a.m., in
room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. John Fleming
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fleming, McClintock, Gosar,
LaMalfa, Denham, Bishop, Huffman, Napolitano, Costa, and
Torres.
Dr. Fleming. The Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans
will come to order. The subcommittee meets today to hear
testimony on H.R. 4366, sponsored by Mr. Valadao; H.R. 5217,
sponsored by Mr. Costa; and the discussion draft on the
``Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act of 2016.''
Before we begin, I ask unanimous consent that our non-
subcommittee colleagues, Mr. Valadao and Mr. Zinke, be allowed
to join us on the dais and participate at the appropriate time
in the hearing if time permits.

[No response.]

Dr. Fleming. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I will now yield myself 5 minutes to make my opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN FLEMING, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Dr. Fleming. Today's hearing involves an examination of
water-related settlements between the Federal Government and
non-Federal parties.
These complex and bipartisan settlements are the results of
decades of litigation, claims, and negotiations, and are
intended to provide certainty for all the parties involved.
But, they also involve Federal dollars. Louisianans and other
American taxpayers are being asked to pay for some parts of
these settlements, so there are legitimate questions about the
Federal costs and the benefits of these bills.
One of the most important questions involving a settlement,
especially when American taxpayer dollars will be used, is
whether resolving the litigation will be advantageous to the
Federal Government compared to its liability under current law.
For many years, these questions were either ignored or not
adequately answered on a bipartisan basis. Congress was simply
viewed at times as a final rubber stamp for approving costly
settlements, or forced to be an arbitrator on fiscal
expenditures even though it did not have the key information
needed to make a decision.
Times have changed. With an over $19 trillion debt, we need
to figure out whether these and other settlements are in the
best interests of the American taxpayer. It is not responsible
to make these assessments in a vacuum. And that's why the
Chairman of this Committee, Rob Bishop, asked the current
Interior Secretary and the former Attorney General last year to
provide more information on future Indian water rights
settlements in order to ensure that they are fiscally
responsible and justified. I ask unanimous consent to enter
that letter into the Record.

[No response.]

Dr. Fleming. Hearing no objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Natural Resources,
Washington, DC

February 26, 2015

Hon. Eric Holder, Attorney General
Department of Justice
950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20530

Hon. Sally Jewell, Secretary
Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Mr. Attorney General and Madame Secretary:

The House Natural Resources Committee (Committee) has primary
authorizing jurisdiction over the legislative resolution of Indian
water rights claims within the House of Representatives. Additionally,
given the longstanding policy of the United States that disputes
regarding Indian water rights should be resolved through negotiated
settlement rather than through litigation, both of your Departments
play key roles in negotiating and developing settlements regarding
these claims before they are ever considered by Congress.
The Committee recognizes that settlements to these matters are
generally preferable to protracted litigation, which does little to
provide water supply and financial certainty for settling and other
parties. Importantly, settlements, if crafted correctly, can also
provide relief to the United States from burdensome legal obligations
and benefit all American taxpayers. The Committee recognizes that the
Executive branch is charged with implementing existing Indian water
rights settlement criteria and procedures designed to meet these
goals.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Department of the Interior Working Group on Indian Water
Settlements for the Participation of the Federal Government in
Negotiations for the Settlement of Indian Water Rights Claims, Federal
Register, Vol. 55, No. 48, March 12, 1990.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Due to the direct linkage between your efforts in negotiating the
proposed resolution of these claims and our responsibility in enacting
such proposals both for the benefit of the United States interests and
to help Tribal and non-tribal parties, it is important that we work
together to facilitate Congressional consideration when you have
reached resolution.
Due to growing federal debt and increased budgetary pressures from
existing Indian water rights settlements, it is important that the
proposed settlements, their proposed legislation and the federal costs
associated with them be fiscally responsible and justified in order to
protect the American taxpayer and future Tribal needs.
As Chairman of the Committee, I write this letter to inform you of
the process that the Committee intends to follow when considering
future Indian water rights settlements during this Congress and to
inform you of the assistance the Committee will need from you and your
designees in order to proceed forward.
Given the role your Departments have in negotiating each proposed
settlement, to help expedite the Committee's consideration of proposed
legislation enacting such settlement that is fiscally responsible, your
departments--in concurrence with the Office of Management and Budget--
must also play a significant and initial role in certifying and
explaining the Administration's support of the financial aspects of
legislation codifying such settlement to the Committee. Put simply,
your Departments must convey support for and forward the settlements
and the proposed authorizing legislation, specifically including
federal spending levels, before any Committee consideration takes
place.

To that end:

1.  I anticipate each of you will provide a statement to the
Committee affirming that each proposed settlement
resolution transmitted by your Department adheres to the
current criteria and procedures.

2.  I ask that your Departments specifically affirm to the Committee
that a settlement meets Criteria 4 \2\ and 5(a) and (b) \3\
to ensure that the American taxpayer is deriving benefits
from any such settlement prior to Committee consideration.
Related to such determination, both Departments will be
expected to affirm that a particular settlement represents
a net benefit to the American taxpayer as compared to the
consequences and costs of not settling litigation, and
specifically support the federal financial authorization
included in the proposed legislative text.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Criteria 4, as included in Federal Register, Vol. 55. No. 48,
March 12, 1990 states: ``The total cost of a settlement to all parties
should not exceed the value of the existing claims as calculated by the
Federal Government.''
\3\ Criteria 5(a) and (b), as included in Federal Register, Vol.
55. No. 48, March 12, 1990 state: ``Federal contributions to a
settlement should not exceed the sum of the following two elements: a.
First, calculable legal exposure--litigation costs and judgment
obligations if the case is lost; Federal and non-Federal exposure
should be calculated on a present value basis taking into account the
size of the claim, value of the water, timing of the award, likelihood
of loss. b) Second, additional costs related to Federal trust or
programmatic responsibilities (assuming the U.S. obligation as trustee
can be compared to existing precedence.)--Federal contributions
relating to programmatic responsibilities should be justified as to why
such contributions cannot be funded through the normal budget
process.''

3.  For settlement legislation to be considered, the Attorney General
or his/her designee must have conveyed to a court and all
settling parties have agreed, in writing, to the settlement
pending a legislative resolution before it is forwarded to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the Committee for it to be considered.

4.  Both Departments and the settling parties must have approved, in
writing, the legislative text needed to codify the
settlement before it is transmitted to the Committee and
have provided that proposed text to the relevant court.

5.  Based on precedent,\4\ the Committee requests that the Department
of Justice consent to being available to testify if any
legislative text is considered by the Committee related to
such proposals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Testimony of Mr. Peter Steenland, Appellate Section Chief,
Department of Justice, before the Joint Hearing on S. 2259 before the
Subcommittee on Water and Power of the Senate Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources and the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, S. Hrg.
103-943, Aug. 4, 1994.

6.  Both Departments must list the legal claims being settled in any
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
document transmitting legislative text; and

7.  Such settlements and proposed legislation shall not include
financial authorizations for claims already settled by
Congress or claims that have no legal basis.

The actions of your Departments, as outlined above, will play a
very critical role in expediting the Committee's consideration of these
important settlement efforts. If your Departments follow this process--
starting with settlement legislation being proposed and supported by
the Administration--it is my intent to then introduce the settlement
legislation at the Administration's request and consider such
legislation in the Committee at the appropriate time. In conclusion, it
is my intent that your actions prior to Committee consideration will
determine whether negotiated settlements proceed in the legislative
process.
I look forward to working with you to help achieve fiscally
responsible settlements that help federally recognized tribes, other
settling parties and the American taxpayer.

Sincerely,

Rob Bishop,
Chairman.

______

Dr. Fleming. He asked the Administration to send
documentation on seven requests before Congress would consider
these settlements. This Administration, to its credit,
responded favorably and our staff have worked together on this
new protocol over the last 15 months.
As a result, we have a recent Administration letter on the
Blackfeet Settlement before us today that answers many of these
questions. A letter was also sent on the proposed Pechanga
Settlement, but it did not make the deadline necessary to add
it to today's agenda. At some point soon, we may consider that
settlement.
The letters on both these settlements responded to many of
Chairman Bishop's requests. But one of the key ones was not
definitively answered. Specifically, the Bishop letter requests
that the Administration affirm that a settlement meets long-
standing Federal criteria in place to determine that the
``total cost of a settlement to all parties should not exceed
the value of the existing claims as calculated by the Federal
Government.''
[Slide]
Dr. Fleming. As the television screen indicates, both the
Blackfeet and Pechanga letters stated that ``the Office of
Management and Budget advises that it is still assessing and
evaluating the information necessary for it to definitely
conclude whether the proposed settlement meets all of the
criteria and procedures.''
While Congress has more information than ever before, we
simply don't have all of it yet, especially as it relates to
the net benefits of these two water rights settlements. On the
other hand, the Administration was very specific in providing
the net benefits and costs on the drainage settlement before us
today, as evidenced by the chart on the television screen.
These are well-intended settlements and I commend those of
you who have worked so hard on getting these bills to this
important juncture. But, as I pointed out, more information is
necessary from the Administration. We also need to work with
the Congressional Budget Office to determine, prior to further
consideration, what these bills would cost, or perhaps reduce
the costs of, the Federal Government.
The American people have asked for and deserve transparency
and accountability so their taxpayer dollars are spent wisely.
This hearing will help examine these settlements in that
context. I look forward to today's testimony.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fleming follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. John Fleming, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Water, Power and Oceans
Today's hearing involves an examination of water-related
settlements between the Federal Government and non-Federal parties.
These complex and bipartisan settlements are the results of decades
of litigation, claims and negotiations and are intended to provide
certainty for all parties involved. But, they also involve Federal
dollars. Louisianans and other American taxpayers are being asked to
pay for some parts of these settlements, so there are legitimate
questions about the Federal costs and benefits of these bills.
One of the most important questions involving a settlement--
especially when American taxpayer dollars will be used--is whether
resolving the litigation will be advantageous to the Federal Government
compared to its liability under current law. For many years, these
questions were either ignored or not adequately answered on a
bipartisan basis. Congress was simply viewed at times as a final rubber
stamp for approving costly settlements or forced to be an arbitrator on
fiscal expenditures even though it did not have the key information
needed to make a decision.
Times have changed. With an over $19 trillion dollar debt, we need
to figure out whether these and other settlements are in the best
interests of the American taxpayer. It is not responsible to make these
assessments in a vacuum. And that's why the Chairman of this Committee,
Rob Bishop, asked the current Interior Secretary and the former
Attorney General last year to provide more information on future Indian
water rights settlements in order to ensure that they are fiscally
responsible and justified.
I ask unanimous consent to enter that letter into the Record--
hearing no objection, so ordered.
He asked the Administration to send documentation on seven requests
before Congress would consider these settlements. This Administration,
to its credit, responded favorably and our staff have worked together
on this new protocol over the last 15 months. As a result, we have a
recent Administration letter on the Blackfeet Settlement before us
today that answers many of these questions. A letter was also sent on
the proposed Pechanga Settlement but it did not make the deadline
necessary to add it to today's agenda. At some point soon, we may
consider that settlement.
The letters on both these settlements responded to many of Chairman
Bishop's requests. But, one of the key ones was not definitively
answered. Specifically, the Bishop letter requests that the
Administration affirm that a settlement meets long-standing Federal
criteria in place to determine that the ``total cost of a settlement to
all parties should not exceed the value of the existing claims as
calculated by the Federal Government.''
As the television screen indicates, both the Blackfeet and Pechanga
letters stated that ``the Office of Management and Budget advises that
it is still assessing and evaluating the information necessary for it
to definitively conclude whether the proposed settlement meets all of
the Criteria and Procedures.''
While Congress has more information than ever before, we simply
don't have all of it yet--especially as it relates to the net benefits
of these two water rights settlements. On the other hand, the
Administration was very specific in providing the net benefits and
costs on the drainage settlement before us today, as evidenced by the
chart on the television screen.
These are well-intended settlements and I commend those of you who
have worked so hard on getting these bills to this important juncture.
But, as I pointed out, more information is necessary from the
Administration. We also need to work with the Congressional Budget
Office to determine, prior to further consideration, what these bills
would cost--or perhaps reduce the costs of--the Federal Government.
The American people have asked for and deserve transparency and
accountability so their taxpayer dollars are spent wisely. This hearing
will help examine these settlements in that context. I look forward to
today's testimony.

______

Dr. Fleming. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member,
Mr. Huffman, for his statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and welcome to the
witnesses. I am glad to be here today to examine three bills
that do deserve our attention. On today's agenda we have the
Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act, to approve a much-needed
Indian water rights settlement for the Blackfeet Tribe in
Montana. This, I believe, is good public policy and ought to
move quickly through the committee.
However, the two other bills on today's agenda would
approve a legal settlement agreement recently reached between
the Federal Government and the Westlands Water District, which
is missing significant environmental and budgetary safeguards,
and should give every member of this committee serious pause.
The settlement agreement would relieve the Federal
Government of an obligation under a 56-year-old law to build an
interceptor drain for the Westlands Water District. In
exchange, the settlement agreement calls for nearly $400
million in a taxpayer bailout for the Westlands Water District.
The drainage legislation would also approve a not-yet-finalized
drainage agreement with the so-called Northerly Area Water
Districts.
I want to be very clear that both of the two bills we are
considering in this regard specifically direct Department of
the Interior to implement the ``Northerly Area'' agreement.
Members of this committee have never seen that agreement. The
public has never seen that agreement. The water utilities that
would benefit from that agreement did not show up today to
testify in favor of it; and we just learned late last night
that the Department of the Interior now says that they cannot
even testify in favor of that agreement, despite ostensibly
supporting at least one of these bills, due to an ongoing
Inspector General investigation that we did not even know was
pending until we learned about it last night.
Mr. Chairman, there are red flags and smoking guns all over
this subject matter, and it begs the question of why the House
is considering supporting an agreement sight unseen, and why we
are even holding the hearing on these two implementing bills
today. But since we are here, it is appropriate to start with
some history.
Fifty-six years ago, Congress passed the San Luis Act of
1960, which authorized construction projects to provide
irrigation water for certain agricultural lands in Merced,
Fresno, and Kings County. Recognizing that much of that land
was very saline and poorly drained soil, the San Luis Act
required the state of California or the Federal Government to
agree to build an interceptor drain.
The Bureau of Reclamation eventually agreed to build the
drain after the legislation passed, and in 1968 they began
construction of a 200-mile drain to transport the drainage
wastewater from the San Luis Unit, and discharge it into the
Delta. After significant public concern about dumping drainage
wastewater into the Delta, which happens to be California's
most important drinking water source, the Federal Government
stopped construction of the drain at a place called the
Kesterson Reservoir.
[Slide]
Mr. Huffman. The picture that you are looking at right now
is why in the 1980s the Kesterson Reservoir became infamous
across the Nation, because it was revealed that this toxic
drainage wastewater from Westlands and the San Luis Unit
contained a highly toxic element called selenium, which is
common in the soils of that area, but deadly in high
concentrations to both humans and wildlife.
The effects of this drainage wastewater on wildlife shocked
the country. What we saw was severe mortality and deformities
among waterfowl in Kesterson. And, again, this photo is an
example of what shocked the Nation at that time.
So, in 1986 the Bureau of Reclamation closed the drain
serving the San Luis Unit because of these selenium concerns.
Folks within the San Luis Unit sued the Federal Government, and
court rulings subsequently found that unless that old law is
amended, that the Department of the Interior still has an
obligation to provide drainage service to Westlands and the San
Luis contractors.
So, here we are today, with legislation that would amend
the San Luis Act of 1960, but with a big catch. In exchange for
amending that law, which I think almost everyone now agrees
should not have contained this taxpayer obligation in the first
place to finance a boondoggle drain for these lands, the
settlement agreement requires taxpayers to provide a $400
million bailout for Westlands and the San Luis water
contractors on top of the millions they receive already in
taxpayer subsidies.
Now, the Westlands Water District has some of the largest
and wealthiest corporate farms in the world. They boast $1
billion in crop sales every single year. Yet, in this
agreement, they are demanding nearly $400 million in a bailout
to simply agree to go along with a common-sense change in
Federal law to acknowledge that this interceptor drain, that
cannot be built because there is nowhere to put this toxic
drain water, should not have to be built.
Some have claimed that this deal actually saves taxpayers
money, because if Westlands forces taxpayers to finance a
drain, it would cost much more than the bailout we are giving
in this agreement. We are going to hear from a witness today
that that is actually not the case.
And while my time is out, Mr. Chairman, we could spend this
entire day talking about the examples in which the interests of
the Westlands Water District are being elevated above the
interests of taxpayers, the interests of the environment, and
the interests of other water users as well, which we will hear
about in a little while. I look forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huffman follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the witnesses.

I'm glad to be here today to examine three bills that do deserve
our attention. On today's agenda we have the Blackfeet Water Rights
Settlement Act, to approve a much needed Indian water rights settlement
for the Blackfeet Tribe in Montana. This, I believe, is good public
policy and ought to move quickly through the Committee. However, the
other two bills on today's agenda would approve a legal settlement
agreement recently reached between the Federal Government and the
Westlands Water District, which is missing significant environmental
and budgetary safeguards, and should give every member of this
committee serious pause.
The settlement agreement would relieve the Federal Government of an
obligation under a 56-year-old law to build an interceptor drain for
the Westlands Water District. And in exchange, the settlement agreement
calls for nearly $400 million in a taxpayer bailout for the Westlands
Water District. The drainage legislation would also approve a not-yet-
finalized drainage agreement with the so-called Northerly Area water
districts.
I want to be very clear that both of the two bills we're
considering in this regard specifically direct the Department of the
Interior to implement the ``Northerly Area'' agreement. Members of this
committee have never seen that agreement; the public has never seen
that agreement. The water utilities that would benefit from that
agreement did not show up today to testify in favor of it, and we just
learned late last night that the Department of the Interior now says
that they can't even testify in favor of that agreement despite
ostensibly supporting at least one of these bills due to an ongoing
Inspector General investigation that we didn't even know was pending
until we learned about it last night.
Mr. Chairman, there are red flags and smoking guns all over this
subject matter and it begs the question of why the House is considering
supporting an agreement sight unseen and why we are even holding the
hearing on these two implementing bills today.
But since we are here, it is appropriate to start with some
history. Fifty-six years ago, Congress passed the San Luis Act of 1960,
which authorized construction projects to provide irrigation water for
certain agricultural lands in Merced, Fresno, and Kings County and
recognizing that much of the land was very saline and poor soil, the
San Luis Act required the state of California or the Federal Government
to agree to build an interceptor drain.
The Bureau of Reclamation eventually agreed to build a drain after
the legislation passed, and in 1968 they began construction of a 200-
mile drain to transport the drainage wastewater from the San Luis Unit
and discharge it into the Delta. After significant public concern about
dumping drainage wastewater into the Delta, which happens to be
California's most important drinking water source, the Federal
Government stopped construction of the drain at a place called the
Kesterson Reservoir.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe picture that you're looking at right now is why the
Kesterson Reservoir in the 1980s became infamous across the Nation,
because it was revealed that this toxic drainage wastewater from
Westlands and the San Luis Unit contained a highly toxic element called
selenium, which is common in the soils of that area, but deadly in high
concentrations to humans and wildlife. The effects of this drainage
wastewater on wildlife shocked the country. What we saw was severe
mortality and deformities among waterfowl in Kesterson, and again this
photo is an example of what shocked the Nation at that time.
And so in 1986, the Bureau of Reclamation closed the drain serving
the San Luis Unit because of these selenium concerns, folks within the
San Luis Unit sued the Federal Government, and court rulings
subsequently found that unless that old law is amended, that the
Department of the Interior still has an obligation to provide drainage
service to the Westlands and the San Luis contractors.
So, here we are today, with legislation that would amend the San
Luis Act of 1960. But, with a big catch.
In exchange for amending that law--which I think almost everyone
now agrees should not have contained this taxpayer obligation in the
first place to finance a boondoggle drain for these lands--the
settlement agreement requires taxpayers to provide a $400 million
bailout for Westlands and the San Luis water contractors on top of the
millions they receive already in taxpayers subsidies. Now the Westlands
Water District has some of the largest and wealthiest corporate farms
in the world. They boast a billion dollars in crop sales every single
year. And yet in this agreement they're demanding nearly $400 million
in a bailout to simply agree to go along with a common-sense change in
Federal law to acknowledge that this interceptor drain that can't be
built because there's nowhere to put this toxic drain water shouldn't
have to be built.
Now some have claimed that this deal actually saves taxpayers
money, because if Westlands forced taxpayers to finance a drain, it
would cost much more than the bailout we're giving them in this
agreement. We're going to hear from a witness today that that is
actually not the case.
While my time is out, Mr. Chairman, we could spend this entire day
talking about the examples in which the interests of the Westlands
Water District are being elevated above the interests of taxpayers, the
interests of the environment, and the interests of the other water
users, which we'll hear about in a little while as well, and I look
forward to the discussion.

______

Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Gosar.

STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL A. GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Arizona is home to 22 federally recognized American Indian
tribes, has the second largest American Indian population, and
reservation land covers over a quarter of the state, making
Indian water rights settlements one of the most important
issues facing Arizonans.
[Slide]
Dr. Gosar. Tribal and non-tribal communities, water and
power users, the state, and the Federal Government have a long
history of working together on complex Indian water rights
settlements. Ten such settlements in Arizona, or portions of
them, as listed here on the TV screen, have been enacted by
Congress, and there are more on the horizon, depending on
negotiations.
These settlements can be a significant benefit to tribal
communities who have decades of water claims. They can remove
clouds of litigation uncertainty for water and power ratepayers
and industries. They can reduce Federal liability to benefit
the American taxpayer. They can also protect and promote jobs,
like the 4,000 mining jobs affiliated with the no-Federal-cost
Bill Williams River Water Rights Settlement Act that Senator
Jeff Flake and I sponsored in the last Congress. When done
properly, they can be a win-win for everyone involved.
Although recent ones have not cost taxpayers a dime, some,
like the Blackfeet legislation before us will cost Federal
money, due in part to the Federal-tribal trust responsibility.
Since there is a Federal funding backlog on existing Indian
water rights settlements, we have a growing national debt, and
many of our non-Western colleagues are not familiar with the
Winters Doctrine and tribal water, it is important that
Congress is educated and making informed decisions on future
settlements.
That is why Chairman Bishop's February 2015 letter and the
Administration's complete answers to it can help pave the way
for consideration of these important matters. It is my hope
that the Administration, which has been acting in good faith so
far, will provide all the answers necessary to move forward on
the Blackfeet, Pechanga, and additional settlements. No one,
except for a few so-called environmental groups, prefers
endless litigation, and with these settlements, with more
information, we can help provide a blueprint for water
certainty and taxpayer relief.
The San Luis drainage bills before us today aim to achieve
that, as well. This Administration concluded that it is
responsible under Federal law for building a multi-billion
dollar irrigation drain, and instead negotiated with local
irrigation districts to go another route that could potentially
save billions of dollars. Meanwhile, the irrigation district
that has helped pay for a drain that was never built will get
some of its money back. But it is also indemnifying the United
States from liability for the damages associated with failing
to provide the drainage.
Nothing is ever perfect in a negotiated water-related
settlement, but I want to applaud these parties here today who
have worked together to achieve a better future for their
communities. I also want to commend Mr. Zinke, Mr. Valadao, and
Mr. Costa for their leadership on these bills. I look forward
to getting more answers today and into the future for these
well-intentioned efforts.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gosar follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Paul A. Gosar, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Arizona
Thank you for holding this hearing.
Arizona is home to 22 federally recognized American Indian tribes,
has the second largest American Indian population and reservation land
covers over a quarter of the state, making Indian water rights
settlements one of the most important issues facing Arizonans.
Tribal and non-tribal communities, water and power users, the state
and the Federal Government have a long history of working together on
complex Indian water rights settlements. Ten such settlements in
Arizona--or portions of them--as listed here on the TV screen have been
enacted by Congress and there are more on the horizon depending on
negotiations.
These settlements can be a significant benefit to tribal
communities who have decades of water claims; they can remove clouds of
litigation uncertainty for water and power ratepayers and industries
and they can reduce Federal liability to benefit the American taxpayer.
They can also protect and promote jobs--like the 4,000 mining jobs
affiliated with the no-Federal cost Bill Williams River Water Rights
Settlement law that Senator Jeff Flake and I sponsored in the last
Congress. When done properly, they can be a win-win for everyone
involved.
Although recent ones have not cost taxpayers a dime, some like the
Blackfeet legislation before us will cost Federal money due, in part,
to the Federal tribal trust responsibility. Since there's a Federal
funding backlog on existing Indian water rights settlements, we have a
growing national debt and many of our non-western colleagues are not
familiar with the Winters Doctrine and tribal water, it's important
that Congress is educated and making informed decisions on future
settlements.
That's why Chairman Bishop's February 2015 letter and the
Administration's complete answers to it can help pave the way for
consideration of these important matters. It's my hope that the
Administration, which has been acting in good faith so far, will
provide all the answers necessary to move forward on the Blackfeet,
Pechanga and additional settlements. No one, except for a few so-called
environmental groups, prefers endless litigation, and these
settlements, with more information, can help provide a blueprint for
water certainty and taxpayer relief.
The San Luis Unit drainage bills before us today aim to achieve
that as well. This Administration concluded that it's responsible under
Federal law for building a multi-billion dollar irrigation drain and
instead negotiated with local irrigation districts to go another route
that could potentially save billions of dollars. Meanwhile, the
irrigation district that has helped pay for a drain that was never
built will get some of its money back but it is also indemnifying the
United States from liability for the damages associated with failing to
provide drainage.
Nothing is ever perfect in a negotiated water-related settlement,
but I want to applaud these parties here today who have worked together
to achieve a better future for their communities. I also want to
commend Mr. Zinke, Mr. Valadao and Mr. Costa for their leadership on
these bills. I look forward to getting more answers today and into the
future on these well-intentioned efforts.

______

Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Napolitano for her remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much. I do have some
comments, but I think I will reserve most of them until the
witnesses are here.
I do have grave concerns over this. First of all, I do not
see any provision that if the agreement is to go through,
whether--in the future--that land is sold for a profit to some
other entity. I just want to say I look forward to it, and I
would yield to Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. I thank the gentlelady. I was just going to
point out that the argument that this is somehow saving the
taxpayers money is at odds with the fact that if the Federal
Government were required to somehow build this drain under
existing law, the Westlands Water District would have to pay
for that. They would have to fully repay the taxpayers of the
United States. Yet, under this agreement, there is no such
protection for the taxpayers.
Also, environmental and water quality safeguards are
completely missing from this deal. These are important. Going
all the way back to folks who looked at this in prior
administrations, the Bush administration, and at the state
level, the Schwarzenegger administration, the importance of
environmental and water quality safeguards in any drainage deal
for this area has always been stressed. Yet, there are
absolutely none in this agreement.
Finally, it is important to note the need for robust
enforcement and performance standards in any agreement like
this, especially in light of recent charges against Westlands
by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Just 2 months ago,
the SEC charged Westlands for misleading investors--and I
quote--``misleading investors about its financial condition as
it issued a $77 million bond offering.'' And they noted that
Westlands' General Manager, Mr. Birmingham, who we will be
hearing from today, described their extraordinary accounting
transactions as ``a little Enron accounting.''
Anyone who compares their business tactics to a company
whose collapse exposed one of the largest accounting frauds in
corporate history should not be trusted so lightly with a
waiver of nearly $400 million owed to the U.S. Treasury, much
less a permanent water contract or carte blanche to manage the
toxic discharge problem that could drain into the most
important drinking water source in California.
After all of these considerations and revelations that we
have on this subject matter, it is mind-boggling that we would
simply take Westlands' word under this agreement. It is equally
mind-boggling that we are seriously here today to consider
these bills that are not even close to being right.
Mr. Chairman, these bills represent a bad deal for
taxpayers, the environment, and public health. They should be
rejected by Congress unless and until they are very
significantly improved. And with that, I yield the balance of
my time.
Dr. Fleming. And the gentlelady yields.
Our first panel today will include a panel of our
colleagues who have direct interest in this legislation. First
we will hear testimony from Mr. Valadao of California on his
bill, H.R. 4366. We will then hear from Mr. Costa, who is also
from California, on H.R. 5217. Then we will hear from Mr. Zinke
of Montana, for his statement on the discussion draft of the
``Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act of 2016.''
Each of you will be recognized for up to 5 minutes, and I
now recognize Mr. Valadao for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID G. VALADAO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Valadao. Good morning, Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the committee. I appreciate the
invitation to testify before you today on my legislation, H.R.
4366, the San Luis Drainage Resolution Act, which I introduced
in the House of Representatives earlier this year.
The district that I represent in California's Central
Valley has the most productive agricultural land in the entire
world. Producing over 400 different commodities, it is safe to
say that my district plays a vital role in feeding the Nation
and the world.
Many outside of agriculture do not understand the complex
and delicate systems involved in putting food on the table of
American families. The San Luis Drainage Resolution Act that we
will be hearing today helps ensure the land in Westlands Water
District can continue to remain productive, while protecting
the environment, and letting the Federal Government off the
hook for potentially billions of dollars.
I would like to provide a brief background on the ongoing
problem that the settlement contained and which my bill aims to
correct.
In 1960, Congress passed the San Luis Act, which authorized
the construction and operation of the San Luis as a part of the
Central Valley Project (CVP). The principal purpose of the San
Luis Unit was to furnish water for irrigation of land in
Merced, Fresno, and Kings Counties in California.
Any water project that brings fresh water to an
agricultural area must take the water remaining after the crops
have been irrigated away from the root zone. Too-shallow
groundwater results in salt buildup in soils and reduces the
productivity of farmland. For this reason, the San Luis Act
expressly conditioned the construction of the San Luis Unit on
the provision of drainage facilities.
The courts have held that the Secretary of the Interior was
and is responsible for providing the drainage to the San Luis
Unit of the CVP. According to the Bureau of Reclamation, this
is at the cost to the Federal Government of over $3.5 billion,
indexed for inflation. Following litigation in the 1970s,
Interior stopped providing the drainage required for the San
Luis Unit. This caused the destruction of thousands of acres of
farm land.
After decades of litigation, appeals, and negotiations
concerning the Federal Government's obligation to construct an
agriculture drainage unit to remove excess water from the
western side of the San Joaquin Valley, the U.S. Federal
Government and Westland's Water District have reached an
agreement to resolve this dispute.
The crux of the agreement is the requirement that
Westland's Water District assumes full responsibility for
managing drainage within the District. In return, the Federal
Government will relieve Westlands Water District of its
existing repayment obligation for construction of the Central
Valley Project.
While both the Federal Government and Westlands Water
District have approved the terms of this agreement, Congress
must affirm the recent settlement in order to achieve a final
resolution. I cannot stress enough the importance of this
legislation so that we may finally end this decades-old
dispute. In doing so, we are able to protect the economic
stability of the most productive agriculture region in the
world by preserving agriculture production and, as a result,
safeguarding thousands of desperately needed jobs in the
region.
Furthermore, passage of this legislation will shield
American taxpayers from potentially billions of dollars in
future drainage and litigation costs by relieving the United
States of its multi-billion dollar statutory and court-ordered
drainage obligation. The U.S. Government has already spent over
$100 million in previous settlements related to the failure to
meet this drainage obligation.
In conclusion, this common-sense agreement reached by the
Federal Government and Westlands Water District, and backed by
both Democrats and Republicans in the House of Representatives,
is absolutely imperative. Implementation of the San Luis Unit
Drainage Resolution would settle this long-standing dispute,
proving beneficial for all those involved.
Thank you for your time, and I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Costa, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Chairman Fleming, Ranking
Member Huffman, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the invitation to testify before you today on my legislation,
H.R. 5217, the San Luis Drainage Resolution Act, which I
introduced to the House of Representatives earlier this year.
This bipartisan piece of legislation that is reflected in both
my legislation and Congressman Valadao's reflects years of work
by this Administration and the Department of the Interior.
I would like unanimous consent to submit a letter from
Secretary Mike Connor indicating the resolution that the
Administration gave in supporting this bipartisan legislation.
[No response.]
Dr. Fleming. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

The Deputy Secretary of the Interior,
Washington, DC

April 21, 2016

The Honorable David Valadao
House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Representative Valadao:

Thank you for your letter dated November 24, 2015, regarding the
Drainage Settlement between Westlands Water District (Westlands) and
the United States (Settlement). In your letter, you requested
confirmation of our mutual understanding of the Settlement in a number
of areas. Your interest in the Settlement is appreciated and our
responses to the specific areas you raised are below.
Litigation and Legal Claims That Would Be Resolved Under the Settlement
Litigation over the United States' obligation to provide drainage
service to the San Luis Unit of the Bureau of Reclamation's
(Reclamation) Central Valley Project (CVP) has a long and complicated
history spanning the last two and a half decades. The summary in your
November 24, 2015, letter accurately describes the litigation that the
Settlement resolves. Litigation commenced shortly after the United
States halted use of the San Luis interceptor drain and plugged all
Federal facilities, following the discovery of embryonic deformities of
aquatic birds at Kesterson Reservoir. This Settlement resolves
Westlands Water District v. United States, the remaining breach of
contract case relating to the United States' drainage obligation, as
well as provides for the vacatur of the 2000 Order Modifying Partial
Judgment in Firebaugh Canal Water District v. United States, whereby
the district court expressly retained jurisdiction and actively
exercises a monitoring function over Reclamation's implementation of
drainage service in the San Luis Unit. The Settlement also provides a
framework for resolving Michael Etchegoinberry, et. al. v. United
States, which is a Fifth Amendment takings case brought by individual
landowners within Westlands. These cases are described in more detail
below.
Firebaugh was filed in 1988 by two water districts located outside
and ``downslope'' of the San Luis Unit. The action was partially
consolidated with Sumner Peck Ranch, Inc. v. United States, a similar
action brought in 1991 by approximately 100 landowners located within
the San Luis Unit. In 1995, following a trial, the district court
entered a partial judgment that the Secretary of the Interior's
(Secretary) obligation under the San Luis Act to provide drainage was
not excused or rendered impossible. In 2000, the Ninth Circuit largely
affirmed the partial judgment, and on remand the district court entered
an injunction (2000 Order Modifying Partial Judgment) against the
Secretary requiring Reclamation to ``promptly'' provide drainage
service to the San Luis Unit. In 2002, the United States settled the
Sumner Peck plaintiffs' claims.
In compliance with the 2000 Order Modifying Partial Judgment, the
Department developed a Plan of Action outlining the steps it would
follow to implement a drainage solution for the San Luis Unit.
Following completion of an environmental impact statement, Reclamation
issued a Record of Decision (ROD) in March 2007 to meet the drainage
service requirements of the court's injunction. The Department also
prepared and submitted to Congress a feasibility report, concluding
that the cost of implementing the selected alternative would be
approximately $2.7 billion (now $3.8 billion in April 2015 dollars).
That amount far exceeds the remaining appropriations ceiling authorized
for construction of the San Luis Unit. As a result, the alternative
selected in the ROD cannot be fully implemented under existing law. As
part of the on-going litigation, the Department advised the court in
November 2009 that, while it could not implement the entire ROD,
sufficient appropriation ceiling remained to allow it to construct one
subunit of drainage facilities within Westlands. Beyond that subunit,
however, the Department remains unable to continue implementation of
the ROD without additional Congressional authorization.
During the same time Reclamation was formulating its plan of action
for the implementation of drainage service, the Firebaugh plaintiffs
continued to seek their own injunction requiring Reclamation to provide
drainage service to lands adjacent to the San Luis Unit. On September
30, 2011, the district court held that the San Luis Act imposed no duty
on the Secretary to provide drainage service that would protect or
remediate conditions on plaintiffs' lands, and the plaintiffs' had
failed to demonstrate unreasonable delay by Reclamation in implementing
a drainage plan within the San Luis Unit. The district court
subsequently entered final judgment on all of the Firebaugh plaintiffs'
claims and the Firebaugh plaintiffs appealed to the Ninth Circuit. On
April 3, 2013, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court, Firebaugh
Canal Water Dist. v. United States, 712 F.3d 1296 (9th Cir. 2013); a
petition for rehearing en banc was subsequently denied and the United
States Supreme Court denied cert.
Under the 2000 Order Modifying Partial Judgment, the district court
continues to monitor Reclamation's activities to provide drainage
service for a subunit of the San Luis Unit within Westlands pursuant to
a ``Control Schedule.'' The United States submits biannual reports to
the district court, which report on progress in implementing the
Control Schedule. The filing of these status reports, supported by a
declaration from Reclamation's Mid-Pacific Regional Director presently
continues. On October 26, 2015, Judge O'Neill granted a Joint Motion
for a Partial Stay by Westlands and the United States and partially
stayed implementation of the current Control Schedule through January
15, 2017 while parties continue to work on obtaining legislation
required to implement the Settlement, however, the Court did not
relieve parties of filing bi-annual status reports with the court.
On September 2, 2011, a group of individual landowners within
Westlands filed suit in the Court of Federal Claims alleging that the
failure by the United States to provide drainage service to their lands
resulted in a physical taking of their property without just
compensation in violation of the Fifth Amendment. Plaintiffs brought
their suit as a class action on behalf of all landowners located within
Westlands ``whose farmlands have not received the necessary drainage
service the United States is required to provide under the San Luis Act
. . ..'' A plaintiff class has yet to be certified. A motion by the
United States seeking dismissal of the takings claim was denied on
September 20, 2013. Etchegoinberry, et. al. v. United States, 114 Fed.
Cl. 437 (2013). The Opinion contains language sharply critical of the
United States' delay in providing drainage to Westlands. Westlands
itself is not a party to this litigation, but pursuant to the
Settlement would intervene for purposes of settling the case. The Court
of Federal Claims has stayed this litigation to allow settlement
negotiations to proceed, but is requiring the submission of regular
status reports on the progress of the discussions.
On January 6, 2012, Westlands filed its own suit against the United
States also in the Court of Federal Claims, alleging that the
government's failure to provide drainage service to the Westlands'
service area constituted a breach of Westlands' 1963 Water Service and
1965 Repayment contracts (including the interim renewal of those
contracts). The United States moved to dismiss Westlands' claims. On
January 15, 2013, the Court of Federal Claims granted the United
States' motion to dismiss, ruling that none of the contracts contained
an enforceable promise to provide drainage to Westlands. Westlands
Water Dist. v. United States, 109 Fed. Cl. 177 (2013). Westlands has
appealed to the Federal Circuit, and briefing on the appeal is
complete. On December 2, 2015, the Federal Circuit granted a stay
through January 20, 2017.

Benefits to the U.S. of the Westlands Settlement:

The Settlement, if authorized by Congress, would relieve
the Department of all drainage obligations imposed by the
San Luis Act, including implementation of the 2007 ROD,
within Westlands. The 2015 costs of implementing the entire
ROD are roughly $3.8 billion.

Westlands agrees to seek dismissal of the Westlands breach
of contract litigation and would join the United States in
petitioning for vacatur of the 2000 Order Modifying Partial
Judgment in the Firebaugh case directing implementation of
drainage service and control schedules.

The Settlement establishes a framework for resolving all
individual landowner claims in the Etchegoinberry takings
case. Specifically, Westlands would intervene in this case
for settlement purposes and would provide compensation to
its landowners. Potential exposure to Federal taxpayers
from an adverse judgment could be as high as $2 billion.

Westlands agrees to provide for the release, waiver, and
abandonment of all past, present, and future claims,
including from individual landowners, and further agrees to
indemnify the United States for any and all claims relating
to the provision of drainage service or lack thereof within
its' service area.

Westlands has also agreed to permanently retire a total of
not less than 100,000 acres of lands within its boundaries
utilizing those lands only for the following purposes:

a. Management of drain water, including irrigation of
reuse areas;

b. Renewable energy projects;

c. Upland habitat restoration projects; or

d. Other uses subject to the consent of the United
States.

The Settlement transfers the legal obligation to manage
drainage to lands within the Westlands service area from
the United States to Westlands.

Westlands agrees to cap its CVP water deliveries at 75
percent of its contract quantity. Any water savings above
this 75 percent cap would become available to the United
States for other CVP authorized purposes.

As part of the overall Settlement, the United States
anticipates it will enter into a water service contract
with Lemoore Naval Air Station to provide a guaranteed
quantity of CVP water to meet the irrigation needs of the
Naval Air Station associated with air operations, and
Westlands would agree to wheel all CVP water made available
to Lemoore.

The Settlement provides the following benefits to Westlands:

Westlands will be relieved of current, unpaid capitalized
construction costs for the CVP, the net present value of
which is currently estimated to be $295 million. Westlands
will still be responsible for operation and maintenance,
will pay restoration fund charges pursuant to the Central
Valley Project Improvement Act and will be responsible for
future CVP construction charges associated with new
construction for the project.

The Secretary will convert Westlands' current 9(e) water
service contract to a 9(d) repayment contract consistent
with existing key terms and conditions. As a ``paid out''
project, the benefit of this conversion gives the district
a contract with no expiration term, consistent with other
paid out Reclamation projects. However, the contract will
contain terms and conditions that are nearly identical to
those in the current 9(e) contract.

Westlands will be relieved of Reclamation Reform Act (96
Stat. 1269) provisions relating to acreage limitations and
full cost pricing. The Reclamation Reform Act grants this
relief on its face to projects that are considered ``paid-
out.'' Additionally, the tiered pricing provisions are
triggered when a district receives 80 percent of its
contract quantity, and as part of the Settlement, Westlands
water deliveries will be capped at 75 percent of its
contract quantity.

Westlands will also take title to certain facilities
including the portion of the San Luis Drain that lies
within Westlands' service area.

The Settlement envisions relief from statutory obligations, debt
relief, title transfer, and authority to enter into a new CVP water
service contract with Lemoore Naval Air Station, all activities
requiring Congressional authorization.
Net Benefit for the San Luis Unit Drainage Resolution Act:
There were several aspects regarding the obligation to provide
drainage service that were evaluated in determining the overall net
benefit to the United States. Included in this consideration were
avoided drainage construction costs, repayment to the United States of
reimbursable costs, relief from Reclamation Reform Act fees, and unpaid
CVP capital obligations. Specific to Westlands, further consideration
was given to the indemnification of current legal claims, namely the
Etchegoinberry v. United States litigation, of which just financial
compensation estimates could be as high as $2 billion.
The result of the Department's net benefit analysis was a savings
to the United States of at least $968.9 million in regards to
Westlands. This amount does not include the avoided financial liability
in the Etchegoinberry claim. The different aspects of the net benefit
analysis are summarized below.

Avoided Construction Costs to the United States--Based on
current conditions and recognition of completed drainage
projects valued at roughly $700 million in 2015 dollars,
particularly in the Northerly Area of the San Luis Unit,
the total remaining cost of providing drainage service has
been calculated to $3.1 billion. Approximately $2.5 billion
is associated with the cost to provide drainage service
specifically to Westlands while the remaining $558 million
is the total cost that would be needed to address drainage
concerns of the Northerly Area of the San Luis Unit.

Repayment of Reimbursable Drainage Construction Costs--
Following the completion of drainage construction projects
and implementation of drainage service, Westlands would be
responsible for reimbursable costs incurred by the United
States. Assuming repayment would occur over a 40 year
period with zero interest as required by current applicable
law, the calculated repayment value in 2015 dollars is
approximately $1.2 billion for Westlands.

CVP Capital Obligation Relief--Your November 24, 2015
letter accurately describes the amount of debt that would
be repaid to the United States by the year 2030 associated
with continued repayment of Westlands' CVP obligations as
$375 million. For purposes of evaluating a potential
settlement, however, we believe the value of repayment in
today's dollars is a more accurate representation of the
costs of settlement. Consequently, we believe $295 million,
which represents the costs of repayment forgiveness in
today's dollars, is the figure that should be used when
evaluating the settlement.

San Luis Drain Feature Re-Evaluation (SLDFRE)--Reclamation
has undertaken some drainage actions as part of the SLDFRE.
The net present value of the debt relief of these
construction costs to Westlands is $13.6 million.

Grasslands Bypass Project--The estimated operations and
maintenance obligations that would be forgiven for the
Grasslands Bypass Project for Westlands is $2.6 million.
Historically, these costs were previously designated as
capitalized construction costs and were not recovered on an
annual basis when the expenditures occurred.

Reclamation Reform Act Relief--As part of the Settlement,
Westlands would receive relief from the Reclamation Reform
Act costs associated with water delivered to full cost
lands. The estimated amount of this relief is approximately
$20 million.

The costs to implement drainage actions in Westlands in this
analysis are based on the costs in the 2007 ROD, indexed to April 2015
dollars. We recognize that Westlands can realize efficiencies, such as
using local or in-house labor, reduced travel, and different purchasing
requirements than Reclamation, that reduce their cost to implement
drainage as compared to the costs if Reclamation were to implement the
2007 ROD. In addition, it is widely recognized that the drainage issue
may have lessened over the last few years due to drought and irrigation
efficiencies, but we are of the view that long term, there will be a
need for substantial financial investment to alleviate drainage
concerns in the San Joaquin Valley. While California has experienced a
series of dry years recently, the historic hydrologic record indicates
that wet cycles will return and drainage will again become a
substantial challenge in the San Luis Unit.
In addition, with Westlands responsible for drainage within its
boundaries, there is more incentive to increase irrigation efficiencies
as new technology is developed in the future, which is a component of
managing drainage that is largely outside of Reclamation's control. It
should also be noted that Westlands will be responsible for
implementing drainage in perpetuity. The costs in this analysis have
only been indexed to April 2015 dollars. These costs will rise as
drainage actions are implemented many years and potentially, decades
into the future.
Based on these and other terms of the Settlement, it is our belief
that the Settlement results in significant savings to American
taxpayers when compared to the unavoidable costs that would occur
without the terms agreed to in the Settlement. Moreover, we are also of
the view that failure to settle on-going litigation will place the
Department's ability to address the effects of the on-going drought in
both the short and long term at risk due to the potential of
significant amounts of appropriations being expended on providing
drainage service. As a practical matter, should our efforts to settle
litigation with Westlands fail, funding for programs throughout the
Mid-Pacific Region are likely to be reduced in order for Reclamation to
adequately fund the Control Schedule. Please find the attached ``Costs
and Benefits to the Federal Government'' table for Westlands that
succinctly capture the information presented in this letter.
We want to again express our appreciation for your attention to
this matter. Please contact us if you have any further questions.

Sincerely,

Michael L. Connor.

ATTACHMENT

U.S. Bureau of Reclamation's Assessment of Costs

and Benefits to Federal Government of Westlands' Drainage Settlement

(Presented in Present (2015) Net Worth)
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

APRIL 20, 2016

______

Mr. Costa. It is important to note that this results in a
decision made by this Administration after the court made a
decision in 2000. As a matter of fact, the language of the
Westlands Settlement Agreement has been in since last fall, and
committees and staff have been briefed. Member staff have been
briefed over the recent months. This is not something new that
they have just looked at.
The district that I represent in Central California's
Valley is home to some of the most productive agricultural land
in the world. The San Joaquin Valley, which I and Congressman
Valadao call our home, and other representatives, are proud of
the crops that we produce that ultimately feed the Nation. This
is what we are talking about--food.
This settlement agreement is much larger than the issues
that we will be discussing here today because it is food on
America's dinner table. It is a national security item. Half
the Nation's fresh fruits and vegetables come from California.
We are number one in the dairy industry, number one in the
citrus industry, and number one in nut production. This is food
that goes on all of our constituents' dinner tables, period;
and that needs to be understood.
The San Luis Drainage Act that we will hear today helps
ensure the land in the San Luis Unit of the Central Valley
Project has the opportunity to continue the long-standing
history of productivity while saving the Federal Government
literally $3.8 billion in liability.
Secretary Connor, I think, said it best, ``After the court
made the decision in 2000, they had three choices. The three
choices were, (1) to change the law, which they chose not to
do; (2) was to reach a settlement agreement, which this
legislation reflects; or (3) to be found in contempt of court,
neither of which Mr. Connor nor Secretary Salazar wanted to
do.''
As a matter of fact, this legislation strongly parallels
the settlement agreement that was reached that the NRDC
negotiated as part of the San Joaquin River Settlement
Agreement. And yes, you can shake your head, but I would like
to enter this as a record to show the parallels of the actions
that have taken place on the San Joaquin River Settlement
Agreement compared to these agreements that we have here, Mr.
Chairman.
[No response.]
Dr. Fleming. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Costa. Congressman Valadao laid out the case for the
necessity for the drainage settlement for Westlands Water
District in his testimony. I have similar thoughts as it
relates to the settlement agreement that I am carrying. My
legislation authorizes an agreement between three Northerly
Water Districts and the San Luis Unit, commonly known as the
Northern Districts. That is Panoche, Pacheco, and the San Luis
Unit.
The passage of H.R. 5217 would result in a resolution to
all of the drainage obligations for the United States, and
would move the responsibilities of those drainage obligations--
and that is where the nexus is, that is where the checks and
balances are--to the control of the local jurisdictions. And
guess what? If they don't abide by those, they don't get the
water. That is the bottom line.
These agreements reached by the Obama administration and
the water districts within the San Luis Unit need to be
authorized to move forward. That is what this hearing is all
about. The benefits of the United States are significant. There
is no lessening of environmental protections requirements under
state or Federal law by these agreements. That needs to be
underlined, as well.
But let me just close on this note. Some of my colleagues
here and elsewhere have said, ``Look, if Westlands Water
District is for something, we are against it, automatically,
period.'' This has been a political football that has been out
in California for years. As a matter of fact, some have
suggested that the San Luis and farming on the west side ought
to dry up and blow away. Dry up and blow away, because that is
how much they think of the production of food and fiber.
Yes, and let me tell you something. That 100,000 acres that
you are concerned about that may be sold? Let me explain
something to you. If that 100,000 acres doesn't have water,
which it doesn't; and if it doesn't have drainage, which it
doesn't--listen to me, if it doesn't have water and it doesn't
have drainage, guess what? It has no value, period.
So, let me close with this thought. Doing nothing, which is
something we do very well around here, only heightens the
concern of your issues about drainage in the Delta. That is
what we do well around here is nothing. So advocate doing
nothing, and we will continue to deal with the challenges, the
Federal Government will continue to be exposed to $3.5 billion
of liability as a result of the court decision.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the time. I will
look forward to the hearing testimony.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Zinke is now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. RYAN K. ZINKE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MONTANA

Mr. Zinke. I am both excited and proud to welcome Chairman
Harry Barnes of the great Blackfeet Nation of Montana to
Washington, DC. Mr. Barnes was elected Chairman of the
Blackfeet Tribal Business Council on July 10, 2014, and has
worked diligently over the past few years to rebuild and
bolster the tribe's government and community.
Mr. Chairman, I know you have waited a long time for this
day to come, and I am glad we have finally passed this one
major hurdle. It is a historic day for Montana. Today marks the
first time in the Blackfeet Compact history that has received a
hearing on the House side. Shortly after the hearing, I will be
proud to formally introduce the bill to the House itself. This
accomplishment has been made possible because of the hard work
of many people. The collaborative efforts of both sides of the
aisle between the tribe, the state, and the congressional
delegation clearly show what a priority this is to the state of
Montana.
We all jointly support this compact and will continue to
fight to see its passage through Congress. The compact has also
reached significant milestones within the Administration. The
letter provided to this committee is the first of its kind, and
I am glad to help push the efforts between the OMB, Department
of the Interior, and the Department of Justice forward. I
cannot stress how critical this water compact is to the state
of Montana, the tribe, and America, which is why it is so
widely supported across the state.
This is not a contentious issue. Not only is it critical to
address the tribe's water issues, but many in our state also
rely on these projects and the completion of this water compact
settlement. The Blackfeet Nation are warriors. They have fought
for over 100 years to protect their culture and their
traditions. And water is a critical part of their way of life,
which is why this compact is so important. Whether it is for
economic purposes or religious ceremonies, water is, as
Chairman Barnes so eloquently states, the creation of the
Blackfeet people.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today and speak
about the importance of this compact, and thank the committee
for holding a hearing on this issue.
On a personal note, I grew up over the mountains of the
great Blackfeet Nation. I have a map in my office. The map
shows what the state looked like in 1889, when the great state
of Montana became a state. And I can tell you the Blackfeet
Nation has given a lot to this country. They have given this
country a lot of reservation land. They have fought in every
battle this Nation has ever fought. My respect to the tribe is
undaunted. I ask you for support, and I look forward to your
questions. I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman. We have no formal
question round, but certainly gentlemen and other Members who
have testified are welcome to join us on the dais.
We are now ready for our second panel. If you will go ahead
and come forward, second panel.
Let's see, we need to put new signs out. If you would, it
would help me out if you sit behind the sign that identifies
you so I don't make too many mistakes.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Fleming. First of all, we have the Chairman of the
Blackfeet Nation, the Honorable Harry Barnes, who is based out
of Browning, Montana. Chairman Barnes will testify on the
discussion draft of the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act
of 2016.
Next is Mr. John C. Bezdek, Counselor to the Deputy
Secretary at the Department of the Interior in Washington, DC.
He will be testifying on all three bills today.
Seated behind Mr. Bezdek, as accompanying witnesses, will
be Ms. Letty Belin, a Senior Counselor to the Deputy Interior
Secretary, and Mr. Craig Alexander, Chief of the Indian
Resources Section, Environment and Natural Resources Division
at the Department of Justice.
Next is Mr. Steve Ellis, Vice President of the Taxpayers
for Common Sense located in Washington, DC. Mr. Ellis will be
testifying on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217.
Next is Mr. Jerry Brown, General Manager of the Contra
Costa Water District, which is based out of Concord,
California. I guess there will be two Jerry Browns in
California, as a result. Mr. Brown will be testifying on both
H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217.
And then, finally, Mr. Thomas Birmingham, General Manager
for the Westlands Water District, which is based out of Fresno,
California. Mr. Birmingham will testify on H.R. 4366 and H.R.
5217.
Each witness' written testimony will appear in full in the
hearing record. I ask that you keep your oral statements to 5
minutes only.
The way the lights work is you will be under a green light
for the first 4 minutes. Then you will be under a yellow light,
caution light, for the last minute. If it turns red before you
complete your testimony, please quickly come to an end so that
we can move on and keep the hearing going and get everyone's
input and questions asked.
I now recognize Mr. Zinke for introduction of our first
witness.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me introduce Chairman Barnes. The Chairman is now the
Chairman of the Blackfeet Nation. He was elected, as earlier
remarked, a former veteran.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will have you say your opening
remarks. I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. Chairman Barnes, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. HARRY BARNES, CHAIRMAN, BLACKFEET NATION,
BROWNING, MONTANA

Mr. Barnes. Thank you very much, Chairman Fleming, Ranking
Member Huffman, and members of the committee. My name is, in
fact, Harry Barnes, and I serve as Chairman of the Blackfeet
Tribal Business Council of the Blackfeet Indian Nation of
Montana. I am honored to be here on behalf of the Blackfeet
Nation in support of the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act.
I want to thank the committee for holding this hearing on this
bill that is critical to the future of the Blackfeet people. I
also want to thank Congressman Zinke and his staff for their
leadership and strong support of this legislation and
settlement.
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement is the culmination of
over two decades of work by the tribe. It represents a
historical break-through in the tribe's over century-long
battle to secure and protect its water rights. Iterations of
the bill have been introduced in previous Congresses. In 2015,
Senators Tester and Daines introduced the Blackfeet Water
Rights Settlement Act, Senate Bill 1125. Earlier this year, the
Senate Indian Affairs Committee marked up and favorably
reported the bill out of committee.
The discussion draft being heard today, which is
substantially similar to the marked-up version of Senate Bill
1125, ratifies the Blackfeet Montana Water Rights Compact;
resolves significant water-related claims against the Federal
Government; and, most importantly, provides the critical
resources needed for the development of the self-sustaining
economy on the Blackfeet Reservation, and a permanent homeland
for the Blackfeet people.
The Blackfeet Tribe resides on the Blackfeet Indian
Reservation in North Central Montana. The reservation is
located along the Eastern Rocky Mountains and borders the
Glacier National Park, Lewis and Clark National Forest, and the
U.S.-Canadian border.
The reservation was established by treaty with the United
States in 1855. The present reservation is approximately 1.5
million acres, and there are currently over 17,000 enrolled
members, about half of whom reside on the reservation.
Six different drainages are encompassed within the
Blackfeet Reservation: the St. Mary, the Milk, Cut Bank Creek,
Two Medicine River, Badger Creek, and Birch Creek. The
reservation is located at the headwaters of these streams, two
of which--the St. Mary River and the Milk River--are allocated
between the United States and Canada by the 1909 Boundary
Waters Treaty. As a result, any tribal claim against the system
creates a great deal of uncertainty among Montana water users.
In December 2007, after nearly two decades of negotiation
to resolve the Blackfeet Tribe's water rights, the tribe
completed a water rights compact with the Montana Reserved
Water Rights Compact Commission. The compact was overwhelmingly
approved by the Montana legislature in April 2009.
In general, the compact confirms the tribe's water rights
to all streams on the reservation. It brings certainty to the
tribe's water rights and protects the tribe's use of water for
the tribe's growing population.
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act would, (1) ratify
the tribe's water compact with the state of Montana; (2)
resolve the Blackfeet Tribe's water-related claims against the
United States; and (3) provide the necessary resources needed
for the tribe to put its water to use and to develop a self-
sustaining economy on the Blackfeet Reservation.
In consideration for the tribe waiving its claims against
the United States, the legislation authorizes Federal funding
for vital drinking water projects, water storage projects, and
irrigation improvements and development on the reservation. It
also provides for water-related economic development projects,
and provides funds to address environmental and fishery issues.
It is important to note that the tribe has water-related
claims, as described in more detail in my written statement,
against the Federal Government in excess of the funds
authorized in the legislation.
The settlement also includes funding for unfunded Federal
programmatic responsibilities, including deferred maintenance
and rehabilitation on the BIA's Blackfeet irrigation project.
Although these are obligations that the Federal Government was
required to undertake outside the context of this settlement,
the tribe has agreed to these items being included as
consideration for the settlement.
Notably, with respect to cost, since 2012, the tribe has
agreed to reduce the amount of funding authorized in the
legislation by more than $190 million to address concerns
raised by the Department of the Interior. Moreover, the state
is contributing $49 million toward the Blackfeet Settlement,
the largest contribution the state has made to any Montana
water settlement.
Dr. Fleming. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, you are 38 seconds
past your deadline. Again, I promise you, every word of it will
be in the official record.
Mr. Barnes. I appreciate that, Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barnes. I apologize for the oversight.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Barnes follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Harry Barnes, Blackfeet Nation
on Discussion Draft of H.R. ____,
``Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act of 2016''
Chairman John Fleming, Ranking Member Jared Huffman, and members of
the committee, my name is Harry Barnes, and I serve as Chairman of the
Blackfeet Tribal Business Council of the Blackfeet Indian Nation of
Montana. I am honored to be here on behalf of the Blackfeet Nation in
support of the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act. I want to thank
the committee for holding this hearing on this bill that is critical to
the future of the Blackfeet People. I also want to thank Congressman
Zinke and his staff for their leadership and strong support of this
legislation and the settlement.
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement is the culmination of over
two decades of work by the Tribe. It represents a historical
breakthrough in the Tribe's over century long battle to secure and
protect its water rights. Settlement legislation ratifies the
Blackfeet-Montana Water Rights Compact, resolves significant water
related claims against the Federal Government, and most importantly
provides the critical resources needed for the development of a self-
sustaining economy on the Blackfeet Reservation and a permanent
homeland for the Blackfeet People.
the blackfeet reservation and the blackfeet people
The Blackfeet Reservation was established by treaty in 1855. The
Reservation is located along the Rocky Mountains in north central
Montana, adjacent to Glacier National Park, Lewis and Clark National
Forest and the border with Canada. Our Reservation is renowned for its
spectacular mountains, majestic plains and abundant natural resources.
The Blackfeet People have occupied this area since time immemorial. As
we say: ``We know who we are and where we come from. We come from right
here. We know, and have always said, that we have forever lived next to
the Rocky Mountains.''
Our treaty, known as Lame Bull's Treaty, was signed in 1855.
Executive Orders and statutes followed, each taking large areas of our
traditional land. We ended up with the land that was most sacred to us:
our present day reservation. In 1896, the Northern Rockies were taken
from us because speculators believed there were rich minerals to be
had. When mineral riches did not materialize, this most sacred part of
our homeland became part of Lewis and Clark National Forest and a
portion later became part of Glacier National Park in 1910. To this
day, we question the legitimacy of the 1896 transaction. While the
Tribe retained hunting, fishing and timbering rights in the area taken,
we hope that one day our claims to this area will be resolved.
The present Blackfeet Reservation is about 1.5 million acres.
Although the United States had promised our Reservation would never be
allotted in the 1896 Agreement by which the Northern Rockies were lost,
the Federal Government went back on its word and allotted lands within
the Reservation to individual tribal members under Allotment Acts in
1907 and 1919.
The Tribe now has over 17,000 members, about half of whom live on
the Reservation. Our people have worked hard to survive in the
sometimes harsh climate of the Rocky Mountains, and to live in the
modern world while maintaining the cultural and spiritual ties to the
land and its resources.
the critical importance of water
Water is critical to the Blackfeet People. It is central to our
culture and our traditions. It is an essential element of our way of
life, and is crucial to our continuing survival culturally,
traditionally and economically. Six different drainages are encompassed
within the Reservation: the St. Mary, the Milk, Cut Bank Creek, Two
Medicine River, Badger Creek and Birch Creek. These are the veins and
arteries of the Reservation and provide life to the Blackfeet People
and bind us together as a People. Water is the source of creation to
the Blackfeet People. We believe that rivers and lakes hold special
power through habitation of Underwater People called the Suyitapis. The
Suyitapis are the power source for medicine bundles, painted lodge
covers, and other sacred items. Contact with supernatural powers from
the sky, water and land is made through visions and dreams and
manifests itself in animals or particular objects. The beaver ceremony
is one of the oldest and most important religious ceremonies, and
beaver bundles have particular significance. The ceremonial importance
of water is especially present in the use of sweat lodges as a place to
pray, make offerings, cleanse and heal. The sweat lodge remains a part
of the religious and spiritual lives of many tribal members.
Water is truly the lifeblood that sustains the Blackfeet People and
our way of life. The water resources of the Blackfeet Reservation are
essential to make the Reservation a productive and sustainable homeland
for the Blackfeet People and for our communities to thrive and prosper.
Safe and clean drinking water supplies are vital for the growing
population on the Reservation, and water is critical to our economy
which is heavily dependent on stock raising and agriculture. The
Blackfeet Reservation's location along the eastern Rocky Mountain Front
makes it the home of abundant fish and wildlife, which depend directly
on the water resources of the Reservation to support them and allow
them to thrive. Large game animals, including moose, elk, and deer
abound. The Reservation provides significant habitat for grizzly bears
and other bears, and for other animals such as lynx, pine marten,
fisher, mink, wolverine, weasel, beaver, otter, grey wolf, swift fox
and others. Numerous bird species are also found on the Reservation
including bald eagle, golden eagle, osprey, ferruginous hawk, northern
goshhawk, harlequin duck, piping plover, whooping crane, and all
migratory and shoreline birds, as well as game birds such as the
sharptail grouse, ringnecked pheasant, mountain dove, Hungarian
partridge and two other species of grouse. The fishery on the
Reservation is renowned, and includes the west slope cutthroat trout,
northern pike, lake trout, rainbow trout, mountain white fish, lake
white fish, brook trout, brown trout, Yellowstone cutthroat trout,
walleye, and many others. The threatened bull trout is also be found on
the Reservation. The habitats of these wildlife and fish species depend
directly on the water resources of the Reservation to support them and
allow them to thrive.
The Reservation also possesses significant timber, oil and gas
resources and other natural resources. Oil and gas production has
occurred on the Reservation since the 1930s, and the Tribe has recently
experienced a significantly increased interest in new development on
the Reservation. The Tribe has also been working hard to develop wind
energy and the hydroelectric potential on the Reservation. All of these
activities are dependent on adequate supplies of water.
Fortunately, we are blessed with an abundant supply of water. Over
518 miles of stream and 180 water bodies, including 8 large lakes, are
located on the Reservation. More than 1.5 million acre-feet of water
arise on, or flow through, the Blackfeet Reservation on an annual
basis--the St. Mary River alone contributing over one-third of the
total supply. Despite the significant water supply, or maybe because of
it, historically, others have sought to appropriate it for themselves,
and water has become a precious resource in more modern times.
historical water conflicts
In 1909, just a year after the historic Winters decision involving
the Milk River, the United States entered into the Boundary Water
Treaty with Canada, which, among other things, divided the Milk River
and St. Mary River between the two countries. However, not a word in
the Treaty, or the negotiations leading to it, mention the Blackfeet,
that these streams arise on or near the Blackfeet Reservation, or that
the Blackfeet have rights to water in these streams. Not long after the
Boundary Waters Treaty, the United States withdrew significant lands on
the Blackfeet Reservation under the 1902 Reclamation Act, and began
construction of the St. Mary facilities to divert most of the United
States' share of the St. Mary River off the Reservation for use by the
Bureau of Reclamation Milk River Project over a hundred miles away. The
United States pursued this course notwithstanding that there was an
equally feasible project on the Blackfeet Reservation where the water
could have been brought. The diversion is accomplished through
facilities on the Reservation, including Sherburne Dam, and a 29 mile
canal through the Reservation that eventually empties into the Milk
River. The Milk River flows north into Canada and then back into the
United States near Havre, Montana, where it is heavily utilized by the
Milk River Project and by the Fort Belknap Reservation.
There are few historical acts, other than loss of land, that have
engendered more passion and outrage than this wholesale transfer of
Reservation water to serve non-Indians far downstream, without a word
about, or any consideration of, the Blackfeet Tribe's water rights or
the Blackfeet water needs. The Tribe is left not only with no access to
and no benefit from its own water, but a tangled web of confusing and
non-existent rights of way and easements for the St. Mary Diversion
facilities on the Reservation. Plans to rehabilitate the 100-year-old
St. Mary Diversion facilities so that the diversion of water off the
Reservation can continue and perhaps increase, have further raised
water right concerns, and have emphasized the need for a final
resolution of the Tribe's water rights.
At the same time that the St. Mary diversion was taking place, non-
Indian water users south of the Reservation built a dam on Birch Creek,
the southern boundary of the Reservation, which was intended to
appropriate Birch Creek water for use by the non-Indian water users off
the Reservation. In Conrad Investment Company v. United States, decided
by the Ninth Circuit in 1908, the same year as the Winters case, the
court upheld the Tribe's prior and paramount right to the water. But
the court did not award the full amount of water necessary to irrigate
all of the Tribe's irrigable lands, leaving it open for the Tribe to
claim additional water in the future. United States v. Conrad
Investment Company, 156 Fed. 123 (D. Mont. 1907), aff'd Conrad
Investment Co. v. United States, 161 Fed. 829 (9th Cir. 1908). In the
meantime, Birch Creek has been fully appropriated through non-Indian
development of 80,000 acres of irrigation immediately off and adjacent
to the Reservation.
Allotment brought the third serious conflict between the Tribe and
non-Indian water users. In an attempt to control the water through the
land, the Conrad Investment case served as the springboard to the first
Blackfeet Allotment Act in 1907. Over a span of two Congresses, the
Blackfeet Allotment Act moved forward with various water rights
provisions intended to make Blackfeet water rights subject to state
law, to enjoin the United States from prosecuting any further suits
against water users, and to give preference to settlers on surplus
lands to appropriate water on the Reservation. See, John Shurts, Indian
Reserved Water Rights: The Winters Doctrine in its Social and Legal
Context, 1880s-1930s (University of Oklahoma Press, 2000), Chapter 6.
These efforts largely failed, thanks in part to a veto from President
Theodore Roosevelt, but the 1907 Allotment nevertheless became law
notwithstanding the promise that the Reservation would never be
allotted. See Agreement of September 26, 1895, ratified June 10, 1896,
29 Stat. 321, 353, Art. V. With allotment, many of the prime irrigation
lands on the Reservation quickly went out of trust, and the Tribe's
water rights have gone unprotected from the use of water by non-Indian
development on the former allotments. Numerous disputes have arisen
over the years of varying severity, and the need to resolve the Tribe's
water rights has increasingly become critical.
The 1907 Allotment Act also authorized the Blackfeet Irrigation
Project. However, from the outset, the BIA built the Blackfeet
Irrigation Project with undersized and inadequate delivery systems and
storage facilities, thereby ensuring that the economic promise of the
Project would be unfulfilled for the Tribe and tribal members. Project
lands continue to have problems in receiving a full supply of water
because of the early BIA decisions to undersize the project.
Traditionally, the Tribe has taken the approach of sharing the resource
cooperatively, but increased shortages during the late irrigation
season, and the dilapidated condition of the Blackfeet Irrigation
Project, have become serious impediments to water use within the
Reservation.
Finally, the cession of western reservation lands in 1895 has
historically been a disputed issue to the Blackfeet People. While the
Tribe reserved the right to hunt, fish and cut timber on the ceded
lands which now form a portion of Lewis and Clark National Forest and
Glacier National Park, the area has traditionally held particular
significance for religious and cultural reasons. The water rights
associated with these activities are resolved in the settlement.
water rights compact
Given the historical water rights issues on the Reservation, the
Blackfeet Water Rights Compact is truly a milestone achievement after
nearly two decades of negotiations among the Tribe, the Montana
Reserved Water Rights Compact Commission and the Federal Government.
The Compact was completed in December 2007. The Montana Legislature
approved it in April 2009 (85-20-1501 MCA), and it is now before
Congress for ratification in the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act.
It will further require approval of the Tribe through a vote of the
tribal membership.
In general, the Compact confirms the Tribe's water rights to all
streams on the Reservation. It brings certainty to the Tribe's water
rights and protects the Tribe's use of the water for the Tribe's
growing population and need to make the Reservation a productive and
sustainable homeland. The Compact:

Establishes the Tribe's water right as all surface and
groundwater less the amount necessary to fulfill state
water rights in all drainages except for the St. Mary River
and Birch Creek;

Establishes a St. Mary water right of 50,000 acre-feet;

Establishes a Birch Creek water right of 100 cfs, plus 25
cfs for in stream flow during the summer and 15 cfs during
the winter;

Protects state water right non-irrigation use and some
irrigation uses through ``no-call'' provisions;

Provides for water leasing off the Reservation;

Closes on-reservation streams to new water appropriations
under state law;

Provides for tribal administration of the tribal water and
state administration of state law water rights and creates
a Compact Board to resolve disputes between tribal and
state water rights;

Provides for an allocation of water stored in Tiber
Reservoir; and

Mitigates the impacts of the Tribe's water rights on Birch
Creek water users through a separate Birch Creek Agreement
by which the Tribe defers new development on Birch Creek
for 15 years over and above the current Conrad Investment
decree, and provides 15,000 acre-feet of water per year to
Birch Creek water users from Four Horns Reservoir, the
total agreement not to exceed 25 years.

state approval and state contribution
As part of the state approval of the Compact, the state committed
to contribute $20 million to the Compact. These funds were fully
authorized and are available when the Compact becomes final. In 2007,
the Montana Legislature also appropriated $15 million for Birch Creek
mitigation. Of these funds, $14.5 million has been placed in an escrow
fund for the Tribe as part of the Birch Creek Agreement, and $500,000
was used for engineering studies for the Four Horns enlargement. In the
recent 2013 Legislature, the state also committed an additional $14
million to the Blackfeet Settlement, bringing the total state
contribution to $49 million. This is a very major contribution on the
part of the state, and the largest for an Indian water rights
settlement in Montana.
blackfeet water rights settlement act
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act will: (1) ratify the
Tribe's water compact with the state of Montana; (2) resolve the
Blackfeet Tribe's water-related claims against the United States; and
(3) provide the necessary resources needed for the Tribe to put its
water to use and to develop a self-sustaining economy on the Blackfeet
Reservation.

Specifically, the bill:

Ratifies the Compact and authorizes the Secretary to sign
it;

Requires the Secretary to enter into contracts with the
Tribe for the delivery of (1) 5,000 acre-feet per year of
St. Mary River water through the Milk River Project
facilities to the Tribe and (2) provides for additional
contracts depending on available water;

Compensates the Tribe for delay in providing additional
St. Mary River water;

Expressly provides for the Milk River Project purposes;

Requires the Secretary to implement the Swift Current Bank
Stabilization Project to correct environmental problems
associated with Milk River Project facilities;

Provides the Tribe with the exclusive right to develop and
market hydroelectric power from the St. Mary Storage Unit
of the Milk River Project;

Directs the Secretary to allocate to the Tribe 45,000
acre-feet per year of water stored in Lake Elwell and
authorizes the Tribe to enter into leases or other
agreements for the use of that water for any beneficial
purpose subject to certain conditions;

Requires the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of
Reclamation, to:

--  carry out deferred maintenance on the Blackfeet
Irrigation Project;

--  undertake rehabilitation and improvements on Four Horns
Dam, including dam safety improvements and other improvements
for the benefit of the Blackfeet Irrigation Project and in
order to provide Four Horns Reservoir water to state water
rights users on Birch Creek;

--  plan, design, and construct the Municipal Rural and
Industrial water system (involving water intake, treatment,
pumping, storage, and pipeline facilities); and

--  construct the Blackfeet Water, Storage, and Development
Projects, including new irrigation and storage, on-farm
improvements and other water related projects.

Authorizes Federal funding for the water-related projects
authorized in the legislation;

Confirms the Tribe's instream water rights in the Lewis
and Clark National Forest and Glacier National Park;

Requires the Blackfeet Tribe to work with the Fort Belknap
Indian Community on resolving any conflict between their
respective Milk River water rights, and directs the
Secretary of the Interior to resolve such conflict if the
Tribe and Community are unable to do so provided certain
conditions are met;

Provides for the waiver and release by the Tribe of water
rights claims against Montana and the United States in
return for recognition of the tribal water rights and other
benefits provided under the Compact and this Act.

waivers/funding
The Tribe has water-related claims against the Federal Government
in excess of the funds authorized in the legislation for, among other
things: (1) the diversion of St. Mary water off the Blackfeet
Reservation to the Milk River Project for approximately 100 years; (2)
the environmental and resource damage caused by the St. Mary diversion
facilities; (3) claims relating to the 1909 Boundary Waters Treaty; (4)
the United States' unfulfilled promise to construct a new storage
facility on Two Medicine River after a catastrophic flood in the 1960s;
and (5) the failure of the United States to protect the Tribe's water
rights from development by others, particularly on Birch Creek, Cut
Bank Creek and the Milk River.
In consideration for the Tribe waiving its claims against the
United States, the legislation authorizes Federal funding for vital
drinking water projects, water storage projects, and irrigation
improvements and development on the Reservation. It also provides for
water related economic development projects and provides funds to
address environmental and fishery issues. The settlement also includes
funding for unfunded Federal programmatic responsibilities, including
deferred maintenance and rehabilitation on the BIA's Blackfeet
Irrigation Project. Although these are obligations that the Federal
Government was required to undertake outside the context of this
settlement, the Tribe has agreed to these items being included as
consideration for the settlement.
Importantly, since 2012, the Tribe has agreed to reduce the amount
of the funding authorized in the legislation by more than $190 million
to address concerns raised by the Department of the Interior. Moreover,
the state is contributing $49 million toward the Blackfeet Settlement,
the largest contribution the state has made to any Montana water
settlement to date.
critical tribal need for water supply infrastructure
The water projects authorized in the legislation include a regional
water system to provide a long-term municipal water supply to all
Reservation communities, funding for the United States' deferred
maintenance obligations and safety of dams obligations associated with
the Bureau of Indian Affairs' Blackfeet Irrigation Project, putting new
lands outside the Project into production through new irrigation
facilities and small water storage projects, stock water and domestic
water developments, lake and fishery improvements and enhancements, and
energy development projects. Settlement funds would also fund the
implementation of the Compact and the administration of the tribal
water right through the Tribal Water Code.
In particular, it is critical to establish a long-term supply of
water to Reservation communities. The Tribe has continually had to
address community water supply problems by cobbling together short-term
fixes. At the same time, the Reservation population has significantly
increased, and projections are that such increases will continue. A
long-term supply will provide the necessary stability that will allow
for long-term community growth.
At the time the Reservation was established, it was acknowledged
that ``[t]here is an abundant supply of water arising on or near the
Blackfeet Reservation,'' but much of that water is now diverted off the
Reservation. Along with the lack of storage capacity for on-Reservation
use and a dilapidated BIA irrigation project, numerous barriers are
created for the Tribe in its efforts to protect and put to use its
valuable water resources. These challenges in part account for the high
unemployment and devastating poverty rate that has plagued the
Reservation for generations. Unemployment runs as high as 70 percent
and more than half of the employed are below the poverty level.
Securing control of and actively managing Reservation water resources
would be an important step toward improving economic conditions on the
Reservation and creating the homeland envisioned in the numerous
treaties and agreements that serve as the foundation of the United
States and Blackfeet Tribe's relationship.
litigation will continue if settlement legislation does not become law
In 1979, the United States filed suit in Federal court seeking to
quantify the Blackfeet Tribe's water rights. In 1983, the Federal
district court litigation was stayed pending the outcome of the Montana
State court water adjudication proceedings. The adjudication of the
Blackfeet tribal water rights in the state court proceedings have been
stayed pending finalization of the Compact and the Blackfeet Settlement
legislation. Should the negotiated settlement of the Blackfeet Tribe's
water right claims fail to be ratified by Congress, then the claims of
the Blackfeet Tribe will be litigated before the Montana Water Court.
The Montana Water Court has already put the Tribe on notice that is not
willing to delay litigation of the Tribe's water rights if a settlement
is not completed by the end of January 2017. Moreover, if the
settlement fails, the Tribe will pursue its monetary claims described
above against the United States, resulting in years of litigation and
potentially a judgment against the United States that exceeds the
funding authorized in the legislation.
conclusion
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement has critical importance to
the future of the Blackfeet People and represents decades of hard work
by many people. The legislation will secure the water rights of the
Tribe through ratification of the Tribe's water rights compact, and
will also provide the necessary funding for the Tribe to develop its
water rights for the benefit of the Tribe and its members. The
settlement will significantly contribute to the development of a strong
Reservation economy, jobs for tribal members, and a better life for the
Blackfeet People.
Finally, although the Department of the Interior was involved in
our negotiations every step of the way in the decades long process, and
was intimately involved in the drafting of the Compact, the
Administration raised a number of issues relating to settlement
legislation. The Tribe has worked with the Interior over the last 3
years to come to agreement on the legislation. We are happy to report
that the Tribe and Interior are in full agreement on the terms of the
legislation.
We thank the committee and committee staff and look forward to
responding to any questions you may have.

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you. Next, Mr. Bezdek, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BEZDEK, COUNSELOR TO THE DEPUTY SECRETARY,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Bezdek. Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear here today regarding the settlement bills before the
subcommittee.
I am accompanied today by Letty Belin, my colleague in the
Deputy Secretary's office, who is also the Chair of the
Secretary's Working Group on Indian Water Rights. Also with me
today is Mr. Craig Alexander of the Department of Justice, who
is appearing as a technical witness to help me respond to
questions the committee might have on the Blackfeet Water
Rights Settlement.
As you know, the Department has submitted detailed written
testimony on congressional correspondence regarding H.R. 4366
and the Blackfeet legislation. I will briefly summarize my
written testimony in the interest of time.
In terms of H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217, the drainage bills
before the subcommittee today will help resolve over 25-plus
years of litigation associated with the Central Valley
Project's San Luis Unit. The unit's congressionally authorized
features include a drain to remove sub-surface water after
irrigation in this part of the Central Valley. For reasons
described in my testimony, the drain was never completed.
The settlement resolves three separate cases currently in
litigation. It provides for the vacatur of the 2000 Order
Modifying a Partial Judgment in the Firebaugh Canal Water
District v. United States case. This will allow the United
States to avoid the cost of implementing a court-ordered
drainage solution currently estimated to be $3.8 billion. By
doing so, it will free up significant resources to address
other pressing water needs in California, which are severely
needed during this drought, and place the obligation of
providing drainage with the District, who is in a much better
position than Reclamation to determine the most appropriate and
cost-effective manner of meeting these legal requirements.
It also addresses and provides a path forward for
resolution of two additional pieces of litigation: a breach of
contract claim by Westlands, and a Fifth Amendment takings case
filed by individual landowners within Westlands. In the takings
case alone, the exposure to the American taxpayer could be in
excess of $2 billion.
We understand there are differing views in this matter, but
the settlement before us today reflects the reality that this
Department has operated in: exposure to ongoing litigation;
meeting court-ordered requirements; and trying to protect
existing budget priorities.
Quite simply, in the months and years leading up to today,
the potential substantial financial impact of compliance with
the judgment has come to pose serious challenges for meeting
priority programs in California and throughout the West. The
need for action by Congress, new legal challenges, and
financial concerns all played a significant role in the
Department's decision to enter into settlement negotiations
with Westlands, and ultimately to the terms of the settlement
itself. For these reasons, the Department supports H.R. 4366.
With regard to the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement Act, I
would like to congratulate Chairman Barnes, the Blackfeet
Tribe, and the state of Montana for their hard work on this
settlement. This took decades to achieve, and required
significant compromise by all of the parties. This is an
incredible achievement, and it is a testament to the
perseverance and vision of Blackfeet leaders who have waited
over 100 years for this moment to arrive.
Disputes over Indian water rights are expensive, divisive,
and create financial, economic, and societal barriers.
Settlements to these disputes, however, help break down these
barriers and improve water resources management by encouraging
collaboration among neighboring communities, while also
stabilizing their economies. This model has proven time and
time again throughout the West, and it is why the United States
has pursued a policy of settling Indian water rights claims for
over 30 years.
For the Blackfeet Tribe, this settlement is a crucial and
long-awaited step toward self-determination. It will provide
badly needed tools for achieving a viable homeland, while
overcoming high unemployment, extreme poverty, and a lack of
employment opportunities.
The Blackfeet water rights settlement resolves all
outstanding Blackfeet water claims, quantifies a tribal right
to more than 750,000 acre-feet of surface water and nearly all
groundwater on the reservation, and funds the construction and
rehabilitation of water-related infrastructure on the
reservation for the benefit of the tribal community.
Federal settlement funding will provide lasting benefit for
the tribe and its members by protecting public health and
creating substantial numbers of temporary and permanent
employment opportunities on the reservation, including
construction, water management, renewable energy, agriculture,
recreation, and tourism. The settlement will also remove the
cloud of uncertainty hanging over the water rights for the Milk
River project. Moreover, the settlement provides protections to
state-based water users and the regional economy, which rely on
such use.
While we believe that each settlement should be evaluated
on its own merits and that the full range of benefits in any
settlement is not easily quantified, the cost of this
settlement, when compared to the Federal benefits received,
reflect a settlement that is in the best interest of the tribe,
the state, and the American taxpayer.
As expressed in our recent correspondence to this
committee, this settlement makes good business sense, good
economic sense, and good legal sense. In short, this settlement
is good government, and we support it. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bezdek follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Bezdek, Counselor to the Deputy Secretary,
U.S. Department of the Interior
Statement on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217, San Luis Unit Drainage Resolution
Acts
Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, I am John Bezdek,
Counselor to the Deputy Secretary at the Department of the Interior. I
am pleased to provide the views of the Department of the Interior
(Department) on H.R. 4366, the San Luis Unit Drainage Resolution Act.
The Department supports the goal of providing a long term drainage
solution in the San Luis Unit. The Department notes that H.R. 4366
would authorize the implementation of a settlement of litigation with
the Westlands Water District (Westlands) and provide a long term
drainage solution and therefore supports the bill. The Department is
also aware of the subcommittee's interest in H.R. 5217, which
authorizes the Westlands Settlement, but additionally authorizes a
related agreement (Northerly District Agreement) with three water
districts in the northern reaches of the San Luis Unit service area. I
will address H.R. 4366 first.
For over 28 years, there has been litigation surrounding drainage
for lands served by the San Luis Unit (SLU) of the Central Valley
Project (CVP). Currently, the Bureau of Reclamation is under a court
order to provide drainage services to these impaired lands and the only
drainage alternative that has undergone environmental and feasibility
review will cost approximately $3.8 billion in 2015 dollars. If
settlement is not authorized, significant amounts of funding will be
directed toward providing drainage services. In order to meet this
court-ordered mandate, the Department may have to significantly reduce
or potentially eliminate other programs.
The San Luis Unit (SLU) is part of the Bureau of Reclamation's
(Reclamation) Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. Congress
authorized the SLU on June 3, 1960, under Public Law No. 86-488. As
originally authorized, the Act contemplated facilities to remove
drainage water from irrigated lands to achieve a long-term, salt and
water balance necessary to maintain sustainable agriculture in the SLU.
Initial plans for drainage facilities included the San Luis Interceptor
Drain (Drain), which would have collected drainage water and conveyed
it for discharge into the Bay-Delta. By 1975, an 82-mile segment of the
Drain (terminating at Kesterson Reservoir) had been constructed, which
provided drainage to a portion of Westlands. Litigation over the United
States' drainage obligation commenced shortly after the United States
halted use of the San Luis interceptor drain and plugged all Federal
drainage facilities in the SLU following the discovery of embryonic
deformities of aquatic birds at Kesterson Reservoir. Kesterson
Reservoir was emptied and, since that time, the United States has not
resumed drainage service to Westlands. These details are a matter of
public record, and my statement will summarize only the facts relevant
to the legislation before the subcommittee today.
Following the closure of Kesterson Reservoir and the plugging of
the Drain, two lawsuits were filed regarding the provision of drainage.
Firebaugh Canal Water District v. United States was filed in 1988 by
two water districts located outside and ``downslope'' of the SLU. The
action was partially consolidated with Sumner Peck Ranch, Inc. v.
United States, a similar action brought in 1991 by approximately 100
landowners located within the SLU. In 1995, following a trial, the
district court entered a partial judgment that the Secretary of the
Interior's (Secretary) obligation under the San Luis Act to provide
drainage was not excused or rendered impossible. In 2000, the Ninth
Circuit largely affirmed the partial judgment, and on remand the
district court entered an injunction (2000 Order Modifying Partial
Judgment) against the Secretary requiring Reclamation to provide
drainage service ``without delay'' to the SLU. In 2002, the United
States settled the Sumner Peck plaintiff's claims.
In compliance with the 2000 Order Modifying Partial Judgment, the
Department developed a Plan of Action outlining the steps it would
follow to implement a drainage solution for the SLU. Following
completion of an environmental impact statement, Reclamation issued a
Record of Decision (ROD) in March 2007, in which Reclamation selected a
drainage alternative that met the drainage service requirements of the
district court's injunction. The Department also prepared and submitted
to Congress a feasibility report, concluding that the cost of
implementing the selected alternative would be approximately $2.7
billion (now $3.8 billion in April 2015 dollars). That amount exceeds
the remaining appropriations ceiling originally authorized for
construction of the SLU. As a result, the alternative selected in the
ROD cannot be fully implemented under existing law. As part of the
ongoing litigation, the Department advised the district court in
November 2009 that, while it could not implement the entire ROD,
sufficient appropriation ceiling remained to allow it to construct one
subunit of drainage facilities within a portion of Westlands.
Reclamation began implementing the selected drainage plan in a subunit
of Westlands in 2010 and in the Northerly Area of the SLU with
construction of the Demonstration Treatment Plant in 2012, pursuant to
a court ordered control schedule. Beyond that subunit, however, the
Department remains unable to continue implementation of the ROD without
additional congressional authorization. In 2012, the district court
entered final judgment against the Firebaugh plaintiffs dismissing
their remaining claims while maintaining jurisdiction to supervise
compliance with the 2000 injunction requiring Reclamation to provide
drainage service to drainage-impaired lands in the San Luis Unit.
On September 2, 2011, individual landowners within Westlands Water
District filed suit in the Court of Federal Claims alleging that the
failure by the United States to provide drainage service to their lands
resulted in a physical taking of their property without just
compensation in violation of the Fifth Amendment. Plaintiffs brought
their suit as a class action on behalf of all landowners located within
Westlands ``whose farmlands have not received the necessary drainage
service the United States is required to provide under the San Luis Act
. . ..'' A plaintiff class has not yet been certified. A motion by the
United States seeking dismissal of the takings claim was denied on
September 20, 2013.\1\ The Opinion contains language sharply critical
of the United States' delay in providing drainage to Westlands. The
Court of Federal Claims has stayed this litigation to allow settlement
negotiations to proceed, but is requiring the submission of regular
status reports on the progress of the discussions. While the complaint
does not specify a dollar amount for damages, estimates suggest that
Federal liability for just compensation could range from zero to over
$2 billion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Etchegoinberry, et. al. v. United States, 114 Fed. Cl. 437
(2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On January 6, 2012, Westlands filed its own suit against the United
States also in the Court of Federal Claims, alleging that the
government's failure to provide drainage service to the Westlands
service area constituted a breach of Westlands' 1963 Water Service and
1965 Repayment contracts (including the interim renewal of those
contracts) with the United States. The United States moved to dismiss
Westlands' claims. On January 15, 2013, the Court of Federal Claims
granted the United States' motion to dismiss, ruling that none of the
contracts contained an enforceable promise to provide drainage to
Westlands.\2\ Westlands has appealed to the Federal Circuit, and
briefing on the appeal is complete. On December 2, 2015, the Federal
Circuit granted a stay through January 20, 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Westlands Water Dist. v. United States, 109 Fed. Cl. 177
(2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Westlands Settlement resolves Westlands Water District v.
United States, the remaining breach of contract case relating to the
United States' drainage obligation. The Settlement also provides for
the vacatur of the 2000 Order Modifying Partial Judgment in Firebaugh
Canal Water District v. United States, allowing the United States to
avoid the costs of meeting its statutory and court-ordered drainage
obligation, currently estimated to be $3.8 billion. The Settlement
further provides a framework for resolving Michael Etchegoinberry, et.
al. v. United States, the Fifth Amendment takings case brought by
individual landowners within Westlands.
Interested parties have commented on the 2010 letter from the then-
Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation to Senator Feinstein focusing
on how the key legislative elements outlined in that letter differ from
the Settlement ultimately negotiated by the parties. While the letter
outlined key elements of a long-term drainage strategy that the
Administration would support if Congress were to consider authorizing a
resolution of the drainage issues in the SLU, the letter was not an
Administration proposal for legislation. The Department's belief was
that a legislative response was needed and the letter was an effort to
facilitate Congress moving forward with a resolution. However, Congress
took no action on the legislative elements the Department indicated it
could support. Therefore, the Administration explored a negotiated
resolution of the drainage problem with Westlands as a response to the
projected costs of construction of drainage service facilities in
Westlands under control schedules which had been submitted to the
district court under the partial judgment and injunction. Moreover,
Reclamation has grown increasingly concerned about the potential
financial impact of compliance with the judgment on its ability to meet
other priority programs. Lack of legislation by Congress, new legal
challenges and financial concerns all played a significant role in the
Department's decision to enter into settlement negotiations with
Westlands and ultimately into the terms of the Settlement itself.
Benefits of the Westlands Settlement to the United States

If enacted into law, the proposed legislation would amend
the San Luis Act to relieve the Department from all
drainage obligations imposed by that statute, including
implementation of the 2007 ROD, the present cost of which
is estimated to be $3.8 billion.

Westlands agrees to dismiss Westlands v. United States,
the breach of contract litigation, and would join the
United States in petitioning for vacatur of the 2000 Order
Modifying Partial Judgment in the Firebaugh case, which
presently requires Reclamation to implement drainage
service.

The Settlement establishes a framework for resolving all
individual landowner claims in the Etchegoinberry takings
case. Specifically, Westlands would participate in this
case for settlement purposes and would provide compensation
to affected landowners. Otherwise, potential exposure to
Federal taxpayers from an adverse judgment could be as high
as $2 billion.

Westlands agrees to release, waive and abandon all past,
present and future claims related to drainage, and agrees
to indemnify the United States for any and all claims from
individual landowners relating to the provision of drainage
service or lack thereof within its service area.

Westlands agrees to permanently retire at least a minimum
of 100,000 acres of lands within its boundaries utilizing
those lands only for the following purposes:

a.  management of drain water, including irrigation of reuse
areas;

b.  renewable energy projects;

c.  upland habitat restoration projects; or

d.  other uses subject to the consent of the United States.

The Settlement transfers the legal obligation to manage
drainage for lands within Westlands service area from the
United States to Westlands. The United States will retain
the ability to enforce this obligation through a contract
term conditioning the U.S. obligation to make water
available to Westlands upon its compliance with State and
Federal law.

Westlands agrees to cap its CVP water deliveries at 75
percent of its contract quantity. Any CVP water which
Westlands would otherwise receive above this 75 percent cap
would become available to the United States for other CVP
authorized purposes.

Westlands agrees that all drainage water will be disposed
of within Westlands' district boundaries and that no
drainage water will be discharged outside of Westlands'
boundaries.

As part of the Settlement, the United States would enter
into a water service contract with Lemoore Naval Air
Station to provide a quantity of CVP water to meet the
irrigation needs of the Naval Air Station associated with
air operations, and Westlands agrees to wheel CVP water
made available to Lemoore.

Benefits of the Westlands Settlement to Westlands

Westlands will be relieved of current, unpaid capitalized
construction costs for the CVP, the present value of which
is currently estimated to be $295 million. Westlands will
still be responsible for operation and maintenance costs,
will pay restoration fund charges pursuant to the Central
Valley Project Improvement Act and will be responsible for
future CVP construction charges associated with new
construction of the project (e.g. Folsom Reservoir Safety
of Dams modifications).

The Secretary will convert Westlands' current 9(e) water
service contract to a 9(d) repayment contract consistent
with existing terms and conditions and all terms of the
Settlement. As a ``paid out'' project, the benefit of this
conversion gives the district a contract with no expiration
term, consistent with other paid out Reclamation projects.
However, the contract will contain terms and conditions
that are nearly identical to those in the current 9(e)
contract, including the shortage provision.

Westlands will be relieved of Reclamation Reform Act (RRA)
(96 Stat. 1269) provisions relating to acreage limitations
and full cost pricing. The RRA grants this relief on its
face to projects that are considered ``paid-out.''
Additionally, the tiered pricing provisions are triggered
when a district receives 80 percent of its contract
quantity, and as part of this settlement, Westlands water
deliveries will be capped at 75 percent of its contract
quantity.

Westlands will also take title to certain facilities
within its service area that it currently operates.

Several aspects regarding the obligation to provide drainage
service were evaluated in determining the overall net benefit to the
United States. Included in this consideration were avoided drainage
construction costs, repayment to the United States of reimbursable
costs, relief from Reclamation Reform Act fees, and unpaid CVP capital
obligations. The United States would also benefit from avoided
financial liability in the Etchegoinberry takings litigation, which
could be as high as $2 billion.
The Department recognizes that Westlands can realize efficiencies,
such as local or in-house labor, reduced travel, and different
purchasing requirements than Reclamation, that reduce its cost to
implement drainage as compared to the costs that Reclamation would
incur if Reclamation implemented the 2007 ROD. Nevertheless, while the
scope of the drainage problem may have lessened in recent years due to
drought and irrigation efficiencies, the Department is of the view that
there will continue to be a need for substantial financial investment
to alleviate drainage concerns in the San Joaquin Valley in the long
term. While California has experienced a series of dry years recently,
the historic hydrologic record indicates that wet cycles will return
and the drainage challenge in the San Luis Unit will increase. With
Westlands responsible for drainage within its boundaries, there is more
incentive to increase irrigation efficiencies should new technology be
developed in the future, which is a component of managing drainage that
is largely outside of Reclamation's control. It should also be noted
that Westlands will be responsible for implementing drainage in
perpetuity. Costs will rise as drainage actions are implemented many
years and potentially, decades into the future.
It is the Department's belief that the Settlement results in a
savings to the American taxpayers when compared to the costs that would
occur without the terms agreed to in the Settlement. Moreover, we are
also of the view that failure to settle ongoing litigation will place
the Department's ability to address the effects of the ongoing drought
in both the short term and long term at risk due to the potential of
significant amounts of appropriations being expended on providing
drainage service. As a practical matter, should our efforts to settle
litigation with Westlands fail, funding for programs throughout
Reclamation are likely to be reduced in order for Reclamation to
adequately fund the Control Schedule.
Were the Settlement not to be approved by Congress, Reclamation
would still be obligated to implement drainage service to all drainage-
impaired lands in the SLU as required under that Act and the
injunction. To fully carry out that obligation, Congress would need to
increase the appropriations ceiling imposed by the San Luis Act and
appropriate adequate funds to complete the work. Some members of the
public and this subcommittee have expressed concerns with many aspects
of the Settlement, and the Department appreciates those concerns and
would note that this settlement is a unique situation stemming, in
part, from a specific set of judicially imposed, legal requirements and
should not be seen as precedential for future settlements. But it is
the Department's view that in this specific case, the years of
negotiation that have led to the Settlement and the introduction of
H.R. 4366 have produced the best possible outcome for the people of
California, the environment, and the American taxpayer. With the
enactment of H.R. 4366, nearly three decades of litigation, enormous
potential liabilities for the United States, and a longstanding
environmental problem will be comprehensively resolved.
As stated above, the Department is also aware of the provisions of
H.R. 5217 which would authorize the Northerly District Agreement. The
Department believes that agreement is consistent with, and
complementary to, the Westlands Settlement. However, the Office of
Inspector General at the Department of the Interior is currently
involved in an investigation, pending which, the Department is
withholding a decision on the Northerly District Agreement and has no
position on H.R. 5217 at this time.
Statement on Discussion Draft H.R. ____, Blackfeet Water Rights
Settlement Act of 2016
Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman and members of the
subcommittee, I am John Bezdek, Counselor to the Deputy Secretary at
the Department of the Interior (Department). I am here today to provide
the Department's views on the discussion draft H.R. ____, the Blackfeet
Water Rights Settlement Act of 2016, which would provide approval for,
and authorizations to carry out, a settlement of the water rights
claims of the Blackfeet Tribe of the Blackfeet Indian Reservation of
Montana. The Department is supportive of the discussion draft H.R.
____, the Blackfeet Water Settlement Act of 2016, and looks forward to
working with the committee to consider this legislation.
The Department supports resolving Indian water rights claims
through negotiated settlement. Our general policy of support for
negotiations is premised on a set of general principles including that
the United States participate in water settlements consistent with its
responsibilities as trustee to Indians; that Indian tribes receive
equivalent benefits for rights which they, and the United States as
trustee, may release as part of a settlement; that Indian tribes should
realize value from confirmed water rights resulting from a settlement;
and that settlements are to contain appropriate cost-sharing
proportionate to the benefits received by all parties benefiting from
the settlement.
Disputes over Indian water rights are expensive and divisive. In
many instances, Indian water rights disputes, which can last for
decades, are a tangible barrier to progress for tribes, and
significantly, hinder the rational and beneficial management of water
resources. Settlements of Indian water rights disputes break down these
barriers and help create conditions that improve water resources
management by providing certainty as to the rights of all water users
who are parties to the dispute. That certainty provides opportunities
for economic development, improves relationships, and encourages
collaboration among neighboring communities. This has been proven time
and again throughout the West as the United States has pursued a policy
of settling Indian water rights disputes whenever possible. Indian
water rights settlements are also consistent with the Federal trust
responsibility to American Indians and with Federal policy promoting
Indian self-determination and economic self-sufficiency.
Today, implementing existing settlements and reaching new
agreements is more important than ever given the need for water on many
Indian reservations and throughout the West and the uncertainty
regarding its availability due to drought, climate change, and
increasing demands for this scarce resource.
The Treaty with the Blackfeet in 1855 encompassed some 27,500
square miles of Blackfeet tribal lands in what was to become Montana.
The discovery of gold in the early 1860s brought the first wave of non-
Indians into the territory, along with increasing pressure to open the
Reservation to non-Indian settlement. A series of Executive Orders
reduced and reconfigured the Reservation and then in 1888, it was
divided into three separate and smaller reservations: the Fort Belknap
Reservation, the Fort Peck Reservation, and the Blackfeet Reservation.
The Blackfeet Reservation was further diminished in 1895 (Agreement of
September 19, 1895, ratified on June 10, 1896, 29 Stat. 321, chapter
398, hereafter ``1895 Agreement''), when the United States purchased
from the Tribe 800,000 acres of land along the western boundary of the
Reservation.
In the 1895 Agreement, the United States promised that the
Reservation would not be allotted without `the consent of the adult men
of the Tribe' (Article V), and that if the government were to build a
canal to control the abundant supply of water available seasonally in
the St. Mary River, the canal would be constructed to provide
irrigation water for the Reservation (Article III and Meeting Minutes).
Within just a few years, the Reservation was opened to allotment;
construction of a canal to capture the supply of the St. Mary River had
begun but the canal was designed and constructed to divert St. Mary
water off of the Reservation for the benefit of the Milk River Project,
located some 200 miles away, and not for the benefit of the Tribe. In
1909, the United States entered into a treaty with Canada apportioning
the waters of the St. Mary and Milk Rivers. This Treaty did not
specifically address the water rights of the Blackfeet Nation and other
tribes, even though it was concluded just after the United States
Supreme Court handed down its 1908 decision in Winters v. United
States--a case involving the Milk River, which established the doctrine
of Federal Indian reserved water rights.
The Tribe's water rights have been fought over for more than 100
years, as reflected in approximately 14 court cases and congressional
proceedings addressing directly or indirectly the use and control of
the Reservation's water resources. Modern efforts to quantify the
Tribe's reserved water rights began in 1979 when the state of Montana
(State) filed suit in State court as part of the statewide water rights
adjudication proceeding. At the same time, the United States filed a
case in Federal court in Montana to adjudicate the Tribe's reserved
water rights claims. The question of jurisdiction that arose as a
result of the two lawsuits was decided in 1983 by the United States
Supreme Court, which held that state court was the appropriate forum to
adjudicate tribal reserved water rights pursuant to the McCarran
Amendment, 43 U.S.C. Sec. 666.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Arizona v. San Carlos Apache Tribe, 463 U.S. 545 (1983). The
Federal Court action has been stayed since 1983 pending the outcome of
the State adjudication.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 1989, the Tribe initiated negotiations with the Montana Compact
Commission and in 1990 the Department appointed a Federal Negotiation
Team to assist in achieving a negotiated settlement of the Tribe's
reserved water rights claims. The State and the Tribe reached an
agreement in 2007, in the form of a Compact, which the Montana
Legislature approved in 2009. Federal legislation to authorize the
Compact was first introduced in 2010. Since then the Administration has
been negotiating with the Tribe and the State to resolve important
Federal concerns relating to cost, cost sharing, Federal interests, and
Federal responsibilities. Those negotiations lowered the Federal cost
of the settlement by approximately $230 million.
The Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement will provide many benefits,
as it resolves all outstanding Blackfeet water claims, quantifies a
tribal water right to more than 750,000 acre-feet of surface water and
nearly all groundwater on the Reservation, and funds the construction
and rehabilitation of water related infrastructure on the Reservation
for the benefit of the tribal community. Federal settlement funding
will provide lasting benefits for the Tribe and its members, by
protecting public health and creating substantial numbers of temporary
and permanent employment opportunities on the Reservation, including
opportunities in the construction, water management, renewable energy,
agricultural, recreation, and tourism industries. The Settlement also
includes a process that will enable the Blackfeet Tribe and the Fort
Belknap Indian Community to resolve a conflict that exists between them
over relative rights to use the Milk River. The settlement process
provides funding to support the Tribes' efforts to reach a resolution,
and authorizes the Secretary to establish criteria to provide for such
an arrangement if the tribes do not reach a successful sharing
arrangement. This settlement is a crucial and long-awaited step toward
achieving the permanent tribal homeland promised to the Blackfeet Tribe
in the treaties and agreements ratified by Congress between 1855 and
1896 that serve as the foundation of the relationship between the Tribe
and the United States.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Treaty with the Blackfeet, 1855, Oct. 17, 1855, 11 Stat., 657,
Ratified Apr. 15, 1856, Proclaimed Apr. 25, 1856, Act of April 15, 1874
(18 Stat. 28, chapter 96), Agreement of 1888, ratified by the Act
approved May 1, 1888 (25 Stat. 113), Agreement of 1895, dated September
26, 1895, ratified by the Act approved June 10, 1896 (29 Stat. 321,
353), Criteria and Procedures, No. 10.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Settlement funding focuses primarily on Federal programmatic
responsibilities, including funding for dam safety repairs and deferred
maintenance for Bureau of Indian Affairs facilities on the Reservation;
\5\ increasing water storage capacity for irrigation and other economic
activities on the Reservation; \6\ construction, rehabilitation, and
expansion of the Blackfeet Regional Water System to provide safe, clean
drinking water to all of the Reservation's major population centers;
\7\ improving tribal irrigation projects with on-farm improvements for
tribal trust lands; \8\ and establishing the Blackfeet Tribal Water and
Energy Office to support self-determination and enhance the Tribe's
capacity to manage its trust resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Indian Dam Safety Act of 1994, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3801 et seq.
\6\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 13, ``the Secretary of the Interior . . . shall
expend such moneys as Congress may from time to time appropriate, for
the benefit, care, and assistance of the Indians . . . for development
of water supplies.'' (Emphasis supplied).
\7\ It is ``the policy of the United States that all Indian
communities and Indian homes, new and existing be provided with safe
and adequate water supply systems . . . as soon as possible.'' 25
U.S.C. Sec. 1632(a)(5).
\8\ 1907 Blackfeet Allotment Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Blackfeet Reservation is set up against the Rocky Mountains and
possesses some of the most spectacular scenery in the United States. It
provides significant habitat for countless wildlife and fish species,
including many protected species. Reservation fisheries are world
renowned. Yet, the Reservation struggles with high unemployment,
extreme poverty, and a lack of employment opportunities. The
Reservation ranks as the 5th poorest reservation in the United States.
The American Community Survey of 2014 calculates the poverty rate on
the Reservation at nearly 40 percent, with unemployment at more than 20
percent, and the share of the population that did not work in the
previous 12 months even higher, at 39.1 percent. In addition to these
bleak statistics, at least 30 percent of Reservation households live in
housing that lacks complete plumbing or kitchen facilities and more
than 80 percent of school age children are eligible for free or reduced
school lunches.
The improvements to irrigation infrastructure on the Reservation
should have a major beneficial impact on the tribal economy, which is a
rural economy dependent on farming and ranching and associated hay and
alfalfa farming operations. Settlement funding will also provide vital
improvements for the Tribe's farming and ranching activities, including
the significant bison herds maintained by the Tribe. Such activities
are an important source of tribal revenues and an important source of
jobs for tribal members. Settlement funds will also support
improvements to tribal lakes and fisheries, providing important habitat
improvements as well as recreational and economic development
opportunities that take advantage of the natural environment. Such
activities will contribute to increased tribal revenues and allow the
Tribe to provide better and more comprehensive services to tribal
members.
The Blackfeet Water Settlement funding may add significant
temporary and permanent job opportunities for tribal members on the
Reservation. These benefits will derive from Federal spending on
important water related infrastructure projects and improvements.
The Settlement will also provide water supplies and increased water
storage capacity which will help the Tribe establish better economic
conditions to support a viable homeland for its members. The funding to
construct, rehabilitate, and expand the Tribe's municipal water system
will ensure all major population centers on the Reservation have
reliable and safe drinking water supply for 50 years into the future.
Currently, the Tribe experiences school closures and business
disruptions because of the unreliability of municipal water systems,
and has had to operate under a ``boil order'' for more than a decade in
a major population center until the Tribe was able to cobble together
grants, loans, and its own funds to update part of its system.
The Blackfeet Water Settlement also provides important benefits to
American taxpayers and the state of Montana. The final quantification
of the Tribe's reserved water rights will bring stability for all water
users within the State and will provide the certainty and reliability
necessary to sustain the economy of the State without disruption. As
originally proposed to this Administration, the Blackfeet Water
Settlement included Federal funding of more than $650 million. The
Department scrutinized every Federal dollar in the original proposal,
and worked closely with the Tribe and the State to reduce the overall
cost of the settlement by well over $200 million and increase State
cost share. The State's direct contribution to the Blackfeet Water
Settlement is now $49 million, a substantial and appropriate direct
state cost share. While the current Blackfeet Water Settlement
authorizes substantial Federal funding requirements through Fiscal Year
2025, we have confirmed that this level of funding is necessary in
order for the Tribe to develop its capacity to manage and develop its
water resources.
Important Federal proprietary interests in Glacier National Park
(Park), the Lewis and Clark National Forest (Forest), the Bowdoin
National Wildlife Refuge, and the Milk River Project will be protected
by the settlement. The Park and Forest will enjoy protection of
important instream flows with early priority dates. Federal funding
also will address important obligations of the Bureau of Reclamation on
the Reservation and provide compensation to the Tribe for deferring
water use
Notably, the Settlement will resolve or provide a process for
resolving disputes and any Federal liability regarding the Milk River
Project. Reclamation's use and occupancy of Reservation lands for the
St. Mary Canal and other features of the Milk River Project has been
disputed by the Tribe for more than 100 years. Under the process
described in section 7 of the Settlement Act, the dispute will be
resolved, and the parties' legitimate interests will be protected going
forward on a permanent basis. Additionally, the Tribe has filed
objections to the Milk River Project water rights claims that are
pending in the Montana general stream adjudication. The Tribe will
withdraw its objections in certain basins at the request of the United
States. The United States will realize tremendous value from the
resolution of these two disputes in addition to the consideration from
the Tribe's waivers of legal claims for damages relating to its water
rights and water resources. Avoidance of these potential money damage
awards against the United States represents additional and very
significant benefits for the Federal Government and the American
taxpayer.
That concludes my written statements. I would be pleased to answer
questions at the appropriate time.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Huffman to Mr. John Bezdek,
Counselor to the Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Bezdek did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Question 1. Please provide an estimate of the total financial
benefit that would be provided to San Luis Unit contractors if H.R.
4366 and H.R. 5217 are enacted. Please include financial benefits
associated with waiving Central Valley Project (CVP) repayment
obligations, Reclamation Reform Act waivers, title transfers of
property owned by the Federal Government and other direct and indirect
financial benefits contained in both bills.

Question 2. Under the settlement agreements, does the waiver of CVP
repayment obligations include the capital obligation for the Trinity
River Division facilities including the Trinity River hatchery?

Question 3. If the settlement agreements are enacted, how much
Trinity River Division water will be allocated under the new 9(d)
contracts provided for in the settlements?

Question 4. As Trustee for the Hoopa Valley Tribe, how can the
Administration agree to a settlement based on a CVP water supply to
which the trust beneficiary tribe has first priority under Reclamation
law without ensuring that any pending dispute the San Luis Unit
contractors have about that priority is fully and finally resolved in
the beneficiary's favor?

Question 5. Section 3404(c)(2) of the Central Valley Project
Improvement Act (CVPIA) requires the Secretary of Interior to
incorporate in any contract for CVP water the provisions of the CVPIA
and other law. Will you agree to fulfill that requirement in the
agreements that would be authorized by the settlement, including: (1)
the CVPIA requirement for contractors to pay for the costs of the
Trinity River Restoration program for as long as water is diverted by
the Trinity River Division; (2) acceptance of the separate priorities
provided for in section 2 of the 1955 Act authorizing the Trinity
Division and senior to diversions to the Central Valley? If not, why
not?

Question 6. Why does the Administration believe that this drainage
settlement should proceed when fundamental issues regarding entitlement
to water for delivery to the San Luis Unit remain unresolved? If San
Luis Unit contractors are not entitled to the water being sought in
this settlement, wouldn't a consequent reduction in water deliveries to
the San Luis Unit potentially resolve a portion of the drainage problem
by reductions in CVP water deliveries to the San Luis Unit?
Question 7. On December 23, 2014, the Solicitor of the Department
of Interior issued Opinion M-37030 regarding Trinity River Division
Authorization's 50,000 Acre-Foot Proviso and the 1959 Contract between
the Bureau of Reclamation and Humboldt County. In the 18 months since
then, have the Department's water managers accounted for that opinion's
conclusion in CVP operations models and estimates of water supply? If
yes, what has the Department done. If not, why not?

Question 8. In an April 21, 2016 letter to Representative David
Valadao, Deputy Interior Secretary Michael Connor states that ``it is
widely recognized that the drainage issue may have lessened over the
last few years due to drought and irrigation efficiencies.'' Has the
Department of Interior developed any updated calculations since the
2007 Record of Decision to estimate the current cost of providing
drainage to the San Luis Unit? If no updated estimates have been
developed, does the Department of Interior believe--based on increased
irrigation efficiencies and other developments since the 2007 Record of
Decision--that a current estimate of drainage costs would be less than
the costs identified in 2007?

Question 9. The Termsheet on the proposed Northerly District
Agreement is vague about the future status of the San Luis Drain and
the future management and cleanup of sediments in the Drain. Under some
scenarios the future management of the Drain and its sediments could
have an adverse impact on national wildlife refuges and other wetlands
that Interior Department agencies are supposed to protect under
numerous laws. For example, Section 3406(d) of the Central Valley
Project Improvement Act requires the Secretary of Interior to maintain
and improve wetland habitat areas in California, including by providing
water supplies and supporting the objectives of the Central Valley
Habitat Joint Venture. In accordance with the Department of Interior's
wetlands-related responsibilities, what is the Department's plan for
the future management of the San Luis Drain in and around the
Grasslands complex of state, Federal and privately managed wetlands?
How will the Department of Interior ensure that all potential impacts
from the Drain and its future management and cleanup will not adversely
impact these wetlands and the numerous species they support before the
Department of Interior and the Bureau of Reclamation relinquish Federal
control of the Drain?

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Bezdek.
Mr. Ellis, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF STEVE ELLIS, VICE PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS FOR COMMON
SENSE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Ellis. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Fleming,
Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217.
I am Steve Ellis, Vice President of Taxpayers for Common Sense,
a national, non-partisan budget watchdog.
In essence, the two agreements that would be implemented by
these bills absolve the United States from providing drainage
to several California water districts in exchange for numerous
new benefits to the districts. At this time, Taxpayers for
Common Sense (TCS) opposes this legislation. It is not that we
do not want to see a resolution to this fight; we absolutely
do. We just don't think this is the best or even a good deal
for taxpayers.
This deal would end the court-mandated requirement that the
United States provide drainage, and shift that responsibility
to the districts. But considering Reclamation estimated the
effort would cost billions of dollars, it is not clear how the
districts would pay for it. The legislation contains no
practical enforcement measures to ensure adequate drainage, or
even provisions for monitoring and testing.
Westlands Water District has estimated that drainage will
cost ``hundreds of millions of dollars, not billions.'' It may
not initially seem relevant, but Westlands recently paid a
penalty to settle an SEC enforcement action over misleading
investors regarding their finances during a bond offering in
2012. How? Westlands used self-described ``Enron accounting''
to manipulate their books to avoid raising water rates for
their customers. Similar accounting practices might explain how
Westlands anticipates lower costs, but that does not ensure
taxpayers that Westlands can meet its drainage obligation.
Under this agreement, Westlands landowners could continue
to grow crops on their land until they can't any more, and then
start reselling the promised water. Or they could use the
affected lands for solar energy development and sell the water.
Or they could retire more acres and grow more profitable crops
on a smaller subset of lands. TCS would not oppose any of these
options, but it would mean that the value of the drainage
obligation that the United States is shedding is a pittance
compared to what Westlands is getting.
Land retirement is a primary strategy for reducing drainage
impacts. But the Northerly Districts' agreement requires no
land retirement at all, and the Westlands agreement only
retires 100,000 acres. It has been widely reported that much of
this land has already been retired. Both Westlands and
Reclamation have previously suggested multiple times that
200,000 acres should be retired. So, including only half as
much in this agreement is surprising. Since drainage impact and
costs will likely push Westlands to retire at least 200,000
acres, in my opinion, this deal is really about the water.
In a 2010 letter to Senator Feinstein, then-Commissioner
Connor stipulated that contract amount of water for Westlands
should be reduced by a proportion equivalent to the amount of
land retired. Less land to irrigate, less water needed. The
agreement abandons this common-sense proposition, and does not
reduce the contract amount. Instead, it keeps the total
contract amount, then stipulates that Westland should get 75
percent of that, or 895,000 acre-feet.
By promising that future allocations will be based on the
full 100 percent contract total, rather than a reduced amount,
it ensures that Westlands will always get a larger share,
relative to other CVP junior contractors. In addition, under
the agreement, Westlands would be considered to be paid out,
and their water contract would convert from a 9(e) water
service contract to a permanent 9(d) contract. If Westlands
retires more land in the future, the excess water not used on
that land would be money in the bank. The excess water
delivered at artificially low rates would become highly
valuable in the market.
The right choices for water distribution in California vary
over time, based on a myriad of factors. At a minimum, giving
Westlands permanent water rights to water should have been
analyzed for its impact on other future Federal and taxpayer
obligations. Reclamation has presented a calculation that was
shown earlier of the purported financial savings to the United
States from this deal. Economic analysis is only as good as the
assumptions that accompany it, and that is where this analysis
fails.
Deputy Secretary Connor stipulates that the analysis relies
on ``current applicable law.'' This fails to recognize these
bills are, in fact, making law and could improve financial
terms for the taxpayer. Under current applicable law, which
dates back to 1902, the districts would have 40 years to repay
billions of dollars at no interest. The last dollar would be
paid in 2070. I reject the savings analysis because of this
fundamental assumption.
Though current law allows for such repayment terms, current
law also provides only $513 million in remaining construction
authority for the San Luis Unit. Additional legislation
providing billions of dollars in budget authority and
appropriations would be necessary before drainage construction
could start. New law, new terms.
Taxpayers for Common Sense has long been on the record that
there should be significant reforms to water project financing
and to price water to reflect market realities. A
reauthorization of the San Luis Unit would provide an ideal
opportunity to change these decade-old policies. I want to
reiterate that TCS wants this issue to be resolved. But these
agreements and this legislation do not resolve the issue in a
way that is fair to taxpayers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I will be
happy to take any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steve Ellis, Vice President, Taxpayers for Common
Sense on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217
Good morning Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to testify. I will be
focusing on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217, both of which would formalize
agreements between the United States and Westlands Water District \1\
and the Northerly Districts.\2\ I am Steve Ellis, Vice President of
Taxpayers for Common Sense, a national non-partisan budget watchdog.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Available at http://www.usbr.gov/mp/docs/Notice-of-Filing-
Settlement-Agreement-AS-FILED-with-attachment-091615.pdf.
\2\ Commentary based on Summary of Termsheet for a Proposed
Settlement Between the United States and the Northerly San Luis Unit
Districts Regarding Drainage from October 29, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In essence, the two agreements absolve the United States from
providing drainage for irrigation water sent to the districts in
exchange for numerous new benefits to the districts:

Drainage would become the responsibility of the districts.

In return the districts would be deemed to have paid off
all capitalized construction costs for the Central Valley
Project (currently estimated at over $400 million in
total). Thus the districts would be given permanent
contracts for their water at a far cheaper price, along
with other benefits such as transfer of various Federal
facilities, waiver of Federal farm size limits, and a new
Federal commitment to permanent water deliveries from the
Central Valley Project (CVP) (because of delayed
environmental reviews and controversies the four districts
currently only have been only able to obtain 2-year
extension contracts for such deliveries for several cycles.
Without these bills, under the CVP Improvement Act (CVPIA)
these would be 25-year contracts).

The Westlands agreement also would help resolve several
different ongoing rounds of litigation and Westlands would
permanently retire 100,000 acres of its 600,000-acre
district (we understand most of these lands have already
been retired under various prior programs or agreements).

The Northerly Districts (San Luis, Panoche, and Pacheco
Water Districts) would also receive a new Federal payment
of $70 million.

There are other factors in the agreements, but these are the main
ones I will be discussing. Also, the full Northerly District agreement
has not been finalized, so my commentary will be mostly Westlands-
focused, but would still generally apply to what I have seen about the
other proposed agreement.
At this time, Taxpayers for Common Sense is opposed to the
legislation. It is not that we don't want to see a resolution to this
fight. We absolutely do. We just don't think this is the best or even a
good deal for taxpayers.
drainage
It is true that this deal would end the court-mandated requirement
that the United States provide drainage for these districts. The
districts would take on the responsibility for ensuring adequate
drainage. But considering that the cost of providing drainage for these
districts is estimated in the billions of dollars, it is also not clear
how the districts would be able to do this.
There have been suggestions that drainage supplied by the districts
would entail small-scale treatment, growing salt-tolerant crops, more
efficient irrigation, and I would imagine further land retirement.
Westlands has estimated that this will cost ``hundreds of millions of
dollars.'' \3\ Not billions. But there is no guarantee that this will
actually happen.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Bettina Boxall Los Angeles Times ``Westlands Water District
Agreement a Retreat From Previous U.S. Plan,'' September 22, 2015.
Available at: http://www.latimes.com/science/la-me-westlands-20150922-
story.html. Quote from Tom Birmingham, General Manager Westlands Water
District.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This disparity in cost estimates is even harder to credit
considering that Westlands recently paid a penalty to settle a
Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) enforcement action over misleading
investors regarding a $77 million bond offering in 2012. The SEC found
an order-of-magnitude disparity in the promised debt service coverage
ratio and the actual coverage ratio. Why? Because Westlands used self-
described ``Enron accounting'' in an effort to not raise water rates
for Westlands customers.\4\ Similar accounting practices might explain
how Westlands anticipates costs an order of magnitude lower than the
Reclamation estimated costs, but they don't provide sufficient
assurances to the taxpayers that Westlands can meet its drainage
obligation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ SEC Press Release ``California Water District to Pay Penalty
for Misleading Investors,'' March 9, 2016. Available at https://
www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2016-43.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The agreements and certainly the legislation contain no practical
enforcement measures to ensure that the districts will provide adequate
drainage, or even provisions for monitoring and testing. The only
apparent ``enforcement'' tool is that if the United States somehow
learns that any of the districts has somehow violated applicable law,
the United States could (but is not required to) impose the ultimate
sanction of stopping all water deliveries to the district--a rarely
used Federal power around the West.
Thus, under this agreement, Westlands landowners could continue to
grow crops on their land until they can't anymore and then start
reselling the promised water (either within the district or to cities
or farms outside the district). Or they could use the affected lands
for solar energy development and sell the water. Or they could retire
more acres and grow more profitable crops on a smaller subset of lands.
TCS wouldn't oppose any of these options, but it would mean that the
value of the drainage obligation government is shedding is a pittance
compared to what Westlands is getting, and TCS would prefer that the
government make a better deal in exchange.
land retirement
The Northerly Districts' agreement requires no land retirement at
all, and the Westlands agreement includes a provision for Westlands to
retire 100,000 acres from the 600,000-acre district. It has been widely
reported that much of this land has already been retired. Furthermore
it is a paltry amount considering what had been discussed in the past.
In 2002, the top Westlands official wrote in the Bakersfield
Californian that they were considering removing 200,000 acres from
production--proudly stating it was one-third of the district--as part
of an earlier proposed drainage settlement.\5\ The government's 2007
Record of Decision on the drainage issue recommended that nearly
200,000 (194,000) acres be retired.\6\ And in a 2010 letter to Sen.
Feinstein (D-CA), then-Commissioner of Reclamation Michael Connor
(current Deputy Secretary of Interior) wrote that Westlands should be
``required to permanently retire a minimum of 200,000 acres of the most
drainage impaired lands'' as part of a settlement.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Bakersfield Californian ``Another View/Tom Birmingham:
Westlands Seeks to Help All Farmers,'' May 1, 2002.
\6\ San Luis Drain Feature Re-evaluation Record of Decision March
2007. Available at http://www.usbr.gov/mp/mp150/envdocs/
San_Luis_Drainage_Feature_Re-evaluation_ROD.pdf.
\7\ Letter from Michael L. Connor, Commissioner, U.S. Department of
Interior to Senator Dianne Feinstein. September 1, 2010
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Considering the consensus on 200,000 acres from so many parties--
including both Westlands and Reclamation--only including 100,000 acres
in the agreement is surprising at best. It's very likely that between
lands too salt-impacted/drainage-impaired for cultivation and an effort
to reduce drainage costs, Westlands will retire at least 200,000 acres
if not more. In my opinion this deal is really about water.
water
How is land retirement tied to water? In the 2010 letter to Sen.
Feinstein, then-Commissioner Connor stipulates that the current
contract amount of water for Westlands (1.193 million acre-feet) should
be reduced by a proportion equivalent to the amount of district land
retired. This was estimated to result in a new contract total of
806,000 acre-feet (still an enormous amount of water and a generous 70
percent of the old contract amount). It only makes sense. Less land to
irrigate, less water needed. The agreement abandons this common-sense
proposition and doesn't reduce the contract amount. Instead it
stipulates in effect that Westlands should get 75 percent of the
contracted amount or 895,000 acre-feet. In wet years, water in excess
of that would be available to Reclamation for their use or to resell to
others, including Westlands, in Reclamation's sole discretion.
First, the higher total contract amount means tiered water pricing
(water price increases for amounts delivered in excess 80 percent of
total contract amount) would never come into effect. Instead of having
to pay higher-tiered prices at 80 percent of the water potentially
delivered to its smaller land area, Westlands would at maximum receive
75 percent of the higher contract amount. The 75 percent level would in
effect become 100 percent of what Westlands is entitled to under the
law if H.R. 4366 or H.R. 5217 is enacted, and the higher-tiered pricing
would never go into effect.
Also, if a higher land retirement figure were used--like say,
200,000 acres, twice what is in the agreement--it would be hard to
justify (under both state and Federal legal principles) contracting for
that much water to be delivered and not change the total contract
amount. And by promising that future annual allocations will be based
on the full 100 percent contract total, rather than a reduced amount
(whether 70 or 75 percent), it ensures that Westlands will always get a
larger share relative to other CVP junior contractors who have
allocation percentages based on their actual contract amounts.
In addition, under the agreement Westlands would be considered to
be ``paid out'' and their water contract would convert from a 9(e)
water service contract to 9(d) repayment contract. This would be a
permanent contract as opposed to the normal contract renewals that
should occur every 25 years under the CVPIA. In his letter to Sen.
Feinstein, then-Commissioner Connor supported the idea of a longer-term
contract than 25 years, but not a permanent contract. Promising a
permanent contract with total amounts that are set in binding
agreements and/or Federal statute regardless of potential future
impacts population growth, other business users, climate change, or
other factors disregards the long history of water strife and
challenges faced in the arid West. At a minimum, such a proposal should
have been analyzed for its impact on other Federal and taxpayer
obligations before the Administration signed a Settlement Agreement
committing the United States to such a new policy for Westlands.
If, as we suspect will happen, Westlands goes ahead and retires
more land, that excess water would be money in the bank. The excess
water they received at artificially low rates would then, obviously,
become much more valuable in the market.
true value
Speaking of money, in an April 21, 2016 letter to Congressman David
Valadao (R-CA, and author of H.R. 4366) regarding the Westlands
agreement, Deputy Secretary of Interior Michael Connor attaches a table
entitled ``U.S. Bureau of Reclamation's Assessment of Costs and
Benefits to Federal Government of Westlands' Drainage Settlement
(Presented in Present (2015) Net Worth).'' \8\ This net present value
analysis discounts future costs and savings to account for the time
value of money and bring everything into 2015 values. This analysis
estimates the agreement would save the government a little less than $1
billion--$968.9 million. This is absolutely the economically
appropriate way to analyze the deal. Money coming in two decades or
more from now is less valuable than money today. But economic analysis
is only as good as the assumptions that accompany it. That is where
this analysis fails.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Letter from Michael L. Connor, Commissioner, U.S. Department of
Interior to Representative David Valadao, April 21, 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deputy Secretary Connor stipulates that the analysis used ``current
applicable law.'' Such an analysis fails to consider that these bills
are in the process of making law, and could instead alter expectations
to improve financial arrangements for the taxpayer. The ``current
applicable law'' goes back to the Reclamation Act of 1902. That means
the beneficiaries of the drain would not have to start repaying for the
project until it is complete. And under ``current applicable law'' the
beneficiaries would have 40 years to repay at no interest. Zero, zilch,
nada.
Reclamation's analysis anticipates the Congress would appropriate
and the United States would spend $2.5 billion on drainage to complete
the project by 2030. In 2070, when the last of the $2.5 billion loan is
repaid, the net present value of that total repayment in 2015 would be
only $1.2 billion. These long-term, no-interest loans arguably made
sense at the beginning of the last century as small farmers got started
and Reclamation was encouraging settlement of the West. Providing a 40-
year no-interest loan in 2016 to Westlands--a wealthy, powerful water
district that brags that its growers produce more than $1 billion worth
of food and fiber every year--makes no sense.\9\ I reject the savings
analysis because of its fundamental assumptions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ http://wwd.ca.gov/about-westlands/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
authority
Even if it is true that the law of the land still allows for such
repayment terms, it is also true that under the law providing for the
construction of the San Luis Unit there was only $513 million in
remaining available authority as of 2015.\10\ So to even construct the
drain and an equivalent new drainage system, additional legislation
providing billions of dollars in budget authority and appropriations
would be necessary before construction could be initiated. New law, new
terms. Taxpayers for Common Sense has long been on the record that
there should be significant reforms to water project financing and to
price water to reflect market realities. A reauthorization of the San
Luis Unit would provide an ideal opportunity to change these decades-
old policies. The facts of the Westlands situation are a perfect recipe
for such fiscal and pricing reforms to reflect the new realities that
have developed since the 1902 Act and the 1960 San Luis Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Bureau of Reclamation U.S. v. Westlands Settlement Agreement
Fact Sheet, Oct. 2015. Available at http: / / wwd.ca.gov / wp-content /
uploads /2015 /10 /westlands-vs-united-states-settlement.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
I want to reiterate that TCS wants this issue to be resolved. But
we don't think that these agreements and this legislation resolve the
issue in a way that is fair to taxpayers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I will be happy to
take any questions you might have.

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Ellis.
Mr. Brown, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JERRY BROWN, GENERAL MANAGER, CONTRA COSTA WATER
DISTRICT, CONCORD, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Brown. Thank you, Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the subcommittee. Contra Costa Water
District (CCWD) is the oldest and largest M&I contractor within
the Central Valley Project, and we rely on the Delta to divert
and deliver high-quality drinking water through CVP and our own
facilities to our 500,000 residents and many large industrial
customers. Anything discharged upstream in the San Joaquin
Valley ends up downstream in the Delta. Any mistakes in these
San Luis drainage agreements will compromise the Delta water
quality we drink and use every day.
CCWD has spent over $1 billion over the past 20 years to
build infrastructure to protect and improve our drinking water
quality. Unfortunately, the pressure on our assets to perform
this critical function grows greater every day, as Delta water
quality continues to decline. For the past 30 years, Contra
Costa has worked with other Delta stakeholders, including Delta
communities and environmental groups to prevent the export of
toxic drainage from the San Luis Unit to the Delta. This
includes opposing the building of the San Luis drain to the
Delta, as well as opposition to drainage discharges within the
San Joaquin River and, thus, ultimately reaching the Delta.
CCWD supports an in-valley drainage solution in keeping
with the 2007 Bureau of Reclamation Record of Decision on the
San Luis drainage feature re-evaluation. It is essential that
drainage is not exported to the Delta. However, as they say,
the devil is in the details, and the details of how drainage
will be managed are lacking in the Westlands settlement
agreement and the Northerly Area agreement.
To ensure that the many beneficial uses of the Delta are
not impacted, the proposed legislation enacting these
agreements needs to be amended in three key areas.
First, the agreements both lack drainage management plans.
This is despite the Obama administration letter to Diane
Feinstein dated September 1, 2010 that identified as key
elements to any drainage settlement measurable environmental
objectives, including water quality and specific enforceable
performance measures. While the Westlands settlement states
that Westlands must manage its drainage as a condition for
receiving CVP water, the enacting legislation and agreements
lack any definition of detailed drainage management plans that
are required for monitoring, reporting, and enforcement
measures.
Second, the agreements call for inadequate amounts of land
retirement. Land retirement has been acknowledged to be the
best way to prevent drainage impacts. The 2007 Record of
Decision selected a final alternative with 194,000 acres of
land retirement, which in itself was already less than the
308,000 acres of land retirement identified in the lowest net
cost alternative recommended by the USGS and U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service. However, the Westlands settlement only
requires 100,000 acres of land retirement, and the Northerly
agreement has no land retirement.
Furthermore, the total contracted amount specified for the
San Luis Unit CVP contract should be reduced proportional to
the amount of land retired. Instead of reaffirming the San Luis
contractor's full contract supply and converting these existing
contract to permanent contracts, the agreement should promote
water conservation and irrigation efficiency by retiring the
water rights linked to the irrigation of retired lands.
Third, the agreements have the potential to harm other CVP
contractors. CCWD and other CVP contractors are already
concerned about the decreasing reliability of the CVP water
supply in general. Replacing the San Luis Unit contractor's
renewable contracts with permanent contracts without legally
binding and enforceable provisions added to the contracts will
harm the rest of the CVP. Congress never intended San Luis
users to be given a priority over other CVP contractors, but
priority is implied by granting the San Luis Unit users
guaranteed permanent contracts.
The March 18, 2016 memo from the Congressional Research
Service to Congressman Jared Huffman regarding the Westlands
drainage settlement describes several ways that CVP contractors
would be harmed by the settlement. In order to avoid adverse
impacts to water supply of other contractors, the San Luis Unit
contract amounts need to be subject to review at regular
intervals, particularly in the face of changing hydrology in
California due to climate change or completion of the
California water fix, or other actions.
Also, forgiving the San Luis Unit contractors' capital
repayment debt must not hurt other CVP contractors by shifting
recovery of cost to us. The legislation must specifically
address how the $420 million cost will be recovered in the
Federal budget without shifting costs to other CVP contractors.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on this topic of
vital importance to CCWD and the Delta.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jerry Brown, General Manager, Contra Costa Water
District on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217
My name is Jerry Brown, and I am the General Manager of Contra
Costa Water District (CCWD). Contra Costa Water District is an urban
water agency located in the eastern end of the Bay Area in Northern
California, on the western edge of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta.
CCWD is the oldest and largest M&I contractor within the Central Valley
Project, we are in the Delta, and we rely on the Delta to deliver high
quality drinking water to our 500,000 residents and many large
industrial customers. We own facilities and divert water from the Delta
under our own permits and approvals. We also operate and maintain CVP
facilities for the Bureau of Reclamation. Unlike other urban areas
which also rely on the Delta and have other sources of supply, almost
all of our water comes out of the Delta. Anything discharged upstream
in the San Joaquin Valley ends up downstream in the Delta, and any
mistakes in these San Luis Drainage agreements will compromise the
Delta water quality we drink and use every day.
CCWD has a unique standing in the Delta. We are known for having a
strong technical acumen on Delta issues and for being constructive
participants in the Delta conversation. CCWD has spent over $1B over
the past 20 years to build infrastructure to protect and improve our
drinking water quality. Unfortunately the pressure on our assets to
perform this critical function grows greater every day as Delta water
quality continues to decline. CCWD frequently engages with a wide range
of stakeholders in collaborative efforts to protect the Delta by
participating in projects that protect Delta levees, enhance Delta
ecosystem protection, improve Delta water supply operations, advance
Delta science, and maintain Delta water quality.
For the past 30 years, Contra Costa Water District has worked with
Delta counties and environmental groups, to prevent the export of toxic
drainage from the San Luis Unit to the Delta. This includes opposition
to building the San Luis Drain to the Delta as well as opposition to
drainage discharges to the San Joaquin River and thus ultimately to the
Delta. CCWD understands the need for drainage services for the San Luis
Unit and fully supports sound in-valley drainage solutions, but we also
seek to ensure that the actions of others will not harm us or our Delta
neighbors. For instance, CCWD participated in the productive Grassland
Bypass Use Agreements process in order to promote effective drainage
management in the Northerly Area.
CCWD acknowledges the stated commitment of Westlands and the
Northerly Area contractors to manage their toxic agricultural drainage
within their own boundaries. An in-valley drainage solution would be in
keeping with the 2007 Bureau of Reclamation Record of Decision on the
San Luis Drainage Feature Re-Evaluation, and it is essential that
drainage is not exported to the Delta. However, as they say, ``the
devil is in the details,'' and the details of the Westlands Settlement
Agreement and the Northerly Area Agreement are lacking. To ensure that
the many beneficial uses of the Delta are not impacted, most important
to CCWD being drinking water as a beneficial use, CCWD's Board of
Directors have taken an Oppose Unless Amended position on the proposed
legislation enacting these agreements with amendments required in three
key areas.
First, the agreements both lack drainage management plans. This is
despite the Obama administration letter to Senator Dianne Feinstein
dated September 1, 2010, that identified as ``key elements'' to any
drainage settlement ``measurable environmental objectives, including
water quality'' and ``specific enforceable performance measures.'' The
Westlands Settlement states that Westlands must manage its drainage as
a condition for receiving CVP water, but the Settlement does not
identify how proper management will be determined. The enacting
legislation, and the implementing agreements, need detailed drainage
management plans specifying monitoring, reporting, and enforcement
measures. The monitoring and reporting that already occurs under the
Grassland Bypass Use Agreements can serve as a model for these
requirements. And at a minimum the terms of the current Use Agreement,
including the requirement to achieve zero discharge to the San Luis
Drain by the end of 2019, need to be incorporated into the Northerly
Area Agreement. The Department of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation has a
responsibility in perpetuity under anti-degradation policies of the
state to ensure that these agreements do not create significant impacts
on the beneficial uses of the Delta. Drainage management plans need to
be finalized and approved by the appropriate state and Federal agencies
before the San Luis Unit contractors receive the benefits of these
agreements. These plans should be overseen by the Environmental
Protection Agency if Reclamation is unable to ensure that these
agreements do not adversely impact other water users such as CCWD or
the Delta ecosystem.
Second, the agreements call for inadequate amounts of land
retirement. Land retirement has been acknowledged to be the best way to
prevent drainage impacts but the settlement fails to secure a
sufficient amount of acres to ensure Westland's fulfills its drainage
control responsibilities. The 2007 ROD selected a final alternative
with 194,000 acres of land retirement, which in itself was already less
than the 308,000 acres of land retirement identified in the lowest net
cost alternative recommended by the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service. However, the Westlands Settlement only
requires 100,000 acres of land retirement, and the Northerly Area
Agreement has no land retirement requirement. Furthermore, the total
contract amount of water given to San Luis Unit contractors through
Central Valley Project contracts should be reduced proportional to the
amount of land retired. Retiring drainage-impaired land not only
reduces the amount of toxic drainage generated from the region but also
reduces the irrigation demand of the region. Decreasing the demand for
Delta exports reduces the burden on the overstressed Delta system,
leading to a healthier ecosystem and a more reliable water supply for
all beneficial uses of the Delta. The Westlands Settlement currently
awards Westlands a permanent contract for their existing 1,193,000
acre-feet of water per contract year, which does not take into account
land already retired or land that will be retired; this inflated total
contract amount gives Westlands an unfair, disproportionately large
base amount from which shortage allocations are calculated. Instead of
reaffirming the San Luis Unit contractors' full contract supply and
converting their existing contracts to permanent contracts, the
agreements should promote water conservation and irrigation efficiency
by retiring the water rights linked to the irrigation of retired lands.
Third, the agreements have potential to harm other CVP contractors.
For 80 years, CCWD has relied on Central Valley Project water to meet
most of our customer needs. CCWD signed a long-term 40-year municipal
and industrial contract with the Central Valley Project in 2005. CCWD
and other CVP contractors are already concerned over the decreasing
reliability of CVP water supply in general. Replacing the San Luis Unit
contractors' renewable contracts with permanent contracts as
contemplated in the settlement without legally binding and enforceable
provisions added to the contracts could harm the rest of the CVP's
contractors by giving Westlands higher priority to limited water
available to the entire CVP. The new rights awarded in the settlement
to Westlands also violate the past practice of the Bureau of
Reclamation recognizing ``first in time, first in rights'' priority,
which means older CVP contractors like CCWD are potentially impacted in
the form of lesser deliveries and/or contract quantities. Also
concerning is the fact that legislative history contains references to
San Luis Unit water as ``surplus'' water. Congress never intended San
Luis users to be given priority over other CVP contractors, but
priority is implied by granting the San Luis Unit users guaranteed
permanent contracts. The basis for moving forward with San Luis Unit in
the first place was that their needs would only be met after existing
needs were met, which include the needs of CCWD and other Delta
beneficial uses. The March 18, 2016 memorandum from the Congressional
Research Service to Congressman Jared Huffman regarding the Westlands
Drainage Settlement describes several ways that CVP contractors would
be harmed by the settlement. Specifically, in order to avoid adverse
impacts to the water supply of other CVP contractors, the San Luis Unit
contract totals need to be subject to review at regular intervals,
particularly in the face of changes in hydrological conditions in
California due to climate change and sea level rise or completion of
the California WaterFix or other actions. Similarly, the settlement
agreements' forgiveness of the San Luis Unit contractors' capital
repayment debt must not hurt other CVP contractors by shifting recovery
of CVP costs to us. The legislation must specifically address how the
$420M cost will be recovered in the Federal budget without shifting
costs to other CVP contractors.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on this topic of vital
importance to CCWD.

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Brown.
Mr. Birmingham, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF TOM BIRMINGHAM, GENERAL MANAGER/GENERAL COUNSEL,
WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT, FRESNO, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Birmingham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. In my written testimony, and in the written
testimony submitted by the Department of the Interior, there is
a detailed description of the history of the litigation that
has brought us to this point. I will not recount that
litigation, but I would like to observe that this is a real
problem, as made very evident by the photograph that was
depicted during the opening statement by the Ranking Member.
This is a real problem that existed in the San Joaquin
Valley and an environmental problem that has existed for more
than 35 years. And it is a problem that will be resolved
through this settlement and the legislation to authorize the
settlement.
I understand that there are many who, at the mere mention
of Westlands Water District, have their blood pressure raised.
I have heard Members of Congress say, ``If this legislation
benefits Westlands,''--not H.R. 4366, but any legislation that
benefits Westlands--``I am going to oppose it.'' But when the
benefits to the United States derived from this legislation are
objectively analyzed, I believe that a reasonable person would
conclude that this is in the best interest of the Federal
Government, it is in the best interest of the taxpayer, and it
is in the interest of the people of the state of California.
Under this settlement, Westlands will assume responsibility
for managing drain water within its boundaries. There are
concerns about the potential that this water will be discharged
to waters of the United States or into the Delta. The
settlement does not permit that. The settlement is very clear.
Water must be managed within our boundaries. And if we do not
perform, the Federal Government has the ultimate hammer. Our
water supply will be shut off.
I understand that this may not be the settlement that
individual Members of Congress have negotiated, but it is the
settlement that the Obama administration negotiated on behalf
of the United States. And under the terms of the settlement,
the Federal Government will be relieved of an obligation to
spend in excess of $3.5 billion under a court-mandatory
injunction. They will be indemnified against any liability as
it relates to their failure to provide drainage. The Federal
Government will be indemnified against liability in existing
takings litigation. Westlands will become a party to that
litigation, and will compensate the landowners who have filed
litigation against the government. Westlands will dismiss its
contractual litigation.
This is pretty simple. We have been paying for drainage
service for in excess of 35 years. We have not received the
drainage service. Our breach of contract litigation will go
away. But from Westlands perspective, perhaps the greatest
benefit is that there will finally be a meaningful solution to
the drainage problem. And that is critical if we are going to
sustain irrigated agriculture on the west side of the San
Joaquin Valley.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would be delighted to answer
your questions or questions of the members of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Birmingham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thomas Birmingham, General Manager/General
Counsel, Westlands Water District on H.R. 4366 and H.R. 5217
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, my name is Thomas
Birmingham, and I am General Manager/General Counsel of the Westlands
Water District. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today in
support of H.R. 4366, the ``San Luis Unit Drainage Resolution Act,''
which authorizes the implementation of the settlement agreement between
the United States and Westlands Water District for the purpose of
resolving litigation related to the Secretary of the Interior's
obligation to provide drainage service to the San Luis Unit of the
Central Valley Project.
westlands water district
Westlands Water District (Westlands) is a public agency of the
state of California, which was formed by an act of the State
Legislature for the purpose of supplying irrigation water to land on
the west side of the San Joaquin Valley. The District's principal
office is in Fresno, California, and it consists of more than 600,000
acres of land in Fresno and Kings counties. The lands within Westlands
are among the most productive agricultural lands in the world. Fruits
and vegetables produced in Westlands grace dining tables across the
United States. That tremendous productivity occurs though a combination
of the area's climate and soil, the skill and diligence of area
farmers, and water. Westlands provides most of the water used to
irrigate these lands, water it receives under a contract with the
Federal Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation). Because of its role in
providing essential irrigation water, Reclamation rightly deserves
credit for helping to create what is now a highly valuable agricultural
resource. In this respect, Federal reclamation policy has been a
notable success.
For some lands within Westlands, as with lands elsewhere in the San
Joaquin Valley, and across the United States, something more is
required to keep the lands productive over the long term. Some lands
require drainage. In the United States alone, 11 million of 44 million
irrigated acres require drainage to remain productive. But disposing of
drainage water can create its own set of concerns and issues, such as
impacts to water quality. As a result of such concerns today there is
no drainage of lands in Westlands, with the result that some lands in
Westlands can no longer support irrigated crops. Without a solution,
still more lands will be rendered infertile. With respect to drainage
for these lands, Federal reclamation policy has been a notable failure.
history of litigation concerning drainage service for the san luis unit
An understanding of the importance of H.R. 4366 requires an
understanding of the events that have brought us to this point. I am
confident that the Members of Congress who approved the construction of
the San Luis Unit of the Central Valley Project in 1960 would have been
very surprised to learn that this subcommittee is considering
legislation, 56 years later, to resolve litigation concerning the
Secretary's duty to provide drainage to the San Luis Unit, as the 1960
legislation was intended to have resolved that issue.
In 1960, it was understood that the delivery of irrigation water to
areas within the San Luis Unit would also require drainage. Studies of
the proposed San Luis Unit confirmed the need for drainage. Lands in
areas adjacent to the proposed San Luis Unit were experiencing drainage
problems, and landowners in those adjacent areas expressed concerns
that providing irrigation water to the San Luis Unit lands without
drainage could exacerbate their drainage problem. Indeed, California's
earliest water plans recognized that if water were exported from the
Sacramento-San Joaquin Rivers Delta and used in the Central Valley a
master drain would be needed. Accordingly, in section 1(a) on the San
Luis Act, Congress required the Secretary to provide for a drain to the
Delta in the event that the state of California did not provide a
drainage system. (Act of June 3, 1960, Public Law 86-488, 74 Stat.
156.) In 1961, California informed the Secretary that it would not
provide a master drain, and on January 9, 1962, the Secretary advised
the Congress that he would make provision for the drain called for by
the San Luis Act. Later, Reclamation entered contracts with Westlands
(and other San Luis Unit Contractors) under which drainage service for
lands within Westlands was contemplated.
There is a long trail of litigation over the Secretary's
performance of these statutory and contractual duties.
That trail begins in 1963, when a group of districts now known as
the San Joaquin River Exchange Contractors, which serve irrigation
water to lands adjacent to the San Luis Unit, filed suit to compel the
Secretary to provide for the drain before commencing construction of
the San Luis Unit. The District Court denied an injunction, and
dismissed the action, based on assurances by the United States that it
would provide drainage to the San Luis Unit.
Construction of the San Luis Drain began in 1968, but in 1975 the
Secretary halted construction with only 40 percent of the Drain
completed, based on concerns expressed by various groups about effects
of the discharge of drain water into the Delta. Without a terminus in
the Delta, drainage water generated from the limited area then being
drained was stored on an interim basis at Kesterson Reservoir. The
drainage water contained selenium, a naturally occurring mineral that
was leached from soils in Westlands served by the Drain. Selenium is an
essential part of the human and animal diet, but at sufficiently high
concentrations can cause adverse effects to human health, animal life
and crops. Selenium was identified as the cause of deformities and
mortality in waterfowl embryos at Kesterson Reservoir, and in 1985 the
Secretary announced that Kesterson and the Drain would be closed. The
Secretary failed to provide any alternative plan for providing
drainage.
In 1988 and 1991, various landowners and water districts, including
the Exchange Contactors, brought multiple actions against the Secretary
to compel the Secretary to provide the drainage service required by the
San Luis Act. (See Sumner Peck Ranch, Inc. v. Bureau of Reclamation,
823 F.Supp. 715 (E.D. Cal. 1993).) After the District Court ruled that
the San Luis Act imposed a mandatory duty to provide drainage, the
government argued that changes in law since the adoption of the San
Luis Act made compliance impossible. After a 3-week trial, the District
Court rejected the government's contentions. The government then
appealed to the Ninth Circuit of Appeals. In the meantime, nothing was
being done to provide Federal drainage service to Westlands.
In 2000, 40 years after passage of the San Luis Act, and 15 years
after the Secretary essentially quit on drainage, the Ninth Circuit
weighed in on the drainage issue. (Firebaugh Canal Co. v. United
States, 203 F.3d 568 (9th Cir. 2000).) The Ninth Circuit held that the
Secretary has a mandatory duty to provide drainage service to the lands
of the San Luis Unit, although the Secretary has discretion whether to
provide drainage service by a drain to the Delta or by some other
means. The Ninth Circuit said:

We agree with the district court that the Department of
Interior must act to provide drainage service. The Bureau of
Reclamation has studied the problem for over two decades. In
the interim, lands within Westlands are subject to irreparable
injury caused by agency action unlawfully withheld. Now the
time has come for the Department of Interior and the Bureau of
Reclamation to bring the past two decades of studies, and the
50 million dollars expended pursuing an ``in valley'' drainage
solution, to bear in meeting its duty to provide drainage under
the San Luis Act.

203 F.3d at 578.
In response to the mandatory injunction issued after the Court of
Appeals decision, Reclamation began evaluating alternative means of
providing drainage service to the San Luis Unit, culminating in the San
Luis Unit Drainage Feature Re-evaluation Environmental Impact
Statement. Thereafter, in 2007, Reclamation signed a Record of Decision
selecting a drainage plan and finding that the cost of providing
drainage for lands served by the San Luis Unit would be approximately
$2.7 billion. Reclamation now estimates that those costs are
approximately $3.8 billion using 2015 cost indices. Reclamation began
implementing the selected drainage plan in a portion of Westlands in
2010 on a court-ordered schedule.
In addition, the United States settled litigation brought by
individual landowners regarding some 37,000 acres within Westlands
damaged by a lack of drainage. Under that settlement, the United States
paid approximately $110 million in damages. However, the claims of
other landowners and Westlands with respect to other lands damaged by
the lack of drainage remain unresolved. In 2011, those other landowners
in Westlands filed a takings claim against the United States, alleging
that failure to provide drainage service has caused a physical taking
of their lands without just compensation, in violation of the Fifth
Amendment. The Court of Federal Claims denied the United States' motion
to dismiss the complaint, and while the complaint does not specify a
dollar amount for damages, the government estimates that Federal
liability for just compensation could be over $2 billion.
In January 2012, Westlands filed a breach of contract claim against
the United States, alleging that the Secretary's failure to provide
drainage service to Westlands constituted a breach of Westlands' 1963
Water Service and 1965 Repayment contracts (including the interim
renewal of those contracts). That case is currently pending.
In the context of this history, it should be evident to any
objective person as to why the settlement authorized by H.R. 4366 is in
the best interests of the United States, Westlands, and Federal
taxpayers. Under the settlement: (1) the Secretary will be relieved of
an obligation, the cost of which, is in excess of $3.5 billion; (2) the
United States will be indemnified against liability that the government
has estimated could be in excess of $2 billion; and, (3) Westlands will
manage drain water within its boundaries, addressing a vexing
environmental problem.
terms of the settlement
Under the settlement authorized by H.R. 4366, the Secretary would
be relieved from all drainage obligations imposed by the San Luis Act,
including implementation of the 2007 Record of Decision, which
Reclamation estimates will cost approximately $3.8 billion. Westlands
will dismiss, with prejudice, the pending breach of contract litigation
and will join the United States in a petition to vacate the District
Court judgment imposing a mandatory injunction ordering implementation
of drainage service. Westlands will provide for the release, waiver and
abandonment of all past, present and future claims arising from the
government's failure to provide drainage service under the San Luis
Act, including those by individual landowners within Westlands' service
area, and would further indemnify the United States for any and all
claims relating to the provision of drainage service or lack thereof
within the Westlands service area. Westlands will also seek to
intervene in the pending landowner litigation for purposes of settling
the case and will pay compensation to individual landowners.
The settlement also provides that Westlands will become legally
responsible for the management of drainage water within its boundaries,
in accordance with Federal and California law. How Westlands will
manage drainage water depends on the varying needs within the drainage-
impaired areas, and will evolve as conditions change. It will also
depend upon ongoing monitoring and regulation of groundwater under the
Long Term Irrigated Lands Regulatory Program being administered by the
California Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board under
the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. California Water Code
sections 13000, et seq. Measures that will be used by Westlands include
elements identified in Reclamation's drainage plan, such as land
retirement, source control through more efficient irrigation practices,
and collection and reuse of shallow groundwater.
In exchange for agreeing to undertake responsibility to manage
drain water within its boundaries, agreeing to dismiss its pending
breach of contract claim against the United States, agreeing to
compensate landowners in the pending Federal Claims Court litigation,
and agreeing to indemnify the United States against future claims
arising out of the Secretary's failure to provide drainage service,
Westlands will be relieved of the obligation to pay its current, unpaid
capitalized construction costs for the Central Valley Project.
Reclamation currently estimates that the present value of these unpaid
costs is approximately $300 million. However, under the settlement,
Westlands will still be responsible for the payment of operations and
maintenance costs of the Project and the payment of restoration fund
charges pursuant to the Central Valley Project Improvement Act.
Moreover, Westlands will still be responsible for future Project
construction charges. The Secretary will convert Westlands' current
9(e) water service contract to a 9(d) repayment contract consistent
with existing terms and conditions. As a ``paid out'' contractor, the
benefit of this conversion is permanent right to a stated share of
Central Valley Project water. However, the terms and conditions of the
contract, including the ``shortage provision'' that immunizes the
United States from liability if shortages are caused by restrictions on
operations of the Project imposed by Federal and applicable state law,
will otherwise be the same as in the current 9(e) contract. Moreover, a
new condition will be imposed in the 9(d) repayment contract: under the
settlement, the United States' obligation to provide water to Westlands
will be conditioned on Westlands' fulfillment of its obligations to
manage drainage water within its service area. In other words, if
Westlands does not fulfill its obligation to manage drainage water in a
manner consistent with state and Federal law, its Central Valley
Project water supply will be cut off.
Another significant term of the settlement related to the 9(d)
repayment contract is that it will cap deliveries to Westlands at 75
percent of its existing contract quantity, 1.193 million acre-feet. Any
water allocated in excess of this 75 percent cap, that otherwise would
have been delivered to Westlands, will instead be available to the
United States for other authorized Project purposes. In a year like
2011, when the allocation to south-of-Delta agricultural contractors
was 80 percent, 59,650 acre-feet of water would have been available for
other purposes, such as level 4 refuge supplies. Assuming a modest cost
of $200 per acre-foot, if the Secretary were to purchase this quantity
of water in the transfer market, the water would have a value of $11.9
million.
The settlement also obligates Westlands to permanently retire from
irrigated agricultural production not less than 100,000 acres of lands
within its boundaries. This total includes lands previously retired by
Westlands, approximately 36,500 acres, and lands previously acquired by
Westlands and fallowed temporarily, approximately 53,500 acres. After
retirement, these lands may be utilized only for: (1) management of
drain water, including irrigation of reuse areas; (2) renewable energy
projects; (3) upland habitat restoration projects; or (4) other uses
subject to the consent of the United States.
similarities to san joaquin river settlement
There exists recent precedent for the settlement between the United
States and Westlands authorized by H.R. 4366. In 2009, Congress enacted
the San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement Act, Title X of Public Law
111-11, which authorized the implementation of a settlement to resolve
decades-long litigation concerning the Secretary's obligation to make
releases from the Millerton Reservoir, a facility of the Central Valley
Project, to comply with the requirements of California law.
Like the settlement between the United States and Westlands
intended to resolve decades-long litigation involving the Secretary's
failure to comply with the law mandating drainage service to the San
Luis Unit, the litigation related to the San Joaquin River involved
environmental impacts resulting from the Secretary's failure to comply
with the law. Both settlements provide for the conversion of Central
Valley Project 9(e) water service contracts to 9(d) repayment
contracts. Both settlements provide for the use of the contractors'
capital repayment obligations as a source of funds to implement the
settlements. The only meaningful difference between the terms of the
two settlements is that under the San Joaquin River Settlement, the
Federal Government remains responsible for compliance with the law and
funding those measures required to implement the settlement. Under the
drainage settlement, the Federal Government is relieved from
responsibility for compliance with the law, and Westlands, at its own
cost, will undertake that responsibility.
I am aware that the mere mention of Westlands Water District raises
the blood pressure of many environmentalists and some Members of
Congress. Therefore, the reaction by some people that the settlement is
a ``sweetheart deal'' for Westlands is not surprising, but is far from
the truth. When the settlement is analyzed objectively, the benefits to
the Federal Government and Federal taxpayers become readily apparent.
The Secretary will not be faced with a mandatory injunction, compliance
with which will cost an estimated $3.8 billion. Westlands will become
responsible for drainage, and if Westlands does not perform, its
Central Valley Project water supply will be terminated. Westlands will
retire permanently 100,000 acres, and its maximum Central Valley
Project water supply will be reduced by 25 percent. Westlands will
compensate individual landowners who have sued the Federal Government,
a Federal liability that the government estimates could exceed $2
billion if the litigation were not settled.
Without question, Westlands will also benefit from the settlement.
Westlands will be relieved of its existing capital repayment
obligation, which the government estimates to have a present value of
approximately $300 million. But money that Westlands otherwise would
have paid the United States absent the settlement, will be used to
manage drainage water pursuant to the settlement. This cost will
greatly exceed $300 million. Westlands will receive a permanent water
supply contract, but this is not an anomaly under Federal Reclamation
law. Across the West, when a contractor is ``paid out,'' the contractor
receives a permanent right to a stated share of a project's water.
Moreover, the conversion of Westlands contract to a 9(d) repayment
contract will provide certainty that is critical to Westlands' ability
to expend the hundreds-of-millions of dollars required to implement the
settlement. But among the most significant benefits farmers in
Westlands will receive is that, after more than five decades, there
will finally be a meaningful solution to the drainage problem.
I would be happy to answer any questions the Members have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Huffman to Mr. Tom
Birmingham, General Manager, Westlands Water District

Mr. Birmingham did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Question 1. If Congress approves the drainage settlement agreement
with the Westlands Water District (Westlands), how specifically will
Westlands provide drainage? Please provide any preliminary drainage
management plans already developed by Westlands, including any cost
estimates associated with such plans. If Westlands has not yet
developed a specific drainage management plan, by when will Westlands
complete a drainage management plan?

Question 2. Does the Westlands Water District anticipate any future
financial commitments--including potential financial commitments
associated with the proposed California WaterFix--that would undermine
Westlands' ability to finance drainage services?

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Birmingham. And indeed, I am
sure we do have a lot of questions today. As a result, I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. My first question
is for Mr. Bezdek.
In an October 2015 document prepared by the Bureau of
Reclamation regarding the drainage settlement, it states that
there is ``the risk that Reclamation could be ordered by the
court to provide this drainage service, notwithstanding the
congressionally authorized construction ceiling under the San
Luis Act of 1960.''
My question for you, sir, is do you agree with Reclamation
that such a court order is a possible risk?
Mr. Bezdek. Mr. Chairman, we do believe that there is risk
associated with this court order, having already ordered that
we have an absolute obligation to provide drainage, that it
could continue to order us to provide drainage, even once the
authorized ceiling has been reached. We believe that that is a
significant risk, and it is something that was one of the
drivers for this settlement.
Dr. Fleming. OK, thank you. If a court would issue such an
order, wouldn't that be disruptive to Reclamation's operations
and other budget priorities?
Mr. Bezdek. Let me answer that by giving you an example,
sir. In 2014, we had budgeted for $29 million to be allocated
toward providing drainage. We had forwarded a reprogramming
letter to Congress outlining that, because of the settlement
and because of the stay issued by the court in light of the
settlement, that we were able to take that $29 million and
spend it on a host of other things, activities to improve water
supply, Endangered Species Act compliance, or other types of
environmental restoration activities.
So, just in a very short period of time we have already
seen the benefits of the settlement. Our concern is that, given
the control schedule issued by the court, and the amounts that
the court is expecting us to expend if we were back in front of
it, that it would definitely jeopardize our ability to meet a
lot of other priorities in California.
Dr. Fleming. OK, thank you. Now, this question is to both
of you, Mr. Bezdek and Mr. Birmingham.
Mr. Ellis stated in his testimony that his organization is
opposed to the drainage settlement because ``we just don't
think this is the best or even a good deal for taxpayers.'' Do
you agree with that?
Mr. Bezdek. We believe that this is a very good deal for
taxpayers. Quite simply, first and foremost, there is the 2000
Order from the Ninth Circuit directing us to provide drainage
service. It is absolute.
Second, since 2010, there have been other intervening
events that have occurred. Westlands has filed a litigation
against us for breach of contract. In addition, individual
landowners within the Westlands District have filed for takings
in the court of claims. We believe that there is potential
exposure of up to 2 billion. From that standpoint alone, we
believe that this is very good. In addition to resolving those
cases, Westlands is also agreeing to step in and indemnify us
for any future damages, as it regards drainage.
So, from our perspective, having this obligation, having
the court direct us to implement drainage, we believe that this
is a very good deal for the United States, and it will free up
our budget to accomplish a lot of other very important things.
Dr. Fleming. OK. How about Mr. Birmingham? What do you
think?
Mr. Birmingham. Mr. Chairman, it is Westlands' view that
this is a very good deal for the United States.
This settlement agreement has been referred to as a
bailout. The real question is who is bailing out whom. In this
context, Westlands is bailing out the United States. Even if
the law were to be changed, and the obligation to deliver
drainage to the San Luis Unit were to go away, there is still
liability, which the Department of Justice has estimated could
be in excess of $2 billion under a takings claim. That does not
go away with the change in the law. And Westlands is agreeing
to settle the litigation with those parties; that is a
significant savings.
Even if the government were to implement drainage, as has
been suggested, we would repay that obligation over a 50-year
period, interest free. That has a present value, according to
the Department of the Interior, of approximately $1.2 billion
that the Federal Government will save, just based in terms of
the present value of money. And there are other benefits that
the United States will receive. We are reducing our water
supply by 25 percent. That has value to the United States.
So, in response to your question, I disagree with the
observation that this is not a good deal, the best deal for the
United States. There may be better deals, but this is a very
good deal for the United States.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Huffman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do have some
questions. Before I get to them I just want to say we continue
to hear, I believe, too many red herrings and straw men on this
subject. I think if people are going to come in here and say
they have heard Members of Congress say certain things, that if
something helps Westlands than they are opposed, they had
better be ready to name names, because I have never said that,
and I have never heard a Member of Congress say that, and I
think we are entitled to know who the heck you are talking
about, or whether it is a complete fiction, which is my
supposition.
Similarly, when folks say that Members of Congress want to
see the west side of the valley blow away and dry up and stop
providing food, that is nonsense. I don't know anyone who
subscribes to that view. So, let's come back to the subject
matter at hand.
And Mr. Bezdek, I think you have drawn the short straw from
the Department of the Interior to come here and defend these
particular settlements, one of which nobody has even seen. For
the first time last night in your written testimony, we learned
that there is apparently a brand new pending Inspector
General's investigation underway. That was the first I had
heard of it. To my knowledge, the first anyone has heard of it.
And now we learn at the last minute that the witness that we
had expected to have here from these Northerly Districts is not
showing up.
Can you just confirm for the record that there is a pending
investigation?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir. There is a pending investigation by
the Department of the Interior's Office of the Inspector
General.
Mr. Huffman. Mr. Bezdek, going back over 8 years, the
Interior Department has always outlined the importance of
retiring between 194,000 and 305,000 acres of land as part of a
solution to the drainage problem on the west side. Yet, in this
agreement, you provide for a mere 100,000 acres of land
retirement, and almost all of that land has already been
retired. So, you are basically proposing to re-retire it, or to
take credit for what has already happened on the ground.
Does Interior now believe that those other hundreds of
thousands of acres are suddenly OK to irrigate with imported
water? And what is Interior's plan to make sure this does not
cause a new Kesterson-type disaster? Who is going to make sure
that does not happen?
Mr. Bezdek. The initial answer to your question,
Congressman, is that our view is that the settlement was
designed to provide great flexibility for Westlands to
determine how best to implement drainage. Our number-one policy
goal was for the Department to get out of the drainage
business. So, the 100,000 acre-foot is a floor, it is not a
ceiling. The settlement was set up precisely to allow for great
flexibility.
It is my anticipation that it will go well above 100,000,
but that is up to Westlands to determine how to implement it.
But one of the cruxes of this settlement was to provide for
flexibility in achieving the ultimate requirements to meet the
drainage obligation.
Mr. Huffman. I think I hear you say that the Westlands
Water District is going to be responsible for making sure that
another Kesterson-like incident does not happen. Is that fair
to say?
Mr. Bezdek. They are going to take on the obligation to
provide drainage. That is correct. And----
Mr. Huffman. So, you are telling Congress and the people of
California that we should entrust the Enron accounting team
with taking care of that particular environmental scenario.
I want to ask you now about liability. We heard about
indemnification. However, what was not mentioned and what I
want to specifically ask you about is that indemnification
provision in the agreement, to my knowledge, applies only from
claims coming from within the San Luis Unit. Isn't that
correct?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Huffman. All right. So just outside the San Luis Unit
you have the San Joaquin River exchange contractors who have
maintained in the past that they are impacted by drainage from
the west side. Does this agreement protect the Department of
the Interior and the taxpayers of the United States against
claims from the San Joaquin River exchange contractors and
others who may be impacted by the drainage problem outside of
the San Luis Unit?
Mr. Bezdek. My understanding, Congressman, is there is a
Ninth Circuit precedent that acknowledges that the obligation
to provide drainage flows only to the land served by the San
Luis Unit, and that there is no obligation to provide drainage
to those individuals with lands that are not served by the San
Joaquin----
Mr. Huffman. Does the agreement protect the taxpayers in
the Department from claims outside the San Luis Unit?
Mr. Bezdek. Does the agreement expressly state that? No,
sir. Do we believe that there is no legal obligation to provide
drainage? We believe there is no legal obligation to provide
drainage to those lands outside of the unit.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Do you intend to do any NEPA
analysis of these proposed agreements that have such profound
potential impacts on other water users and the environment?
Mr. Bezdek. We do agree that NEPA should be done on the
implementation of both agreements. I believe the legislation
acknowledges that the implementation will be subject to NEPA
and other environmental laws.
Mr. Huffman. Well, Mr. Costa's legislation says that they
will be implemented notwithstanding any other law. Doesn't that
include NEPA, ``any other law'' ? Wouldn't that appear to waive
NEPA?
Mr. Bezdek. Our position, sir, is that these agreements
will be implemented, and they will be subject to NEPA.
Mr. Huffman. Far more questions than we have time for. I
yield back.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields. Chairman Bishop is
recognized.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Fleming. I noticed all the
Californians are here. And if Californians are all here, we
must be talking about water. Right?
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Back in February of 2015, I sent a letter to
the Attorney General, as well as the Secretary of the Interior,
which outlined a process. And we recognized in that letter that
settlements are basically preferable to litigation, and that it
usually helps the taxpayer because it takes away burdensome
liabilities.
So, the bills that are here before us attempt to do just
that. So Valadao and Costa, you relieve the Federal Government
of building, what, a $4 billion drain, even though the law and
the courts say they have to? But you can change that and have a
net savings to the American taxpayer.
Similarly, the Blackfeet legislation would save, what,
around $200 million to the taxpayer if it were implemented,
even though it is not a cost benefit assessment that has been
done by OMB?
I appreciate the work of the sponsors, and those in the
community that are working on both these pieces of legislation.
I think we have created a process that is moving forward. But--
here comes the but--there is still work that needs to be done
because, until OMB actually responds to the letter that we sent
back in 2015 and gives their definitive statement, you are
still asking us to be an arbitrator on the funding of this
bill.
I realize OMB signed off on the testimony that you gave,
but their testimony is sending us mixed signals because the
other week they said they are still assessing the cost of the
bills that are using this criteria. That has to be part of the
process. That was part of the February 2015 letter, and it has
not yet arrived.
So, Mr. Bezdek, let me ask you--and Ms. Belin, if you would
like to--when can we get a definitive written answer from OMB
so we can continue on with this timeline? And let me ask you
specifically. Can we get that within 2 weeks?
Mr. Bezdek. Mr. Chairman, I am unable to give you an exact
date by which OMB will respond. What I can tell you is that the
Department believes the criteria and procedures have been met.
This is a new process in terms of following the protocols laid
out in your letter. We are working with OMB to get the net
information, but I am unable to sit here and give you a precise
date by which they will respond.
The Chairman. Well, that gives us problems, since we are
planning on moving forward with these bills. I appreciate the
position of the Department, but they are wrong. Until OMB
fulfills that portion of the letter, those criteria have not
been met. It has to be there.
So, I am going to give you another chance. When can we
expect OMB to fulfill the Administration's responsibilities
here?
Mr. Bezdek. Mr. Chairman, all I can tell you is that we are
working with them. I was on the phone with them last evening.
We are exchanging information. It is difficult for me to sit
here and give you a date. All I can tell you is we are working
very hard to provide that information.
The Chairman. That does not help. I appreciate the
situation you find yourself in, but it simply does not help.
That is part of the criteria. That has to be there. And these
pieces of legislation are being hung up because OMB still is
giving mixed signals. I mean, they may have signed off on this
document, but they have to give a written cost benefit
assessment. That has to be part of the process. And we are not
going to be able to move forward until OMB actually does their
job.
So, if you would be kind enough to go back there and tell
them, ``Damn it, do it, we cannot move forward with these bills
until that has taken place, do it.'' And I hope to do that.
I have 1 minute left. Let me ask you, because one of these
does deal with a drainage settlement that supposedly helps the
Navy. Can you tell me how the Navy is involved with that
settlement?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir. There is a naval air station that is
within this area that has issues with birds striking aircraft.
So they need to have irrigation water to keep the weeds down,
to keep the rodents down, to keep the birds out. This deal will
solidify an agreement whereby water will be provided to them
from the CVP, and it will be wheeled by Westlands. So, this is
a benefit to the Navy.
The Chairman. Well, good. I hope that works out. Otherwise,
we have an NDAA amendment coming up one more time.
Once again, OMB needs to do their job. We have to have that
assessment. That is essential. It is not done, and we cannot
move forward until it happens. If you would communicate that, I
would be greatly appreciative.
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. The Chairman yields back. Mrs. Napolitano is
recognized.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with my
colleague, Mr. Huffman, on many of the points that he has made.
But Mr. Bezdek, does the Department of the Interior have
any concerns over whether Westlands will be able to carry out
the financial obligations on this settlement to construct the
drainage that properly protects the drinking water and quality
and environment without misleading the Federal Government and
local residents? This is the people's house, we are supposed to
be protecting them.
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, ma'am. We do believe that Westlands has
the capability and ability to do this. We also have worded the
settlement agreement to provide that if drainage is not
provided, that we maintain the right to have the ultimate
drainage solution, and that is to cut off water deliveries.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, if there is no water?
Mr. Bezdek. Excuse me, ma'am?
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, what if there is no water to be able
to--I am sorry, I am thinking about another area.
Wasn't there an effort to begin cleanup of that
contamination at one end?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes. There has been work that has been
undertaken by the Northerly Districts to implement a portion of
the west side regional drainage plan. In addition to that,
there has been work on----
Mrs. Napolitano. And what results have there been from that
cleanup?
Mr. Bezdek. Those plans are not finished. They are due to
be finished in 2020. So, the results are not complete yet.
Mrs. Napolitano. Are there any measurements in the
settlement that ensure that Westlands would carry out the
financial obligations?
Mr. Bezdek. In terms of a metric as to carrying out--no,
ma'am. The agreement just basically says if Westlands does not
provide drainage, we maintain the right to withhold deliveries.
We structured the agreement specifically to provide Westlands
flexibility. I know there is a lot of concern about whether
drainage will be done. Our position is whether it was
Reclamation or Westlands, both of which are going to be
accountable to the State Water Resources Control Board for
implementing a drainage solution.
So, we feel comfortable that Westlands has the capability,
and will carry this out.
Mrs. Napolitano. I also have concerns over the entities
receiving Federal land and the facilities. And then possibly
selling at a later date at a profit at the expense of the U.S.
taxpayers.
I yield to Mr. Huffman. He had additional questions.
Mr. Huffman. I thank the gentlelady. I want to ask Mr.
Ellis from Taxpayers for Common Sense about a point you made.
You took issue with the Department's economic analysis when it
was justifying this settlement as a good deal for taxpayers,
because I think I heard you say they are selectively invoking
current law.
On the one hand, they look at the Reclamation Act's very
forgiving 40 year, 0 interest repayment terms, and they say,
``Look how much that would cost the taxpayers if we advanced
money for a drainage solution.'' On the other hand, they ignore
the fact that the Federal liability for a drainage solution
under current law is capped at $513 million.
So, really, if we are looking fairly at current law, all of
these projections about multi-billion dollar liabilities are
completely contravening current law. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, sir, Congressman Huffman. They did a net
present value analysis, which is the appropriate analysis to
do, discounting future dollars, bringing it all into 2015. But
they did assume all of the current law provisions, which means
that the last dollar that would be repaid would be in 2070,
which--I think on the face of it, and especially in this day
and age where you have a water district that claims that it
produces $1 billion in food and fiber every year, that they
would get a no-interest loan from taxpayers for 4 years does
not make a lot of sense.
And then also, yes, this legislation is making law, and
this is an area that we have had concern for years about, the
pricing of water, and how this is structured, and we are basing
it all on a 1902 Reclamation Act.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Then, Mr. Brown, you talked about
the issue of Westlands, which is the most junior contractor in
the system, being elevated in priority by virtue of this new
permanent water contract they would be getting. Explain what
that means to a senior water rights holder like Contra Costa
County, which needs that water for municipal purposes.
Mr. Brown. Certainly. When it comes to allocating the
limited supplies that the Bureau has, there is a review of the
different priorities. And this has kind of been a long-standing
issue. In fact, Mr. Birmingham was an attorney against the
Bureau back in the early 1990s, when Judge Wainger made the
call that there are priorities, even within the CVP. It is
within that basis that the San Luis Unit is essentially
developed for surplus water, and that is water that is only
available after all the other needs of the environment and the
other water users have been met.
So, the concern we have is that if somehow this agreement
puts in place a new priority in the system, that somehow we
have now gone down in rank, and that concerns us greatly.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Mr. McClintock is recognized.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Birmingham, if the settlement is not approved, what is
the next legal step for Westlands?
Mr. Birmingham. If the settlement is not approved, and the
Department of the Interior or the Secretary fails to comply
with the court-ordered mandate, the next legal step would be to
ask the court to hold the Secretary in contempt.
Mr. McClintock. And the cost of judgments, I see here on a
balance sheet provided by the Bureau of Reclamation, runs from
a minimum of $1.3 billion to as much as $3.3 billion. Mr.
Bezdek, is that correct?
Mr. Bezdek. Sir, the only approved drainage plan comes out
of a 2006 EIS with a cost of roughly $3.8 billion escalated to
today's dollars.
Mr. McClintock. So, the liability to the taxpayers would be
$3.8 billion?
Mr. Bezdek. That is correct, sir.
Mr. McClintock. And the cost to taxpayers of this
settlement is estimated at what?
Mr. Bezdek. The cost to the taxpayers is the debt
forgiveness on Westlands' capital obligations, which has been
presently valued at roughly $295 million.
Mr. McClintock. And I see a total cost here on your
assessment of $331 million. So we are in the ballpark, then,
roughly $330 million.
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir.
Mr. McClintock. So, for $330 million of cost we are
relieving ourselves of $3.8 billion of costs?
Mr. Bezdek. That is how we see it.
Mr. McClintock. I am not entirely clear why that would be
such a bad deal for taxpayers, Mr. Ellis. I realize you are
dealing in a realm of absolutes, but we have these judgments
against us. This settlement bill would not be here if the
Federal Government actually thought it would prevail. Why would
you throw out $3.8 billion of savings for $300 million of cost?
Mr. Ellis. I wouldn't, if I thought that those were
actually accurate numbers. And again, it is--Congressman
McClintock, you know, we have worked together on a lot of
different things, Taxpayers for Common Sense and you, on
various amendments on the Floor, and in this case----
Mr. McClintock. I know we have, but unfortunately you deal
in absolutes, and we have to deal in realities. And the reality
is we are looking at $3.8 billion in cost to be judged against
the taxpayers that we can relieve ourselves of right now for
about $330 million.
Mr. Ellis. Yes, sir. But the thing is that they are
assuming that all of the current law--which means that they are
assuming that basically, even though Westlands has to repay all
of the costs for building the drain, that that is discounted
over a 40-year period that does not start until 2030 on a no-
interest loan.
So, the reason why the return is so much lower is because
we are moving it all into 2015 dollars. My question then again,
Congressman, is why is the law setting up the 40-year no-
interest loan?
Mr. McClintock. Because, with all due respect, we are
looking at a more than 10-to-1 savings to cost on this.
Mr. Birmingham, I understand why this is a good deal for
the government. I am not entirely clear why it is a good deal
for you.
Mr. Birmingham. Well, I appreciate that, Mr. McClintock,
and there are many people who have asked the same questions.
Why would Westlands agree to this? But I would like to address,
if I may just take a moment of your time, a number of the
issues that have been raised.
The new priority that Westlands is going to get with this
settlement is very specific. Westlands doesn't get a new
priority. We get a 9(d) contract, but that is just like the
9(d) contract that the Friant contractors have. Last year,
Westlands had a zero allocation, the 9(d) contractors in Friant
had a zero allocation. The year before that Westlands had zero,
Friant had zero. These contracts--and the agreement is very
specific--do not give Westlands any priority.
But going back to the question of why would Westlands do
this, we need to solve this problem. It has been a problem that
has festered for more than 35 years. And we see this as a way
to ultimately solve the problem. We will have to comply with
state law. As Mr. Bezdek said, we are going to have to comply
with the requirements of the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board that is now beginning to implement a long-term
irrigated lands program that will require monitoring and will
ensure that water quality is not degraded.
And there are benefits to Westlands as a result of this,
just like any compromise. We----
Mr. McClintock. Just so that I am clear on this, we are at
the end of the litigation process. You are now in the process
of enforcing the court's decision, correct?
Mr. Birmingham. We were approached by the Obama
administration approximately 3 years ago, and asked, ``Would
you consider trying to negotiate a settlement,'' because they
did not see a means forward of complying with the mandatory
injunction.
Mr. McClintock. Right.
Mr. Birmingham. So, we sat down with the Obama
administration to try to settle this litigation, and I think
that we have come to a settlement that is fair to the
government and it is fair to Westlands. So, we have not been in
enforcement over the course of the term we have been trying to
settle this case.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Mr. Costa is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bezdek, there has been an issue raised that I think
needs to clearly be resolved by the Inspector General's
investigation. To your knowledge, does this have anything to do
with the Westlands settlement agreement?
Mr. Bezdek. No, sir, it does not.
Mr. Costa. All right, good. My understanding is the cost of
providing drainage service, under your testimony, would be
significant if we do not implement this proposal. Some estimate
$80 million a year. Do you agree with that number?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir. The court-ordered control schedule
actually has $80 million as a figure in one of the out-years.
Mr. Costa. So, to our friends with the Taxpayers, if we do
nothing, this is an $80 million obligation that the Department
of the Interior has.
Now, your budget for the Bureau of Reclamation is, what,
approximately $200 million annually?
Mr. Bezdek. The region, probably a little bit more than
that. But that is in the ballpark.
Mr. Costa. So, $80 million would have to be absorbed out of
that $200 million, would it not?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir.
Mr. Costa. That would be significant. That would impact a
whole host of issues, as you noted in your testimony, from
protection of endangered species law, to a host of other issues
that you are dealing with in the region. And it would also, I
suspect, impact priorities for the San Joaquin River
restoration, in terms of its schedule to be maintained. Is that
correct?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir, it would. It would be a major drain
on our budget, period.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Brown, I appreciate your testimony. You
indicated about the concerns that Contra Costa Water District
has, and I appreciate that. Is it true that you have a
discharge permit?
Mr. Brown. We are not a discharger, no.
Mr. Costa. You don't discharge into the water?
Mr. Brown. No.
Mr. Costa. The Delta?
Mr. Brown. No, sir.
Mr. Costa. OK. But you are concerned about discharges,
right?
Mr. Brown. Absolutely.
Mr. Costa. And this settlement, if enacted, eliminates
discharges. Would you not agree that is the purpose, in part,
of this settlement agreement?
Mr. Brown. We are not confident that that will occur.
Mr. Costa. Even though, in face of the issue that if they
don't comply they don't get water? You don't think that is
enough of a motivational factor?
Mr. Brown. No, I don't.
Mr. Costa. Why?
Mr. Brown. Because there is no specificity to what
compliance means. There are no requirements for reporting----
Mr. Costa. No, no, no.
Mr. Brown [continuing]. There are no requirements for
monitoring----
Mr. Costa. Hold on a second, Mr. Brown. Let me tell you----
Mr. Brown [continuing]. And there is no enforcement action
by anybody.
Mr. Costa [continuing]. Something about what is happening
in the Northern Districts. In the Northern Districts, where we
have implemented a regional plan, they are subject to both
state and Federal environmental law. Do you not agree?
Mr. Brown. I agree, and I have the actual drainage
requirements that they have here that are specifying all the
monitoring, measuring, and reporting.
Mr. Costa. I think it is important for people to note here,
Mr. Brown, that 80 percent of the salts and 90 percent of the
selenium have been reduced in the Northern Districts. Do you
agree with that number, Mr. Brown?
Mr. Brown. I don't know if those numbers are correct, but I
agree that there has been a significant reduction in the salts
and toxics, yes.
Mr. Costa. And the selenium.
Mr. Brown. And there is a goal to get to a zero discharge
by 2019.
Mr. Costa. And this is an effort that has been going on--
for the other Members--with the University of California Los
Angeles that has a facility there, there is a reverse osmosis
facility that is going there. There has been a great deal of
effort that has taken place between the Northern Districts,
Westlands, to perfect the agreement, because they know that
they have to eliminate discharges. The reality is this has been
an issue, as has been stated by Mr. Birmingham, for 35 years
that they have had to contend with.
I was in Los Banos when Mr. Halson raised the issue that
there would no longer be drainage provided at the San Luis Unit
that was a part of the original Act. That changed the whole
world; and so, as a result of that decision, we are now dealing
with the issues that have come before us.
Is this solution going to be satisfactory to everyone in
this committee? Of course not. Was the solution for the San
Joaquin River Settlement Agreement satisfactory to everyone in
this committee? Of course not. Are there still challenges with
implementation of the San Joaquin River Settlement Agreement
that involved climate change, involved land subsidence, and
involved costs? Absolutely.
But if we are to do nothing, that does not provide any
assurance to the folks in Contra Costa or to the Delta who are
discharging, and some who do have permits to discharge into the
Delta. Would you not agree, Mr. Brown, that a solution
ultimately needs to occur?
Mr. Brown. An in-valley drainage solution with drainage
management specifics of monitoring----
Mr. Costa. Right. Where you and I disagree----
Mr. Brown [continuing]. Reporting, and enforcement is an
important----
Mr. Costa [continuing]. Is I believe this is contained in
the settlement agreement and you do not believe it is contained
in the settlement agreement.
We can agree to disagree, but I believe the facts speak for
themselves. I believe you would not have this bipartisan
agreement before us that the Obama administration has
negotiated if that were not the case.
Thank you. My time has expired.
Dr. Fleming. Mr. LaMalfa is recognized.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Birmingham, do you wish to follow up on what was a
contention made with the short amount of time on shifting of
priority as regards to your district versus--Contra Costa was
brought up. Do you wish to elaborate on that?
Mr. Birmingham. Yes, Mr. LaMalfa, thank you. Throughout the
negotiations, the concern that other contractors may fear that
this would give Westlands some kind of priority that would
reduce their water supply was paramount in the minds of all of
the parties negotiating.
The settlement agreement is very specific. The legislation
that would authorize the settlement agreement is very specific.
And, in fact, the legislation was amended at the request of
several water agencies to ensure that this agreement cannot be
implemented in a way that would reduce their water supply,
affect their water supply, or increase their costs.
As a consequence, we have other districts, like the Tehama-
Colusa Canal Authority and the Friant water contractors, who
have expressed support for this legislation to authorize the
implementation of the settlement because both are clear. We
cannot implement this in a way that would affect their water
supply or impose costs on them.
Mr. LaMalfa. Certainly. OK. What is your level of
confidence in the ability of your district being able to
fulfill the obligations of the settlement versus if the Federal
Government was to still be in charge of getting this drainage
done. I mean yours versus theirs. Timely or cost-wise.
Mr. Birmingham. I have a lot more confidence in the ability
of Westlands Water District to do this, as opposed to the
Department of the Interior. And that is not a criticism of the
Department of the Interior, necessarily. But, as we have talked
about, it requires appropriations, it requires authorizations,
and even if we are talking about only the ceiling, $570
million, we are still going to be fighting every year to get
that money appropriated, or we are going to be in court,
fighting for the judge to order the Department of the Interior
to spend up to that ceiling.
We have an expectation of what we will do to manage
drainage service. It will vary from place to place, depending
upon the circumstances. We have the ability to pay for it. And
we are confident that we will be able to do it more quickly,
more effectively, more efficiently than the Department of the
Interior. We have a 50-year history with the Department of the
Interior; it has not happened.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Quickly, if nothing is done, what do you
see as the longer-term impact on agricultural production in
your area?
Mr. Birmingham. The purpose of providing drainage is to
protect the arability of the land. To say the solution is to
retire 200,000 acres, that is inconsistent with the purposes of
providing drainage service.
If drainage service is not provided, if we do not find a
solution, more and more land will become sterile. We will not
be able to irrigate it. There are areas all over the world--the
fertile crescent is no longer fertile because of drainage
problems.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. Mr. Bezdek, if this settlement is
not affirmed by Congress and the government is exposed to the
full cost--well, first, let's settle the number. We heard a
number $513 million as some kind of cap number, but you still
contend that the full exposure would be $3.8 billion. Which
number are we dealing with here?
Mr. Bezdek. The San Luis authorization has an authorized
ceiling, and we believe that that is $500 million and change to
reach the authorized ceiling. Our view, however, is that, given
the order of the court, that we have an absolute obligation to
provide drainage, that we believe there are significant risks,
that the court will not stop at that authorized ceiling, and it
will continue to order us to provide drainage. If that is the
case, then we are talking $3.8 billion.
Mr. LaMalfa. If Reclamation is required to meet this
responsibility, how long would it take for Reclamation to get a
project done?
Mr. Bezdek. Of this scope and magnitude, it would depend
entirely upon appropriations, and how often they would come in
and what amounts, it would take a number of years, sir, a
number of years.
Mr. LaMalfa. Longer than the partnership would be with
Westlands doing so, is that right?
Mr. Bezdek. I would say that is a safe assumption. Yes,
sir.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, OK. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Dr. Fleming. Mrs. Torres is recognized.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indeed, California is
in the house whenever we talk about water. However, I am from
Southern California, where we have to deal with a lot of the
same issues, salinity and the water. I represent a district
that had a lot of farming and dairies. Most of that is gone
now.
Mr. Brown, when you talked about reducing water by 25
percent, over what period of time and is that reduction solely
by residential customers, or who is responsible for this 25
percent reduction?
Mr. Brown. I am a little at a loss here as to what you are
talking about, exactly--are you talking about amounts that have
been conserved within my service area?
Mrs. Torres. Yes, that was your testimony, correct?
Mr. Brown. No. I think the testimony that I was giving was
relative to the 25 percent reduction in the total supply that
Westlands would be allowed to take out of the CVP.
Mrs. Torres. Oh, OK.
Mr. Brown. Sorry if there is any confusion.
Mrs. Torres. Thanks for that clarification.
Mr. Bezdek, the Inspector General investigation, can you
explain what that is, what that entails?
Mr. Bezdek. I am sorry, ma'am, other than the information
that we put in our testimony, I really have nothing else to add
to it.
Mrs. Torres. Is that classified information that you are
not able to share in the committee?
Mr. Bezdek. It is just information they have chosen not to
share with me.
Mrs. Torres. They have chosen--OK.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Torres. I apologize if I put you in a bad position
here.
Back to Mr. Brown. You have no drainage ability right now,
is that right?
Mr. Brown. We are a water supplier to municipal industrial
customers. We have wastewater agencies that treat and discharge
into the river in our area. But we are not responsible for
those discharges.
Mrs. Torres. OK. I am going to yield the rest of my time to
Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, my fellow colleague.
Mr. Bezdek, what happens if this agreement is not ratified,
in terms of the implications for the endangered species
recovery?
Mr. Bezdek. If this agreement is not ratified, as we have
discussed already, Congressman, there will be just a tremendous
drain on the Bureau of Reclamation's budget, and our ability to
do good things in the environment will be potentially severely
hampered. In terms of habitat, in terms of in-stream flow, in
terms of species management, we have concerns that there will
be impacts on our ability to do good things for the
environment.
Mr. Costa. Thank you.
Mr. Brown, I have a lot of respect for the work you do on
behalf of the Contra Costa Water District, and your desire to
enlarge the Contra Costa Reservoir. Los Vaqueros is to be
applauded. We all need to try to address all the water tools in
our water toolbox to fix our broken water system. I hope you
are supportive of other efforts to use other water tools,
including increasing storage capacity, whether it be at Shasta
Lake or Sites or looking at Temperance Flat, because we want
you to have a reliable water supply in the Contra Costa Water
District. Do you support those other efforts?
Mr. Brown. We support storage projects in California, yes.
Mr. Costa. Good, I am glad to hear that. You talked about
land that ought to be taken out of production. I made the case
that food and fiber is a national security item. I don't know
what your expertise is, but how much land do you think we
should take out of production in California?
Mr. Brown. I don't have a particular opinion about that----
Mr. Costa. Well, no, you do have an opinion. You said
100,000 acres was not enough. So is it 300,000? Or should it be
all of Westlands?
Mr. Brown. I have an opinion that the 100,000 acres is
inadequate, yes. I think----
Mr. Costa. Eight hundred thousand?
Mr. Brown. No, I said 100,000.
Mr. Costa. OK. So, what is the magic number, two? Three?
Four hundred thousand?
Mr. Brown. The Bureau of Reclamation has already identified
that it should be at least 194,000, and the USGS said it could
be 308,000----
Mr. Costa. But the Bureau of Reclamation settled on 100,000
acres after a negotiated agreement. You have been in negotiated
agreements, right?
Mr. Brown. Yes, I have.
Mr. Costa. OK. So, they start at one number, 300, and they
negotiate to 100,000. That is a negotiated agreement.
Mr. Brown. I applaud Mr. Birmingham. He is an excellent
negotiator. But I am not so sure the Bureau has protected our
interests, though.
Mr. Costa. Well, I applaud all--because these are hard.
Mr. Brown. Yes, they are.
Mr. Costa. They were hard in the San Joaquin River
Settlement Agreement, they are hard here. And they are always
difficult. And it is a compromise.
My time is expired, Mr. Chairman, but I thank you. And I
thank the gentlewoman.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman. The gentlewoman has
yielded. Mr. Denham is recognized.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, just a comment.
I find it interesting that while I did not support the San
Joaquin Restoration Settlement, the chief negotiator, this is
very, very similar. There seems to be a little bit of hypocrisy
here in dealing with our current situation on drainage.
Mr. Birmingham, can you talk about the Kesterson Reservoir
tragedy--what happened there, who was in charge?
Mr. Birmingham. The simple answer to your question is it
was the Department of the Interior. The Kesterson Reservoir had
originally been designed as a set of regulating reservoirs in
anticipation of completing construction of the master drain to
the Delta.
When the construction of the drain stopped, Kesterson
became the terminus of the reservoir. But the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service said, ``Since we are going to have these
reservoirs, let's turn the area into a wildlife refuge.'' And,
as a consequence, the bio-accumulation of selenium, which no
one is going to dispute was a very serious problem, resulted in
the types of deformities and the death that the Ranking Member
was referring to. But it was the Department of the Interior
that was responsible for the decisions made related to
Kesterson Reservoir.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Obviously, this is an ongoing
frustration. We ought to be addressing more water storage. But
it has certainly been frustrating that, yes, these settlements
come up, the Federal Government does not do its job, whether it
is providing the infrastructure for drainage, or fish ladders,
or you name it. On a number of these settlements, we end up not
only with a huge challenge, but our water gets shut off, as
well.
Now, some people in our state, some people around the
country, tend to overlook that. But in our area, when you see
people unemployed, when you see farmers that have been
generational that are now losing their farms, it is a real
issue. It is something that hits home.
Mr. Bezdek, to your knowledge did the U.S. Department of
Justice and the Department of the Interior negotiate that one
of the key safeguards of the Westlands agreement is that if
Westlands fails to manage drainage in their boundary they could
lose their water contract?
Mr. Bezdek. Yes, sir. That was negotiated by our team,
which included representatives from the Department of Justice,
as well as the Office of the Solicitor and the Department of
the Interior.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Zinke is
recognized.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barnes, as you know, this compact is critically
important to Montana and all concerned. We also noticed concern
as expressed by Chairman Bishop in Congress about the OMB
assessment. There are some cost concerns. But as you pointed
out in your written testimony, that litigation, if it
continues, then the settlement does not become law. Could you
expand further on the importance of moving forward on this
settlement and settling these claims rather than allowing this
litigation to continue?
Mr. Barnes. Thank you, Representative Zinke. Yes, as you
noted in your opening statement, and very generously and
eloquently, that we are warriors, it is in our DNA, as
witnessed by the recent Elouise Cobell Settlement case. There
are a lot of other Elouise Cobells on the Blackfeet
Reservation.
I personally know that no good ever comes out of
litigation. It becomes a settlement that neither party
appreciates, neither party generally has a whole lot to do with
the ultimate settlement.
We, of course, would press our case. I was trained as an
electrician, and I worked as a journeyman electrician, and
ultimately as a contractor. I negotiated contracts. With no
disrespect to the law trade, we realize that the highest paid
nonproductive journeyman on the job was an attorney.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Barnes. As I said, I say that with no disrespect. But
it becomes money spent that does not go to the benefit of
either party. But we would press our case, understanding, of
course, that $260 million in this settlement is unfunded
Federal programmatic responsibility.
So, we would first press our case on that trust
responsibility of the Federal Government's lack of carrying out
those changes, and regular routine maintenance things that have
been deferred because of budget constraints. So, that is our
first, and that is over half of the settlement, just in things
that were not done, but that we rolled into this in the
interest of settlement. Then we would go back on the other
issues of claims.
For the Boundary Treaty of 1907, the Blackfeet were not at
the table, nor were we invited. That settlement between Canada
and the United States did not take in concerns or the Blackfeet
interests, and that certainly is probably the largest issue in
here.
And, we as Blackfeet today, have come to realize that if we
are not at the table, we are on the menu. We refuse to be on
the menu. Going forth we want to be at the table at our
rightful place on a government-to-government basis. So, we are
not demanding trust responsibility, we are demanding input upon
our future.
We have the Milk River project which really is for the
downstream users. That whole irrigation project and diversion
was not to the benefit of the Blackfeet, it was to the benefit
of our downstream Montana users. I do not begrudge them their
need for irrigation for their croplands and ranchlands, but
again we were not at the table on that.
A lot of the settlement has to do with that. We have more
clearly defined all of the claims in our written testimony.
There are a lot of right-of-way issues there. We would rather
not fight those. We are prepared to if we need to. As you well
know, a warrior's main responsibly is to always be prepared,
and we are. We would rather go with the negotiated settlement,
and negotiations were very tough. I do not necessarily agree
with everything that the Department has put in front of us, but
we did for the betterment of the entire settlement, which not
only affects the Blackfeet Tribe and the Blackfeet people, but
all of those downstream users, as was pointed out.
We are the headwaters, you know? We are the source water of
that, and we aim to find justice in this settlement. We
understand the wording that we were not appreciative of. It
seems counter-statements in the same sentence that we agree in
support, but--that famous ``but''--now that has caused a
tremendous amount of consternation.
I want the Department to fully agree and support this. Now,
if they need to go back to OMB, I would encourage them to go
down there this afternoon and get this thing resolved because,
quite honestly, we gave as much as we can, Representative
Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, the headwaters
also go down to Louisiana.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Fleming. Yes. Frankly, being from Louisiana, we would
love to give you at least half, maybe two-thirds, of our water
any time.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Fleming. If we can get it to you, we would. Trust me on
that.
Well, I thank all the witnesses. It was a very interesting
debate--a lot of, I think, well-intentioned ideas and certainly
serious questions, and a lot of great work, and we appreciate
that.
I want to thank the staff for the great job they do in
subcommittee, as well.
We may have further questions in writing, so we will hold
the record open for 10 days. In case we do deliver more
questions to you, we ask that you would respond in writing, as
well.
So, therefore, there being no other business, and without
objection, we are adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
