- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE COSTLY IMPACTS OF PREDATION AND CONFLICTING FEDERAL STATUTES ON NATIVE AND ENDANGERED FISH SPECIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE COSTLY IMPACTS OF PREDATION AND CONFLICTING FEDERAL STATUTES ON
NATIVE AND ENDANGERED FISH SPECIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, February 10, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-723 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

JOHN FLEMING, LA, Chairman
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                        CNMI
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Norma J. Torres, CA
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Debbie Dingell, MI
Thomas MacArthur, NJ                 Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, February 10, 2016.....................     1

Statement of Members:
Fleming, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Demko, Doug, President, FISHBIO, Chico, California...........    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Questions submitted for the record.......................    45
Grossman, Gary D., Professor of Animal Ecology, Warnell
School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia...................................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    33
McCormack, Hon. Leotis, Secretary, Columbia River Inter-
Tribal Fish Commission, Lapwai, Idaho......................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Stelle, Will, Regional Administrator, West Coast Region,
National Marine Fisheries Service, Portland, Oregon........    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Questions submitted for the record.......................    24

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the
Interior, prepared statement of............................    64

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE COSTLY IMPACTS OF PREDATION AND CONFLICTING
FEDERAL STATUTES ON NATIVE AND ENDANGERED FISH SPECIES

----------

Wednesday, February 10, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. John Fleming
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fleming, Lummis, Gosar, LaMalfa,
Denham, Newhouse; Huffman, Costa, and Lowenthal.
Dr. Fleming. The Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans
will come to order. The Water, Power and Oceans Subcommittee
meets today to hear testimony on an oversight hearing entitled,
``The Costly Impacts of Predation and Conflicting Federal
Statutes on Native and Endangered Fish Species.''
We will begin with opening statements, and I yield to
myself for just that.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN FLEMING, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Dr. Fleming. The focus of today's hearing is about
simultaneously protecting the American taxpayer and the
electricity ratepayer, enhancing self-sustaining tribal
economies and coastal economies, and stabilizing food prices.
There are numerous so-called `stressors' on native and
endangered fisheries, but predation by sea lions, birds, and
other fish has become a growing problem that outweighs all
other stressors in some circumstances. Yet, reducing this
stressor should be the lowest hanging fruit to pick, if the
Federal Government had its act together. Shockingly, it
doesn't.
Billions of ratepayer and taxpayer dollars have been spent
to recover endangered fish species on the West Coast and
elsewhere. Some measures are working. For example, on average,
over 95 percent of salmon migrating through the Pacific
Northwest's Federal Columbia River system successfully pass
through and over the dams. Electricity ratepayers have invested
significantly in this endeavor, with over a third of their
monthly bills accounting for migrating salmon costs each year.
But, to add insult to injury, as we will hear later today,
sea lions decimate up to 45 percent of the returning Chinook
salmon run, and birds eat up to 20 percent of the entire out-
migration of juvenile salmon each year. Those sea lions and
birds are protected by other Federal statues--namely, the
Marine Mammal Protection Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
So, once again, we have another example of how the right and
the left arms of the Federal Government are acting opposite of
each other.
Further down in California, where the eyes of the Nation
have focused on a crippling drought, Federal and state water
supply restrictions have been imposed to help protect the 3-
inch Delta smelt and salmon. There are numerous factors that
harm the fish, but predation has helped keep these fish on the
Federal Endangered Species Act list, and the regulations that
go with this listing.
These regulatory measures have exacerbated a natural
drought, and the end result has been skyrocketing unemployment
up to 40 percent. In the meantime, third-party litigation
against measures to control these predators continues.
Louisianans are paying not only for this litigation, but for
the higher food prices associated with California's fruits,
nuts, and vegetables.
The Federal Government can do better, starting with
enacting bipartisan legislation introduced by our colleagues,
Jamie Herrera Beutler and Kurt Schrader, to control more sea
lions. More administrative things can be accomplished, too,
beginning with what our tribal witness says is a ``metric for
fish, bird, and marine mammal predation, so the comparisons and
impacts can be properly assessed.''
The status quo may be working for sea lions and litigators,
but it is not working for the American taxpayer, the
electricity ratepayer, fisheries, tribal communities who have
worked hard to bring back salmon populations, and our food
consumers nationwide. Today's hearing is another step toward
much-needed change.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fleming follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. John Fleming, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Water, Power and Oceans
The focus of today's hearing is about simultaneously protecting the
American taxpayer and the electricity ratepayer, enhancing self-
sustaining tribal economies and coastal economies and stabilizing food
prices.
There are numerous so-called ``stressors'' on native and endangered
fisheries, but predation by sea lions, birds, and other fish has become
a growing problem that outweighs all other stressors in some
circumstances. Yet, reducing this stressor could be the lowest hanging
fruit to pick if the Federal Government had its act together.
Shockingly, it doesn't.
Billions of ratepayer and taxpayer dollars have been spent to
recover endangered fish species on the West Coast and elsewhere. Some
measures are working. For example, on average, over 95 percent of
salmon migrating through the Pacific Northwest's Federal Columbia River
system successfully pass through and over the dams. Electricity
ratepayers have invested significantly in this endeavor, with over a
third of their monthly bills accounting for migrating salmon costs each
year.
But, to add insult to injury and as we will hear later today, sea
lions decimate up to 45 percent of the returning Chinook salmon run and
birds eat up to 20 percent of the entire out-migration of juvenile
salmon each year. Those sea lions and birds are protected by other
Federal statutes, namely the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act. So, once again we have another example of
how the right and left arms of the Federal Government are acting
opposite of each other.
Further down in California, where the eyes of the Nation have
focused on a crippling drought, Federal and state water supply
restrictions have been imposed to help protect the 3-inch Delta Smelt
and salmon. There are numerous factors that harm the fish, but
predation has helped keep these fish on the Federal Endangered Species
Act list and the regulations that go with this listing. These
regulatory measures have exacerbated a natural drought and the end
result has been skyrocketing unemployment of up to 40 percent. In the
meantime, third party litigation against measures to control these
predators continues. Louisianans are paying not only for this
litigation but for the higher food prices associated with California's
fruits, nuts, and vegetables.
The Federal Government can do better--starting with enacting
bipartisan legislation introduced by our colleagues Jamie Herrera
Beutler and Kurt Schrader to control more sea lions. More
administrative things can be accomplished too, beginning with what our
tribal witness says is a ``metric for fish, bird and marine mammal
predation so that comparisons and impacts can be properly assessed.''
The status quo may be working for sea lions and litigators, but it
is not working for the American taxpayer, the electricity ratepayer,
fisheries, tribal communities who have worked hard to bring back salmon
populations and our food consumers nationwide. Today's hearing is
another step toward much-needed change.

______

Dr. Fleming. The Chair would like to recognize the Ranking
Member, Mr. Huffman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
visitors today. I have to say I really do enjoy the
opportunities that we have to have substantive discussions
about issues affecting our natural resources and our
environment. These discussions really remind us just how much
we depend on healthy, functioning, resilient ecosystems. We
depend on them for food, for clean water, for jobs, revenue,
recreation, and for protection from disaster. So, I am very
pleased today to have a conversation about these issues, and to
discuss how we will work toward the recovery of our native
salmon and steelhead.
Now, as the Chairman knows, many of our salmon and
steelhead runs are not doing so well. I am sorry to say that in
California we have what can only be described as a salmon
crisis. According to some estimates, 78 percent of our
California native salmon may be extinct or extirpated within
the next century if the current trends continue.
In 2008 and 2009, we had the first-ever total closure of
the ocean salmon fishery along the West Coast because of the
poor returns in California. A closure like that absolutely
devastates the fishing industry. It results in significant job
losses. And, ultimately, closures like that require millions of
dollars in disaster aid from Congress. Sadly, what happened in
2008 and 2009 may only be a preview of our future if we
continue on with business as usual.
While I appreciate the focus of today's hearing is on
predation, it is important to recognize there are many other
important stressors, much greater stressors, that have to also
be discussed and addressed before our salmon and steelhead
stocks will recover.
In California, we have unsustainable water exports from the
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, degraded habitat conditions, an
environment where more than 90 percent of the historic spawning
habitat for Central Valley salmon and steelhead is blocked by
dams, and a lack of sufficient cold water to sustain our
fisheries.
Just last week Federal officials announced that we had a 97
percent mortality rate for juvenile Sacramento winter-run
salmon in 2015, and that is following similar dismal years each
of the prior 2 years. We know this disastrous decline was
caused by excessive water withdrawals and faulty temperature
readings that allowed water temperatures in the Sacramento
River to rise too high for salmon survival. The year before,
juvenile salmon, as I mentioned, had a 95 percent mortality
rate. And together, this data suggests that we absolutely have
to address the scientifically demonstrated root cause of this
problem. We need to do better.
Now, on predation, I think our recovery efforts have to be
guided by science. Currently, there is some scientific
uncertainty about whether predator removal programs, like the
ones supported by my Republican colleagues, actually help or
hurt endangered fisheries. But I do agree that the issue is
worth examining, and I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses.
However, we also have to deal with the other stressors that
we know are preventing salmon recovery, even the politically
difficult ones, like unsustainable water exports in California.
Otherwise, we will never be able to protect the salmon jobs
that are so important to my district or to Oregon, Washington,
or Alaska. It is also very important to note that predator
control problems supported by my Republican colleagues target
fish species that are protected and managed very differently
under state law.
So I hope, going forward, my Republican colleagues will
give some consideration to the fact that it is the state of
California and its Fish and Game Commission that decides
whether a fish like the striped bass is treated as a nuisance
predator that should be fished out of a system, or whether it
is prized for its value as a game fish. We are going to have to
work together with the state and try to be on the same page.
Similar to California, the Columbia River system is home to
13 ESA-listed salmon and steelhead runs. And we know that the
decline of these runs has been caused by the construction and
operation of large dams. The Bonneville Power Administration
and the Army Corps of Engineers have invested a lot of
resources into helping imperiled fish navigate the stagnant
pools and massive dams blocking what, in many cases, are
severely degraded spawning grounds. But there is still a lot of
work to do.
Last year, this committee examined legislation to increase
lethal take of California sea lions below Bonneville Dam. There
is every reason to believe that simply focusing on that problem
will not solve the bigger problem of salmon recovery. It will
not solve the problem of the Bonneville buffet created as
salmon line up to enter the dam's fish ladders. And it is
important to remember the dam created the buffet; the sea lions
are just exercising their all-you-can-eat privileges.
Likewise, programs to kill cormorants and Caspian terns are
very questionable. A U.S. Fish and Wildlife survey recently
found that cormorant predation on juvenile salmon has no impact
on the number of adults returning to the river, and therefore,
no impact on salmon survival and recovery.
Look, in an ecosystem, lots of living things eat lots of
other living things. That is the way nature works. Perhaps we
are overdue for a primer on that basic tenet of ecosystems.
But I do look forward to our discussion this morning, Mr.
Chairman. And again, I thank the witnesses for their
participation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huffman follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans
Mr. Chairman, I have to say that I really enjoy the opportunity to
have substantive discussions about issues affecting our resources and
our environment. These discussions remind us just how much we depend on
healthy, functioning, resilient ecosystems. We rely on them for food,
clean water, jobs, revenue, recreation, and protection from disasters,
so I'm pleased to talk today about these issues and to discuss how
we'll work toward the recovery of our native salmon and steelhead.
As the Chairman knows, many of our salmon and steelhead runs are
not doing well. I'm sorry to say that in California we have what can
only be described as a salmon crisis. According to some estimates, 78
percent of California's native salmon will be extinct or extirpated
within the next century if current trends continue.
In 2008 and 2009, we had the first ever total closure of the ocean
salmon fishery along the West Coast because of poor salmon returns from
California. The closure devastated the Pacific Coast fishing industry,
resulting in significant job losses. Ultimately, the fishing closure
required millions of dollars in disaster aid from Congress. Sadly, what
happened in 2008 and 2009 is only a preview of our future if we
continue on with business as usual.
While I appreciate that the focus of today's hearing is predation,
we know that there are many other important stressors that we must
address before our salmon and steelhead stocks will recover. In
California we have unsustainable water exports from the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta, degraded habitat conditions, an environment where more
than 90 percent of the historical spawning habitat for Central Valley
salmon and steelhead is blocked by dams, and a lack of sufficient cold
water to sustain our fisheries.
Just last week Federal officials announced that we had a 97 percent
mortality rate for juvenile Sacramento winter-run salmon in 2015. We
know that this disastrous decline was caused by excessive water
withdrawals and faulty temperature readings that allowed water
temperatures in the Sacramento to rise too high for salmon to survive.
The year before, juvenile salmon suffered a 95 percent mortality rate.
We must address the scientifically demonstrated root causes of this
problem. We must do better.
On predation, I believe our recovery efforts must be guided by the
science. Currently, there's some scientific uncertainly about whether
predator removal programs like the ones supported by my Republican
colleagues actually help or hurt endangered fisheries, but I agree that
the issue is worth examining and I look forward to hearing more from
our witnesses. But we must also deal with the other stressors that we
know are preventing salmon recovery, even the politically difficult
ones like unsustainable water exports from the Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta. Otherwise we'll never be able to protect the salmon jobs that
are so important to my district, or to Oregon, Washington, or Alaska.
It's also important to note that the predator control programs
supported by my Republican colleagues target fish species protected
under State law. I hope going forward my Republican colleagues will
respect the state of California's role in determining species
protections.
Similar to California, the Columbia River system is home to 13 ESA-
listed salmon and steelhead runs. We know that the decline of these
runs has been caused by the construction and operation of the Federal
Columbia River Power System, While the Bonneville Power Administration
and the Army Corps of Engineers have invested significant resources in
helping imperiled fish navigate the stagnant pools and massive dams
blocking what are in many cases significantly degraded spawning
grounds, there is still much work to be done.
Last year, this committee examined legislation to increase lethal
take of California sea lions below Bonneville dam. We know that sea
lions are native to this area and have always eaten salmon. While
removing a few of them may make some people feel better, and may in the
case of identified problem animals have some measurable positive
impact, it will not solve the problem of the ``Bonneville Buffet''
created as salmon line up to enter the dam's fish ladders.
Likewise, programs to kill cormorants and Caspian terns--which have
been eating salmon and steelhead in the lower Columbia since long
before humans first set foot in North America--will not bring these
fish back from the brink of extinction. Indeed, a U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service study found last year that cormorant predation on
juvenile salmon has no impact on the number of adults returning to the
river, and therefore no impact on salmon survival and recovery.
In an ecosystem, lots of living things eat lots of other living
things. That's simply the way nature works. In an ecosystem heavily
altered by humans, new conditions often favor some predators over
others. Salmon are keystone species, and many other species depend on
salmon as part of their diets. They always have and they always will.
This is not something we should lament, and neither is the fact that
conservation laws like the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act have been successful in restoring many of
these salmon dependent species. What we should lament is that we have
not done enough to deal with the root causes of salmon decline and have
not taken the actions necessary to restore fish populations as quickly
as we have restored populations of some seabirds and marine mammals.
One action that would have a much more significant impact on salmon
and steelhead recovery is the removal of dams that have outlived their
useful life spans. I applaud President Obama, Secretary Jewell,
Undersecretary Sullivan, the states of California and Oregon, and
PacifiCorp for circumventing the roadblocks thrown up by this
Republican Congress and beginning the long overdue process of dam
removal on the Klamath River. I am hopeful that this is the beginning
of a movement to accelerate salmon recovery by focusing on deadbeat
dams in the West.

Thank you, I yield back.

______

Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Gosar for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL A. GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for coming today. The topic of this hearing is very
important to Arizonans and others who depend on the Colorado
River for their water and power supplies. Most everyone agrees
with the need to recover truly endangered species. The
questions are over the best ways to accomplish this objective.
As many of us in the West know, the Endangered Species Act
is a relatively inflexible Federal law that continues to be
driven by litigation. The endangered species costs borne by the
American taxpayer and water and electricity ratepayers can be
staggering in some cases, but some do not want those costs to
be made public or in an understandable form.
That is why I have introduced H.R. 1869, the Environmental
Compliance Cost Transparency Act. This bipartisan bill mandates
the power marketing administrations, which sell power from our
Federal reservoirs, to provide a line item of the environmental
costs on their customers' power bills. This allows customers to
see exactly what they are paying for, so that they are better
informed to what may be working and what may not. Shining the
light of sun on government is never a bad thing.
Controlling predators is part of these costs. For example,
efforts to control the evasive green sunfish, which devour
endangered humpback chub near Lees Ferry, Arizona, are part of
hundreds of millions of ratepayer and taxpayer dollars aimed to
recovering four endangered fish in parts of the Colorado River
Basin.
As we will hear today, we actually have some Federal laws
that make it even harder to recover truly endangered species.
Perhaps more egregiously, we have an outdated provision in the
Federal Central Valley Project Improvement Act that actually
has a goal of doubling the invasive striped bass, a voracious
predator of endangered salmon smolts.
[Slide]
Dr. Gosar. Now, if you will take a look up at the screen,
there is a picture. In some cases, over 90 percent of the
smolts are devoured by striped bass in parts of central
California, making a mockery of fish recovery and taxpayer
investments.
Now we are going to look at a video in just a second. This
video, while reminiscent of a 1980s video game, shows us how a
smolt which has radio telemetry is being chased and devoured by
a striped bass which also has a radio. This 2009 Bureau of
Reclamation study at the Old and San Joaquin Rivers shows the
salmon in red, chased by the striped bass in blue. Let's take a
peek.
[Video shown.]
Dr. Gosar. Yes, you can't make up this contradiction in
Federal law. But every time Republicans have tried to strip the
striped bass from that list, we are met with statements that
the 1992 law is sacrosanct and cannot be touched.
Outdated laws do nothing except line fundraisers' and
lawyers' pockets, and prolong a failed status quo. And blaming
Federal water and power infrastructure, in the hopes of tearing
it down, breaching it, or undermining it, is not only
irresponsible, but unrealistic.
We have two witnesses before us today: a tribal
representative from the Pacific Northwest and a fish biologist
from California, who experience these issues firsthand every
day, and see the unnecessary conflicts between our Federal
laws. I commend them for their leadership and dedication, and
hope that this Administration will finally start to listen.
As Chairman Fleming said in his opening statement, let's
pick some low-hanging fruit.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gosar follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Paul A. Gosar, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Arizona
Thank you for holding this hearing. The topic of this hearing is
very important to Arizonans and others who depend on the Colorado River
for their water and power supplies.
Most everyone agrees with the need to recover truly endangered
species. The questions are over the best ways to accomplish this
objective. As many of us in the West know, the Endangered Species Act
is a relatively inflexible Federal law that continues to be driven by
litigation.
The endangered species costs borne by the American taxpayer and
water and electricity ratepayers can be staggering in some cases, but
some don't want these costs to be made public or in understandable
form. That's why I've introduced H.R. 1869, the Environmental
Compliance Cost Transparency Act. This bipartisan bill mandates the
Power Marketing Administrations, which sell power from our Federal
reservoirs, to provide a line item of environmental costs on their
customers' power bills. This allows customers to see what exactly
they're paying for so they are better informed of what may be working
and what may not. Shining the sun on government is never a bad thing.
Controlling predators are part of these costs. For example, efforts
to control invasive green sunfish, which devour endangered humpback
chub, near Lees Ferry, Arizona are part of the hundreds of millions of
ratepayer and taxpayer dollars aimed to recovering four endangered fish
in parts of the Colorado River Basin.
As we will hear today, we actually have some Federal laws that make
it even harder to recover truly endangered species. Perhaps most
egregiously, we have an outdated provision in the Federal Central
Valley Project Improvement Act that actually has a goal of doubling the
invasive striped bass, a voracious predator of endangered salmon smolts
(as the picture on the screen indicates). In some cases, over 90
percent of the smolts are devoured by striped bass in parts of central
California, making a mockery of fish recovery and ratepayer
investments.
This video, while reminiscent of a 1980s video game, shows us how a
smolt that has radio telemetry is being chased and devoured by a
striped bass which also has a radio (show video).
You can't make up this contradiction in Federal law, but every time
Republicans have tried to strip the striped bass from that list, we are
met with the statement that the 1992 law is sacrosanct and cannot be
touched. Outdated laws do nothing except line fundraisers and lawyers
pockets and prolong a failed status quo.
And blaming Federal water and power infrastructure in the hopes of
tearing it down, breaching it, or undermining it are not only
irresponsible but unrealistic.
We have two witnesses before us today--a tribal representative from
the Pacific Northwest and a fish biologist from California--who
experience these issues firsthand every day and see the unnecessary
conflicts between our Federal laws. I commend them for their leadership
and dedication and hope that this Administration will finally start to
listen. As Chairman Fleming said in his opening statement, let's pick
some low-hanging fruit.
I look forward to today's hearing. Thank you.

______

Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields. We are ready to hear
from our witnesses today. Each witness' testimony will appear
in full in the hearing record, so I ask that witnesses keep
their oral statement to 5 minutes, as outlined in our
invitation letter.
You noticed we went maybe a little bit over our 5 minutes.
We set a bad example for you.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Fleming. We prefer you stay within your 5 minutes.
I also want to explain the timing lights. You will be under
a green light for 4 minutes, a yellow light for 1 minute, and,
when it turns red, we ask that you conclude your statement.
Every word of your statement will be put into the written
testimony.
To introduce our witnesses, first we have the Honorable
Leotis McCormack, Secretary of the Columbia River Inter-Tribal
Fish Commission from Lapwai, Idaho. Am I saying that correctly?
Lapwai? OK.
We also have Mr. Will Stelle, Regional Administrator of the
West Coast Region for the National Marine Fisheries Service,
based in Portland, Oregon; Dr. Gary Grossman, Professor of
Animal Ecology with the Warnell School of Forestry and Natural
Resources at the University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia; and
Mr. Doug Demko, President of FISHBIO in Chico, California.
I now recognize Mr. McCormack for your testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LEOTIS McCORMACK, SECRETARY, COLUMBIA
RIVER INTER-TRIBAL FISH COMMISSION, LAPWAI, IDAHO

Mr. McCormack. [Speaking native language.] Good morning.
Again, my name is Leotis McCormack. I am a Councilman for the
Nez Perce Tribe. I also sit as the Secretary for the Columbia
River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (CRITFC). Chairman Fleming
and committee members, I want to extend my appreciation for
this opportunity to testify before you this morning.
As it stands, there are 13 salmon and steelhead populations
in the Columbia Basin listed under the Endangered Species Act.
Predation by marine mammals and birds of freshwater fish is one
of the largest sources of mortality upon juvenile and adult
salmon alike. There is a regional consensus that predation is
and will be a priority issue to address.
I will briefly describe the three categories of predation,
followed by current actions being taken to manage them, then
conclude with some recommendations.
First, regarding marine mammals: 20 years ago, Yakima
Nation fisherman and tribal leader, Virgil Lewis, was among the
first citizens of the Northwest to recognize and call attention
to the growing California sea lion problem. There was a huge
presence in the lower Columbia River as fish counts, because of
the dams, were dropping. The fish that did make it to the fish
ladders were often mortally wounded by these sea lions.
Today, it is widely understood that sea lions and other
marine mammals are causing serious harm to endangered salmon.
CRITFC estimates that over 50,000 ESA-listed spring Chinook
salmon have been taken in the Columbia River by California sea
lions since the year 2000. The current sea lion population is
now greater than 350,000, a six-fold increase since the
enactment of the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA). They are
growing at a rate of 9.2 percent every single year.
Following a lengthy permitting process, the states of
Oregon and Washington are implementing an effective, though
limited, lethal removal program. This limited removal program,
as it stands, has not and will not keep pace with their growth
rate.
We are particularly concerned with the effect this growing
sea lion population will have on the lower return years which
are being projected. Last session, H.R. 564, the Endangered
Salmon and Fisheries Predation Prevention Act was introduced to
create more efficiency in dealing with predator sea lions.
CRITFC strongly supports that specific legislation.
For predation by avian species: there are over a dozen
species of birds in the Columbia Basin whose diet is primarily
fish. Annual losses of juveniles are staggering. During 4
recent years of recordkeeping from 2010 to 2013, losses ranged
from 17-21 million smolts annually by a double-crested
cormorant colony on East Sand Island, a man-made island near
the mouth of the Columbia River. This equates to approximately
20 percent of the entire out-migration of all juvenile
salmonids each year. Caspian terns nesting on that same island
consumed an additional 3-5 million smolts annually during that
same time period.
The Caspian tern control strategy has been to drive them
from areas of high salmon predation to areas of lower impact.
However, this process takes years. It is highly unpredictable,
and during the transition period, juvenile salmonids continue
to be eaten by the millions.
The double-crested cormorant emphasis is on nest
destruction and lethal removal of 50 percent of the existing
population. We achieved last year's goal of destroying over
5,000 nests and the lethal removal of the approximately 3,500
adult birds. There are 3 years remaining in this effort.
With regard to predation by freshwater fish species: the
Columbia River was originally home to fewer than 40 fish
species, including salmon. Today the number is close to 80.
Half of these fish are not native, and many of them are
partially or wholly fish-eating.
For over 20 years, the native northern pikeminnow has been
the target of an aggressive bounty campaign to reduce its
numbers, generally successfully. However, many non-native fish
are given protection as game fish, and managed for sport
angling purposes. It is a recipe for disaster for endangered
salmon.
In my written testimony, I include several specific
management recommendations, which I will summarize here. First,
develop a common metric for fish, bird, and marine mammal
predation. Second, assess and act quickly when predation trends
develop. Third, prioritize salmon management in anadromous
waters and remove barriers to harvest of non-native fish
species, then emphasize population management, rather than on
individual animals. Determine reasonable population ceilings
for avian predators, then predatory non-native fishes, and
last, reduce, when necessary, overall predator population sizes
using all tools, including lethal removal.
How can Congress improve natural resource? They can do that
by placing tribes on equal footing as states for access to
authorities, permits, and management tools and requiring
respectful deference to tribal treaty rights and endangered
species when in conflict with non-endangered protected species.
Chairman Fleming and committee members, this hearing gives
us hope that Congress will address these contradictions and
otherwise well-intended natural resource laws. So again, I want
to say [Speaks native language.], thank you from the bottom of
my heart for this opportunity to testify before you today.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McCormack follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Leotis McCormack, Nez Perce Tribe and
Commissioner, Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission

Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman and distinguished members
of the Water, Power and Oceans Subcommittee, on behalf of the Nez Perce
Tribe and the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (CRITFC),
thank you for inviting me to testify on the costs, impacts and
management implications related to the various forms of predation upon
native and endangered fish species. My testimony will provide an
overview of the three main sources of predation: marine mammals; avian;
and freshwater fish, against Columbia River salmon, sturgeon and
lamprey. I will offer a brief history of the CRITFC and our legal
authorities related to salmon management before discussing successes
and challenges managing these forms of predation on Columbia Basin
salmonids. My testimony will conclude recommendations for improving
predation management.
an overview of predation on columbia river salmonids
Predation is a keystone agent that controls fish population
dynamics. Although predation is a naturally occurring population
control agent, management becomes necessary in a highly modified
environment, such as the Columbia River Basin. Since the implementation
of the Tribes' Spirit of the Salmon Plan, an alarming increase in
predation of sturgeon juveniles, salmon and lamprey by birds, marine
mammals and other fish has occurred (Rieman et al. 1991; Collis et al.
2002; Evans et al. 2012; Stansell et al. 2010). In the basin, newly
created habitats from dredge spoils increased predacious bird
populations, along with changes to primary food sources bringing more
hungry sea lions upriver, the creation of reservoirs and the
introduction of predatory species have resulted in ballooning predator
populations. The negative changes in avian, mammalian, and fish species
population dynamics have tipped the predator/prey balance to the point
that active management is required to rebalance predator populations
and reduce salmon, lamprey and sturgeon losses.
Avian predation refers to predation by piscivorous (i.e., fish
eating) birds on salmonids. Key avian predator species in the Columbia
Basin include Double-Crested Cormorants (Phalacrocorax auritus),
Caspian Terns (Hydroprogne caspia), California Gulls (Larus
californicus), Pelicans and Ring-Billed Gulls (Larus delawarensis). The
abundance and distribution of double-crested cormorants and Caspian
terns has increased dramatically in recent years, from a few hundred to
tens of thousands in a less than 20 years (Roby et. al. 2012). In 2011,
the combined loss was approximately 23 million salmon smolts (BRNW
2012). Smolts may also be subject to predation by marine seabirds off
the Pacific Coast. Estimates of these oceanic predators are upwards of
a hundred thousand birds or more (NMFS personal communication).
Marine Mammal predation is a growing problem in the lower Columbia
River. California Sea Lion (Zalophus californianus) abundance and their
impacts on listed salmonids (Oncorhynchus spp.) increased dramatically
at Bonneville Dam since the turn of the century, stabilized for a
couple of years and since 2013 have increased to the highest levels
ever recorded. In 2008, the National Marine Fisheries Service granted
the states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho authority to lethally
remove nuisance California sea lions under section 120 of the Marine
Mammal Protection Act (MMPA). CRITFC estimates that over 50,000 ESA-
listed spring Chinook salmon have been taken in the Columbia River by
California sea lions since the year 2000. Since 2009, Steller sea lion
(Eumetopias jubatus) abundance in the Columbia River has also
increased. In 2012, Steller sea lion predation at Bonneville Dam
actually exceeded that of California sea lions. However by 2015,
California sea lions were again the dominate species at Bonneville Dam
and they teamed with Steller sea lions to take approximately 8,500
salmon and steelhead. Bear in mind that this take was observed within
\1/4\ mile of Bonneville Dam and represents only an index of predation
since sea lions were distributed throughout the river from the Dam to
the estuary (about 150 miles). In 2015, 2,340 sea lions were counted at
the East Mooring Basin on March 20, in Astoria, OR near the mouth of
the Columbia River. Abundance of sea lions using the East Mooring Basin
in 2013 was about 700, this number approximately doubled in 2014, and
doubled again in 2015. California sea lion abundance was estimated at
296,750 animals in 2010 (Carretta et al. 2011) indicating that the
population is robust and expanding. California sea lions are present
year round in Bonneville Dam's reservoir.
Fish predation (i.e., fish on fish predation) is well studied or
barely studied, depending on the species of predator. Baseline research
efforts in the John Day reservoir on the Columbia River in the 1980s
identified a native fish, the Northern Pikeminnow (Ptychocheilus
oregonensis), as a significant predator of salmonid smolts, along with
non-native walleye, smallmouth bass and channel catfish (Vigg et al.
1991). Estimates of smolt predation were in the millions, with most
eaten by northern pikeminnows, which are not protected as a game fish
by the states of Oregon and Washington. An intensive government
sponsored public control program on northern pikeminnows was initiated
in 1990 and continues to this day. The program has removed nearly 4
million pikeminnow from the Columbia and Snake Rivers. Management
action to remove non-native piscivorous fishes has not been taken,
although sufficient information confirms their direct and indirect
impacts to salmon (ISAB 2008). In 2013, Washington State removed the
size and daily limits on catfish, walleye and smallmouth bass on
selected areas of the Columbia and Snake River and their tributaries
upstream of McNary Dam. In 2015, the state of Oregon enacted similar
regulation for the mainstem Columbia from the Pacific Ocean upstream to
the state boundary with Washington upstream of McNary Dam. However,
major salmon bearing tributaries such as the Willamette, Hood River,
John Day River, and the Umatilla still have restrictive regulations
that protect largemouth and smallmouth bass, also known predators of
juvenile salmon and lamprey. Similarly, portions of the Snake River in
Oregon have bag and possession restrictions to protect largemouth and
smallmouth bass
commission history and legal authorities
The Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission was formed in 1977
by resolutions from the four Columbia River treaty tribes: Confederated
Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, Confederated Tribes of the
Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon, Confederated Tribes and Bands of
the Yakama Nation, and Nez Perce Tribe. CRITFC's mission is to ensure a
unified voice in the overall management of the fishery resource and to
assist in protecting reserved treaty rights through the exercise of the
inherent sovereign powers of the tribes. CRITFC provides coordination
and technical assistance to the tribes in regional, national and
international efforts to ensure that outstanding treaty fishing rights
issues are resolved in a way that guarantees the continuation and
restoration of our tribal fisheries into perpetuity.
The combined ancestral homelands of our four tribes cover roughly
one-third of the entire Columbia River Basin in Washington, Oregon, and
Idaho. Our existence on the Columbia River stretches beyond 10,000
years to time immemorial. Salmon has always been a unifying force and
we rely on its abundance for physical and cultural sustenance.
Collectively, we gathered at places like Celilo Falls to share in the
harvest, forging alliances that exist today. Our fishing practices were
disciplined and designed to ensure that the salmon resource was
protected, and even worshipped, so it would always flourish.
Salmon is so fundamental to our society that in 1855 when our four
sovereign tribes \1\ and the United States collaborated and negotiated
treaties, our tribal leaders explicitly reserved--and the United States
agreed to assure--our right to fish in perpetuity within our ancestral
homelands as well as to ``take fish at all usual and accustomed
places.'' We kept our word by ceding roughly 40 million acres of our
homelands to the United States, while the United States pledged to
honor our ancestral rights. It was the expectation of our treaty
negotiators then that we would always have access to abundant runs of
salmon; it is our expectation now that the U.S. Government will honor
that commitment and take the steps necessary to protect our treaty
resources. The treaties of 1855 were all ratified by the Senate of the
United States. The Supremacy Clause of the Constitution applies to all
such treaties.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Treaty with the Yakama Tribe, June 9, 1855, 12 Stat. 951;
Treaty with the Tribes of Middle Oregon, June 25, 1855, 12 Stat. 963;
Treaty with the Umatilla Tribe, June 9, 1855, 12 Stat. 945; Treaty with
the Nez Perce Tribe, June 11, 1855, 12 Stat. 957.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The importance of fish, especially salmon, to our tribes cannot be
overstated. In U.S. v. Winans, the U.S. Supreme Court stated that
fishing was ``not much less necessary to the existence of the Indians
than the atmosphere they breathed.'' The salmon are an integral part of
our cultural, economic and spiritual well-being. They are a primary
food source and our consumption of this First Food is nearly 10 times
higher than the national average. Salmon is fundamental to a healthy
tribal diet and plays a significant role in combating the risks of
heart disease and diabetes in our communities.
Our livelihood evolved over thousands of years and our physical and
cultural survival was intimately tied to the salmon. Ceremony became
essential to insure the continued survival of the salmon, our
traditions, and thus ourselves. Without salmon and without ceremony, we
would cease being Indian people. We are longhouse people and these
ceremonies have gone on without interruption for thousands of years.
For these reasons, in conjunction with modern fisheries management
principles, we are alarmed over the increasing impact by sea lions and
other predators on these vital treaty and public resources.
a brief history of salmon decline
The Columbia Basin and its tributaries began seeing major changes
in the 1800s as agricultural lands were developed and dams harnessed
the natural flows to build a western economy with low cost electrical
power, navigation, and irrigation. Commercial fishing lacked restraint
decimating salmon runs without regard for future generations. Logging,
mining and agriculture bit into the earth, fouling clean waters, and
degrading riparian habitat crucial to salmon survival. Nature's
bounties were exploited to build bigger cities with bigger economies,
and the energy and infrastructure to support them was siphoned from the
river. As more lands were flooded, more promises flowed. Tribal leaders
were told the dams would actually make life easier on salmon as the
roaring pace of the river was reduced. We were also told that if any
impacts occurred they would be mitigated.
The mitigation and recovery of our treaty fishing resources has
been slow but methodical. Thirteen salmon and steelhead populations in
the Columbia Basin are listed under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Pacific lamprey and white sturgeon populations are also depressed and
resources to rebuild them are slim, making us worry if they too will be
listed under ESA.
regional recovery efforts
We have been doing our best to bring the salmon back. Our tribal
members have long shouldered a heavy conservation burden through
voluntary harvest reductions on our fishery. Now, in cooperation with
states, Federal agencies, and our neighbors in the Columbia Basin we
are making huge financial and social investments in recovery efforts.
In 2008, CRITFC and its member tribes successfully concluded
lengthy negotiations resulting in three landmark agreements: (1) the
Columbia Basin Fish Accords \2\ with Federal action agencies overseeing
the Federal hydro system in the Columbia Basin; (2) a 10-Year Fisheries
Management Plan with Federal, tribal and state parties under U.S. v.
OR; and (3) a new Chinook Chapter of the Pacific Salmon Treaty.\3\
These agreements establish regional and international commitments on
harvest and fish production efforts, commitments to critical
investments in habitat restoration, and resolving contentious issues by
seeking balance of the many demands within the Columbia River Basin.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Nez Perce Tribe is not a Columbia Basin Fish Accord
signatory.
\3\ See ``Salmon Win A Triple Crown'' at http://www.critfc.org/
text/wana_w09.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
impacts of predation on tribal families
Salmon are central to the ceremonial, subsistence and commercial
lives of our people. Salmon fishing has long been a traditional way of
providing the necessary means to safeguard our families economically.
Even the settlers who descended upon our ancestral homelands
capitalized on the abundant salmon runs to secure an economic foothold
in the region. In the middle of the 1900s, spring salmon runs dwindled
and we had to forgo a tribal commercial harvest. However, when runs
rebounded slightly from 2000 to the present we were able to open
limited commercial tribal harvests.
A commercial tribal fishery diversifies economic opportunities in
what are traditionally hard hit rural economies. We have made
considerable investments to rebuild our salmon economy and increase the
commercial value of tribally caught salmon. Not long ago, the tribal
commercial fishermen were receiving 30 to 40 percent less than market
value. Today, we have overcome this disparity through innovative
marketing strategies, individual training and public outreach. It has
taken several years to build a brand identity for tribally caught
salmon. The public is embracing the benefits of buying the products of
our tribal fishery and demand is outpacing supply.
Predation is most notable and alarming to tribal communities in the
spring when spring Chinook, the mainstay of our salmon culture, is
exploited by marine mammals in the lower Columbia and especially at
migratory bottlenecks, such as passage points at dams. Prized for
ceremonial, subsistence and commercial uses, these important uses have
all suffered from predation's impact. Some fish buyers won't purchase
damaged fish and the value can drop as much as 50 percent. The growing
level of sea lion predation can devastate the hard earned the value of
the tribal commercial fishery.
Impacts by predation to juvenile salmon, while sometimes less
visible, are no less harmful to tribal families by the alarming numbers
of juvenile salmon killed.
marine mammals--a growing management concern
California Sea Lions, Steller sea lions and other marine mammals
historically had a very limited presence in the Columbia River with a
functional and mutually respectful relationship between them and tribal
people. Tribal members harvested them for their skins and oils. Tribal
members also killed marine mammals that were disruptive to fishing
activities. Though well intentioned, the MMPA has made the river more
hospitable to opportunistic sea lions and less hospitable to salmon,
lamprey and sturgeon survival by limiting traditional and modern
management methods. The sea lions have learned to profit from the
abnormal situation by preying on salmon and other treaty protected
resources particularly at vulnerable areas like Bonneville Dam. They
are cunning, proven by their ability to outmaneuver the exclusion
devices placed in the fish ladders and their ability to ride the
shipping barges through the dam's locks. While we admit that the
Creator intended a place for them, it doesn't lessen the problem they
are causing by exploiting an unnatural environment.
There was a time when a portion of a state fishing license fees
were used to manage the sea lion population to reduce their predation.
Historically, when sea lions made it up to those parts of the river
where the dams now sit, they would be shot and they would be bled out
in the river. Sea lions were shrewd enough to understand that this was
an area they needed to avoid. Things have changed for the worse now
because man has changed the nature of the river. Now, returning salmon
must pass artificial dams and go up man-made cement fish ladders to get
upstream. They are trapped by sea lions who understand the salmon must
go right by them if they hang out close to the ladders. We ask our
friends in the animal rights community to understand that we are
dealing with basic nature when the ability of endangered salmon to
defend themselves has been so compromised.
Some people claim that placing blame on the sea lions is a ruse to
divert attention away from the dams' impact on salmon survival. If they
understood our dilemma, they would clearly recognize that attention is
actually being drawn to Bonneville Dam where a growing number of sea
lions have learned to exploit an artificial situation to
disproportionately impact depressed salmon runs. Increasing numbers of
sea lions have been documented returning year after year. In the last 5
years, over a hundred animals have learned to prey on threatened and
endangered spring Chinook as they converge on the entrances to the
dam's fish ladder.
Significant predation at the dam is rising, evidenced by the number
of salmonids eaten by sea lions. But growing data sets paint a
troubling picture of increasing depredation throughout the lower
Columbia River. We have previously estimated that 18 percent to 25
percent of the spring Chinook salmon run are lost to sea lions annually
between Bonneville Dam and the mouth of the river, but based on recent
NOAA research, it could be as high as 45 percent of the run. In
addition, impacts by sea lions are disproportionally distributed on the
early portion of the run. During March and April there are many days
when the take by sea lions exceeds the fish count in the ladders. We
are concerned that these early returning fish may be from stocks that
are most at risk of extinction.
Every year a few sea lions pass through the Bonneville Dam lock.
These animals damage fishing gear and steal salmon from our fishers.
Some California sea lions have spent over 4 years in the Bonneville
pool. Studies show that the farther upstream the sea lions travel, the
higher percentage of salmon and steelhead in their diet. Additional
studies indicate that salmon comprise 10-30 percent of their diet. The
latest available sampling data beginning in 2001, shows that each year
slightly over 30 percent of the spring salmon passing though
Bonneville's fish ladder have suffered some form of injury caused by
marine mammals. Those salmon that escape with harsh wounds are less
likely to survive their upstream journey and unlikely to successfully
spawn. Tribal and non-tribal fishermen who harvest these injured fish
cannot fully utilize them for their subsistence, sport and commercial
value.
Facts on Marine Mammal Predation in the Columbia River:

An unprecedented explosion of pinnipeds in the lower
Columbia River has caused spikes in predation levels of
salmon despite years of hazing and cumbersome removal
authority;

California sea lions are completely recovered and
expanding, current population estimate is >325,000 with an
annual growth rate of 9.2 percent;

The large and growing surplus of male Sea lions, far in
excess of the reproductive needs of the population, is
expanding their range in reaction to increasing salmon and
smelt runs;

Sea lions killed over 8,474 salmon within \1/4\ mile of
Bonneville Dam (146 miles from the Ocean) in 2015, a
staggering 140 percent increase over the previous 12-year
average;

California Sea Lions have routinely passed through the
locks into the Bonneville Pool, 146 miles from the mouth of
the Columbia, some residing there for over 4 years;

The aggressive feeding behavior threatens the safety of
sport, commercial and tribal fishermen trying to land
catch;

NOAA Fisheries estimated an unaccounted for loss of 45
percent (99,000 fish) of the 2014 Spring Chinook Salmon run
between the estuary and Bonneville Dam, this loss is over
four times greater than in 2010 when the losses were
estimated at only 10 percent;

Tribal ceremonial, subsistence and commercial fisheries
experience unique and unmitigated damage from growing sea
lion predation; and

Anticipated downturns in future salmon runs due to the
present drought conditions would increase sea lion impacts
even more. Management tools are needed now to help address
this anticipated impact and attempts to address California
Sea Lion predation under the existing constraints of the
MMPA have been inadequate and hampered by protracted
litigation by special interests exploiting ambiguities in
the law.

avian predation
Juvenile salmonids and juvenile lamprey in the Columbia River Basin
are subject to extensive predation by fish eating (i.e. piscivorous)
birds throughout their entire migration route. In the Basin, there are
over a dozen species of birds whose diet is primarily fish, but the key
predators are double-crested cormorants, Caspian terns, several gull
species, and in some areas, white pelicans. Birds are predators on
juvenile salmonids and juvenile lamprey during the entire course of the
out-migration, but dam tailraces and the estuary are the areas of
greatest impact. Annual losses in the estuary are staggering. During
the last 4 years of record keeping (2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013), losses
ranged from 17 to 21 million smolts annually by a double-crested
cormorant colony on East Sand Island, near the mouth of the Columbia
River. This equates to approximately 20 percent of the entire out-
migration of all juvenile salmonids each year. Many of these fish are
wild and are listed as threatened or endangered under ESA.
Additionally, Caspian terns nesting on the same island, also
consumed an additional 3-5 million smolts annually during the same time
period. Ironically, both of these colonies are the largest for their
species in the entire world. Both species are common, with the Caspian
tern found throughout the world, while the double-crested cormorants is
a North American species with numbers in the hundreds of thousands.
Smaller colonies of double-crested cormorants, gulls and Caspian terns
nest upstream and eat well over an additional million smolts annually,
but with a greater per capita impact. For example, a small colony (
Develop a common metric for fish, bird and marine mammal
predation (i.e., adult equivalents) so that comparisons and
impacts can be properly assessed;

Investigate, monitor, evaluate and propose solutions to
habitat changes at Columbia River tributary confluences
where hydrologic modifications have resulted in increased
sediment deposition and potentially attracted predator
responses;

Investigate indirect food web effects of predation;

Apply active, adaptive management practices to predation
sources;

Persuade co-managers to prioritize salmon management in
anadromous waters and remove barriers to harvest of non-
native fish species;

Recognize the benefits of native fish communities and
balanced ecosystems;

Develop greater cross-agency cooperation and investigation
opportunities;

Place greater emphasis on seasonal mainstem and tributary-
based predation research and management of predatory non-
native fishes and avian predators, particularly during the
spring out-migration period;

Include ``several gull species, mergansers, and pelicans''
to the list of bird predators and include upstream and
tributary areas;

Support regional efforts by actions agencies to actively
manage populations of double crested cormorants and other
piscivorous birds with lethal control if habitat
modifications and dissuasion efforts are not successful in
the Columbia River estuary, as well as inland reaches of
the Basin to reduce losses of juvenile anadromous
salmonids; and

Work with co-managers to determine reasonable population
ceilings for piscivorous waterbirds and predatory non-
native fishes and reduce overall population sizes,
including lethal removal for all fish-eating birds and non-
native fishes that persist in boat restricted zones,
hatchery release points, low head irrigation diversion,
tributaries, overwintering habitat, and other areas where
temporal and species constraints bring juvenile salmon and
lamprey into proximity with predacious species.

In conclusion, the United States made many promises beginning in
1855 with our treaties and subsequently when the dams were constructed.
The treaty rights are meant to preserve our physical, cultural and
economic livelihood--the United States committed to protecting these
rights. We were further promised that any harm done to our fisheries
attributed to the dams would be taken care of--Bonneville Dam has
created an artificial situation the sea lions have learned to exploit.
We have run out of options and any new technology will not be available
in the near future to deal with the current dilemma.
We need a full suite of authorities and tools to deal with growing
depredation from marine mammals, growing bird colonies and freshwater
fish. We need timely solutions to protect our ceremonial, subsistence
and commercial harvests for salmon, lamprey and sturgeon.

Again, thank you for this opportunity to share our concerns and to
express our support for this legislation.

______

Dr. Fleming. OK, thank you, Mr. McCormack. Next up is Mr.
Stelle.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF WILL STELLE, REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR, WEST COAST
REGION, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, PORTLAND, OREGON

Mr. Stelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
members of the committee. My name is William Stelle, and I am
the Regional Administrator for NOAA Fisheries on the West
Coast. It is nice to be back here. I have a written statement,
which I would like to submit for the record, and I will try to
be disciplined and summarize my oral remarks quickly. Let me
offer several general observations, and then a little bit of a
sketch of current efforts on predation.
First, is predation a problem with the conservation and
recovery of listed salmonids on the West Coast? The answer is
yes, unequivocally. And we would welcome the opportunity to
work with you and your staff in fashioning legislative
strategies to strengthen our efforts to address the predation
problems.
Two, context matters a lot. So, if you think that predation
is the silver bullet, think again. It is not. It is one factor
of numerous factors, what we call limiting factors, for the
rebuilding of these salmonid runs. But it is only one. So, just
as we address it, we must also address the other factors, as
well.
The third major point is science matters. What do I mean by
that? What I mean by that is, at the end of the day there are
different opinions about whether or not and how to address
predation problems, like other things in life. And as we engage
the effort to control predation, we must do so based upon data,
quantitative data if possible, so that we can demonstrate the
character of the problem, we can quantify the problem, and we
are also prepared to demonstrate whether or not and to what
extent control measures are working or not working. So, science
matters, investing in the science infrastructure to enable
success is really important.
Then, my final comment would be understand that
partnerships in this effort are also essential. This is not
just a National Marine Fisheries thing. The states are deeply
involved, other Federal agencies are deeply involved, tribes
are deeply involved, and the private sector is deeply involved.
Building and fostering the partnerships for success in
predation control programs is essential.
Let me just sketch a little bit of the predation efforts
underway right now, and we can delve into more details during
questions.
First of all, as Leo just outlined to you, in the Columbia
Basin predation of lots of different sources is a major
problem. Bird predation, fish predation, and marine mammal sea
lion predation, all three are significant sources, and are
outlined in our recovery plans as major limiting factors. And
we, working with the Corps of Engineers, the Bureau of
Reclamation, the tribes, and the states of Washington, Oregon,
and Idaho, are instituting programs to address avian predation,
fish predation, and sea lion predation.
On sea lions in particular, we would welcome working with
the committee on ways to strengthen, streamline, and broaden
the management measures that we can bring to bear to manage
these burgeoning sea lion populations. It is a real problem.
Moving to the south, into the Central Valley--also of keen
interest to members of this committee--again, predation is a
major problem. Striped bass predation is a major problem. We
would welcome efforts with the California Department of Fish
and Wildlife, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the California
Department of Water Resources, to develop the data on the scope
and extent of the predation problem, to identify the hot spots
of where predation is most likely occurring, and then to
implement measures to reduce striped bass prey in those hot
spots.
So, we are open and welcome to efforts to pursue and
strengthen predation control programs where they occur, on a
scientific basis.
With that, I will welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stelle follows:]
Prepared Statement of Will Stelle, Regional Administrator, West Coast
Region, National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce
introduction
Good morning Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the subcommittee. My name is Will Stelle, and I am the Regional
Administrator for the West Coast Region of the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), within the U.S. Department of Commerce. Thank
you for inviting NMFS to testify before you today on predation of
Pacific salmon on the West Coast.
The West Coast Region of NMFS is responsible for the stewardship of
our Nation's living marine resources and their habitats off the coasts
and in the watersheds of Washington, Oregon, California, and Idaho.
These responsibilities cover 317,690 square miles of the eastern
Pacific Ocean's California Current Ecosystem, over 7,000 miles of tidal
coastline, and 176,000 acres of freshwater and estuarine habitats.
The management priority of the West Coast Region is two-fold: to
maximize productivity and sustainability of fisheries and fishing
communities through effective fisheries management and to recover and
conserve protected species and their habitats. The responsibility of
the Region, and the agency, to protect, conserve, and recover the
Pacific's threatened and endangered anadromous and marine species is
found in our authorities under the U.S. Endangered Species Act (ESA)
and the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA).
Congress passed the ESA on December 28, 1973, recognizing that the
natural heritage of the United States was of ``aesthetic, ecological,
educational, recreational, and scientific value to our Nation and its
people.'' It was understood that, without protection, many of our
Nation's living resources would become extinct. NMFS has ESA
jurisdiction over marine and anadromous species, including West Coast
salmon and steelhead. Under the ESA, our responsibilities include
reviewing species' status to determine if listing is warranted,
developing protective regulations to conserve listed species,
designating critical habitat to protect the ecosystems upon which the
species depend, and developing and implementing recovery plans. These
recovery plans serve as a roadmap to bringing threatened and endangered
species to the point where ESA protections are no longer needed.

Section 4(a)(1) of the ESA specifies that NMFS shall determine
whether a species is threatened or endangered because of any of the
following five factors \1\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The ESA further requires that listing determinations be based
solely on the best scientific and commercial information available;
economic impacts are not considered in making species listing
determinations and are prohibited under the ESA.

1.  Present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of its habitat or range;

2.  Over-utilization of the species for commercial, recreational,
scientific, or educational purposes;

3.  Disease or predation;

4.  Inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms; and

5.  Other natural or man-made factors affecting its continued
existence.

The complex life cycle of Pacific salmon and steelhead
(Oncorhynchus sp.) spans freshwater streams and rivers, coastal
estuaries, and the great expanse of the California Current ocean
ecosystem. This complex life cycle and broad geographic range exposes
Pacific salmon and steelhead to a diversity of threats, including those
listed above. Many Pacific salmon and steelhead stocks have declined
substantially from their historic numbers and are now at a fraction of
their historical abundance. These declines collectively led to NMFS'
listing of 28 salmon and steelhead stocks in California, Idaho, Oregon,
and Washington under the ESA beginning in 1989.
We have recovery plans currently in place for 19 of the 28 listed
salmon and steelhead stocks, and plans for the remaining 9 are proposed
or under development. These recovery plans detail the factors leading
to the decline and limiting the recovery of each salmon and steelhead
stock, and they outline the site-specific actions that are necessary to
address each of these threats.
While the specific suite of factors leading to the decline of each
salmon and steelhead stock is unique, the list generally includes
overfishing, loss and degradation of freshwater and estuarine habitat,
hydropower development and blocked passage, poor ocean conditions, and
harmful hatchery practices. For some stocks, predation by resurgent
pinniped populations, bird colonies, as well as by thriving populations
of native and non-native fish species also poses a serious threat to
the stock's persistence and eventual recovery.
No single factor holds the key to recovering Pacific salmon and
steelhead stocks. Each factor, each threat, must be addressed and
reduced. As such, addressing sources of predation is a key component of
our strategy to recovering threatened and endangered Pacific salmon and
steelhead.
In the past two decades, NMFS has made targeted investments to
further understand the effect of predation on various Pacific salmon
and steelhead stocks to better inform our recommendations to address
this important and emergent threat. We are also executing the statutory
and regulatory authorities granted to us under the ESA and the MMPA to
take direct action to reduce specific sources of predation. Under
section 7 of the ESA, we work with other Federal Action Agencies on
projects to operationalize predation control efforts. In these cases,
NMFS is able to provide expertise in the design of predator control
programs, however, it is the responsibility of the Action Agencies to
carry out the programs in adherence with their Biological Opinions
(BiOps). NMFS has additionally coordinated with states and local
authorities to implement a hazing program under section 109 of the MMPA
to discourage depredation of salmon and steelhead by pinniped
populations. We have also authorized the lethal removal of individual
pinnipeds that have become habituated to predating on salmon at
Bonneville Dam in the Columbia River using our authority under section
120 of the MMPA.

The following sections detail a few examples of predation impacts
on Pacific salmon and steelhead on the West Coast and NMFS's efforts
underway to investigate or mitigate these impacts.
salmon predation in the columbia river estuary (washington/oregon)
A. Avian Predation Control

NMFS' 2008 BiOp on the Federal Columbia River Power System (FCRPS
BiOp) called for the investigation of avian predation in the Columbia
Basin by the FCRPS Action Agencies; primarily, the Army Corps of
Engineers (Corps). This investigation validated the finding in a
Caspian tern plan prepared in 2005 by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, NMFS and the Corps, which showed that Caspian terns were
responsible for consuming large numbers of juvenile steelhead and
Chinook salmon in the entirety of the Columbia basin. The investigation
called for by the 2008 BiOp found that, on average, Caspian terns were
consuming more than 5 million salmon and steelhead smolts per year. As
a result, the Corps has focused efforts on Caspian terns in its Inland
Avian Predator Management plan. Active implementation of the plan began
in 2014 with both active and passive dissuasion of terns from nesting
at two interior Columbia basin sites that once held up to 850 pairs.
Despite the plan's success in its initial year, in 2015, approximately
500 pairs of terns relocated themselves to a third new nesting site due
to extremely low Columbia River flows during the 2015 nesting season.
NMFS, along with the Action Agencies, expects that higher river flows
(and perhaps some active management of reservoir levels) in 2016 will
again help reduce the nesting area available at interior Columbia basin
nesting sites.
The goal of Action Agencies under the 2008 FCRPS BiOp in the lower
Columbia is to manage the tern population by limiting the colony on
East Sand Island to 3,125-4,375 nesting pairs in order to increase
juvenile Chinook salmon survival by 2 percent and steelhead survival by
3 percent. To accomplish this goal, the Corps has constructed alternate
nesting sites in a total of six lake basins in eastern and southern
Oregon and in San Francisco Bay to reduce the colony area on East Sand
Island to 1.0 acre in size. This reduction led to a relocation of birds
to alternate nesting sites outside the Columbia River Basin, yielding a
13 percent reduction in the number of turn breeding pairs on East Sand
Island between 2014 and 2015; however, a large number of non-nesting
terns remain in the estuary. NMFS expects that many of these remaining
birds will move to the constructed nesting sites outside the basin
during 2016 and beyond. A multi-agency Caspian Tern Adaptive Management
Team (led by the FCRPS Action Agencies with participation from multiple
Federal, state and tribal agencies, including NMFS) is in place to
assess the program as it moves forward.
The FCRPS Action Agencies (primarily, the Corps) are also managing
double-crested cormorants in the Columbia River estuary under the 2008
FCRPS BiOp to achieve increases in survival of yearling Chinook salmon
and steelhead of 1.1 percent and 3.5 percent, respectively. The
mechanism to achieve these survival increases has been to reduce the
number of cormorants nesting in the estuary from an annual population
of 13,500 pairs to an average of 5,380-5,939 nesting pairs. With a
depredation permit from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Corps
began actively reducing cormorant colony size by lethally removing
adult birds and oiling eggs in active nests in 2015 after completing
their Cormorant Management Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and
Record of Decision. A total of 2,324 adults were culled and 5,089 nests
were oiled in 2015 in strict adherence to the EIS' Management Plan. A
multi-agency Double-Crested Cormorant Adaptive Management Team (led by
the FCRPS Action Agencies with participation from multiple Federal,
state and tribal agencies, including NMFS) is in place to assess this
program as it moves forward.
In addition to control for these two specific avian predator
populations, all mainstem Columbia River dams have monitoring and
deterrence plans for avian predators that include some level of active
and passive dissuasion activities. Passive dissuasion is accomplished
through the deployment of avian wires in the shape of a canopy over
parts of the tailrace just below each dam. Active dissuasion includes
staff from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service who patrol the dams and fire long-range pyrotechnics
at avian predators in areas where they congregate. Five of the eight
mainstem FCRPS project dams also employ limited lethal removal of
specific problem birds as needed to reinforce their active dissuasion
methods. Project-by-project monitoring and deterrence plans are
contained in the Corps' annual Fish Passage Plan for the FCRPS (http://
www.nwd-wc.usace.army.mil/tmt/documents/fpp/index.html).
B. Piscine Predator Control

Some predatory fish species, such as the northern pikeminnow, are
native to the Pacific Northwest. The Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife estimated that in the early 1990s, this species consumed an
estimated 1.4 million juvenile salmonids in the John Day Reservoir
alone. In addition, large populations of non-native predatory fish
species such as smallmouth bass, northern walleye, and channel catfish
were planted in streams and lakes in the Pacific Northwest during the
last two centuries to enhance recreational fishing opportunities. A
U.S. Geological Survey biological study found that smallmouth bass
consumed about 2 percent of the juvenile spring Chinook and 7 percent
of the juvenile fall Chinook passing the Dalles Dam in 2002, and the
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) has reported
observations of large populations of channel catfish below the dams in
the Snake River and in the Yakima River.
Population control efforts executed by the states of Oregon and
Washington with respect to these predators to date have focused on
enhancement programs to increase recreational value of non-native
predatory fish and increase license sales. In addition, WDFW removed
size and daily limits for bass and walleye and daily limits for channel
catfish in the mainstem Columbia above McNary Dam beginning in 2013-
2014.
To address predatory fish control associated with projects
consulted on by NMFS under the ESA, Douglas County Public Utility
District (PUD) and Chelan County PUD have included an annual pikeminnow
removal program in their Habitat Conservation Plans for the Wells,
Rocky Reach, and Rock Island Hydroelectric Projects. Hook-and-line
techniques are employed for all three programs during the juvenile out-
migration season (April through July) and target fish in project
reservoirs larger than 9 inches. Annual catch varies, but averages
10,000 to 15,000 pikeminnow from the Wells; 25,000 to 35,000 from the
Rocky Reach; and 25,000 to 35,000 from the Rock Island Reservoir.
C. Pinniped Predator Control

Since the passage of the MMPA amendments in 1994, NMFS has been
devoting significant resources and partnering with affected parties to
better understand the problem of pinniped predation on at-risk stocks
on the West Coast, and to develop appropriate responses to relieve
impacts to coastal communities. A key component of NMFS' program is our
fiscal support of and collaboration on the research and monitoring of
West Coast pinniped populations and their impacts on specific
threatened and endangered salmon stocks in the Columbia-Snake River
Basin, and Puget Sound. A number of port authorities in California,
Oregon, and Washington have requested NMFS' assistance in addressing
their local pinniped predation issues. These ports include the
communities of: Monterrey in California; Gold Beach, Newport, and
Astoria in Oregon; and Ilwaco and Westport in Washington. NMFS staff
work closely with such communities to inform them of the statutory
authority to deter marine mammals under section 101(a)(4) of the MMPA
to ensure public safety, protect their gear, catch, and private
property. These techniques include removing and discouraging haul-out
locations on docks and jetties, implementing hazing programs to
discourage pinnipeds from predating on fish and interacting with
fisheries, and reducing attractants such as through disposal programs
for fish carcasses. NMFS assistance includes convening workshops to
understand the challenges facing local anglers and communities, and to
educate local jurisdictions of the likely impacts if they do not
exercise the authorities available to them in addressing this problem.
NMFS is very concerned about the impact robust populations of
pinnipeds in the Columbia River and elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest
are having on ESA-listed salmon and steelhead stocks. For example, from
2002-2015, California sea lions consumed an estimated total of 45,294
salmonids within \1/4\ mile of Bonneville Dam. To give perspective on
this, total salmonid passage at Bonneville Dam from 2002-2015 was
estimated at 2,539,926 fish from January 1 through May 31: the period
during which pinnipeds are normally present in the vicinity of
Bonneville Dam.
With passage of the MMPA amendments of 1994, Congress recognized
the limits of non-lethal deterrence of pinnipeds as a means to protect
at-risk, threatened, and endangered salmonids along the West Coast.
These amendments included MMPA Section 120, which allows states to
apply for authority to lethally remove certain, individually
identifiable pinnipeds to protect salmonids.
In accordance with the procedures in Section 120 of the MMPA, the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and the ESA, NMFS authorized
in 2008 and 2012 the states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho to remove
or kill individual California sea lions that they determined to be
having a significant negative impact on five populations of ESA-listed
salmon and steelhead in the Columbia River. Combined, the three states'
authorizations allow up to 92 animals to be removed per year. Since
receiving removal authority in 2008, the states have permanently
removed (to captivity or euthanized) 102 California sea lions.
Preliminary data suggest that our MMPA Section 120 program has been
successful overall in reducing the predation rate on salmonids in the
immediate vicinity of Bonneville Dam. For example, the Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife estimates that the Section 120 program
has prevented the loss of 15,000-20,000 salmonids at Bonneville Dam
since its inception. However, despite the benefits of the program, the
number of California sea lions (and predation rates on salmonids) have
steadily increased in the past 3 years. Research conducted by NOAA
Fisheries' Northwest Fisheries Science Center estimating survival of
adult spring/summer Chinook salmon from the Columbia River estuary to
Bonneville Dam from 2010 through 2015 suggests that the weighted mean
annual survival (adjusted for harvest, detection efficiency at
Bonneville Dam, and gear-associated mortality) was 90 percent, 87
percent, 88 percent, 73 percent, 59 percent, and 72 percent,
respectively. With known and assumed sources of mortality accounted
for,\2\ this research suggests that the remaining unaccounted for fish
are lost to pinniped predation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Natural mortality is generally estimated to be between 2 and 4
percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pinniped predation has also expanded to the Willamette River, where
a minimum of 27 and 32 individual California sea lions in 2014 and
2015, respectively, consumed an estimated 5,141 salmonids below
Willamette Falls. It is estimated that this represents approximately 10
to 13 percent and 8 to 10 percent of the potential escapement above
Willamette Falls of ESA-listed winter-run steelhead and spring-run
Chinook in 2014 and 2015, respectively.
Effective implementation of Section 120 of the MMPA has been
challenging at times, and it could benefit from minor targeted
improvements. NMFS has previously provided testimony to this committee
articulating our perspective on suggested improvements. This discussion
is most recently detailed in testimony provided by Mr. Barry Thom,
Deputy Regional Administrator of the West Coast Region of NMFS on July
15, 2015.
salmon predation in the central valley, california
A study published in 2014 by NMFS' Southwest Fisheries Science
Center (SWFSC) found that annual overall survival of out-migrating
late-fall-run Chinook salmon smolts in the Sacramento River was between
3-16 percent, which is low when compared to survival of salmon in other
West Coast rivers including the Snake (27.5 percent survival) and
Yakima (28 percent survival), two rivers that have much longer
migration corridors. These low survival percentages likely result from
a combination of threats, including low flows, degraded habitat and
high densities of both non-native (i.e., striped bass, smallmouth bass,
and largemouth bass) and native (e.g., pikeminnow) predatory fish
species.
Management actions for improving juvenile salmon survival through
the Sacramento River and Delta are described in detail in our Central
Valley Chinook Salmon and Steelhead Recovery Plan (Recovery Plan).
Specific restoration actions in the Recovery Plan are implemented
through agency and stakeholder partnerships and through individual
competitive grant opportunities. In addition, our 2009 Biological
Opinion for the Long-term Operations of the Central Valley Project and
State Water Project (OCAP BiOp) specifies that certain actions are the
responsibility of the Action Agencies to execute. In the case of the
OCAP BiOp, Action Agencies refer to the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
(Reclamation) in coordination with the California Department of Water
Resources (DWR). A few of the key strategies are outlined below.
A. Restoring Juvenile Salmonid Rearing Habitat

The vast majority of historic floodplain and wetland habitat in the
Central Valley no longer exists or is no longer accessible for juvenile
salmonids. Restoring that habitat and access to it is expected to
decrease the risk of predation of juvenile salmonids by other fish
species because: (1) they will have access to more food, allowing them
to grow faster and thereby improve their ability to avoid predation;
and (2) the restored wetlands and floodplains will increase habitat
complexity and predator refuge areas. Restoring juvenile rearing
habitat is a key action in Recovery Plan. In addition, our OCAP BiOP
specifies that the Action Agencies will restore 17,000-20,000 acres of
floodplain rearing habitat for juvenile winter-run and spring-run
Chinook and for Central Valley steelhead in the lower Sacramento River
Basin.
B. Management of CVP/SWP Operations Conditions During Winter and Early
Spring

NMFS and its Federal and state agency partners (Reclamation, DWR,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
Wildlife) are working with Delta water users including the Northern
California Water Association to pursue four related activities to
understand, manage, and reduce the exposure of juvenile winter-run
Chinook salmon to negative flows and increased predation in the central
and south Delta:

1.  Continued partnership and support of the Collaborative Adaptive
Management Team (CAMT) and the Salmon Scoping Team;

2.  Installation of barriers at Georgiana Slough and other key
junctions;

3.  Improved enhanced particle tracking modeling; and

4.  Real-time salmon monitoring and water export management in the
Delta.

Implementing these activities is expected to improve juvenile
winter-run Chinook salmon survival by expanding our knowledge of and
ability to manage Delta conditions and impacts to ESA species;
minimizing the distribution of juveniles from the Sacramento River into
the interior Delta; and minimizing juvenile salmonid exposure to
reverse flows and predation if they do enter the interior Delta. Of
these items, installation of barriers at Georgiana Slough is a
requirement of the Action Agencies in our 2009 OCAP BiOp.
C. Modifying Predation ``Hot Spots''

The presence of man-made structures in the Sacramento River and
Delta likely contributes to increased predation levels of salmonids by
other fish species in specific areas where predators congregate in
large numbers--termed ``hot spots.'' Red Bluff Diversion Dam in the
Sacramento River was one such hot spot until the dam gates were
permanently removed by the Action Agencies in 2012 per our 2009 OCAP
BiOp. Removing the dam gates greatly improved the flow conditions at
the structure in the favor of juvenile salmonids, making them less
vulnerable to predation at that site. Consequently, predator densities
at the dam decreased after the gates were removed.
D. Isolating Striped Bass within Clifton Court Forebay

Survival of juvenile salmonids through Clifton Court Forebay, on
the State Water Project in Contra Costa County, California, is
extremely low due to an abundance of striped bass. To fulfill an action
required by the 2009 OCAP BiOp to improve juvenile salmonid survival,
DWR will this year be initiating a capture and relocation program for
striped bass in Clifton Court Forebay. The striped bass will be
released in an isolated section of the forebay, eliminating their
access to juvenile salmonids in the forebay's open waters. This effort
is intended to improve salmonid survival while also enhancing striped
bass fishing opportunities in the isolated area.
conclusion
Pacific salmon are of profound importance to healthy ecosystems,
cultures, and economies, making their recovery a priority for the
Region and the agency as a whole. NMFS has made great progress in
recent years toward completion of high-quality salmon and steelhead
recovery plans that provide a roadmap to conservation of these listed
icons of the Pacific West Coast.
Recovering Pacific salmon and steelhead populations will take
decades to achieve, but should ultimately provide long-term economic
stability, allow the United States to honor its commitment to tribal
reserved fishing rights, and afford maximum regulatory flexibility.
NMFS remains committed to investing in Pacific salmon and steelhead
recovery in a way that addresses all threats to the species, including
predation, in order to ensure our progress toward recovery remains on
track.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide testimony today on
this important topic. I appreciate the subcommittee's time and
attention to these important issues and I look forward to working with
you further. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record by Rep. Jim Costa to Mr. Will Stelle
Question 1. NMFS has in the past requested that the California Fish
and Game Commission abolish its striped bass fishing regulations in
order to reduce striped bass predation on native fish, including
Chinook salmon (both by appearing in front of the Commission and
sending written requests). Do you continue believe that this would be
advisable? Are you prepared to renew your request or support such a
request made by others?

Answer. As reflected in the Final Central Valley Chinook Salmon and
Steelhead Recovery Plan (2014), NMFS believes that an effective
strategy for improving juvenile salmonid survival includes restoring
rearing habitat at a large scale, providing protective flows during
juvenile out-migration, minimizing the exposure of juvenile salmonids
to areas of high predation (e.g., non-physical barriers to deter
juvenile salmonids produced in the Sacramento River from being pulled
south into the central and south Delta), modifying predation ``hot
spots'' so conditions at those sites are more in the favor of juvenile
salmonids, and conducting research to expand our knowledge of and
ability to manage predation impacts on juvenile salmonids. With respect
to research, the recovery plan calls for studies to quantify predation
and evaluate whether predator control actions (e.g., fishery management
or directed removal programs) can be effective at minimizing predation
on juvenile salmonids.

Our efforts in 2010 to modify striped bass fishing regulations were
developed with our partners at the California Department of Fish and
Wildlife (CDFW), as striped bass is a state fishery managed by the
California Fish and Game Commission. We continue to work with our
partners at CDFW to identify actions to enhance salmonid recovery,
including (as stated above) efforts to reduce predation by non-native
predatory fish species. We stand ready to support the state of
California with any future considerations to address non-native
predation, potentially including modifications to state fishing
regulations. Any future efforts considered would be based on our best
available scientific information and likely include an adaptive
management component in order to address scientific uncertainties.

Question 2. The threats assessments for spring-run Chinook salmon,
winter-run Chinook salmon, and steelhead that accompany your 2014
California Central Valley Salmon and Steelhead Recovery Plan rank
predation in the highest stressor category for each species. What
specific steps has NMFS taken to reduce predation effects in the
species?

Answer. To address the important threat of predation on juvenile
salmonids in the Central Valley, we are: (1) executing the statutory
and regulatory authorities granted to us under the Endangered Species
Act (ESA) to require and influence direct action to reduce predation;
(2) collaborating with numerous agency and non-agency partners to
identify and implement predation minimization projects; and (3)
conducting research through our Southwest Fisheries Science Center
(SWFSC) to further understand juvenile salmonid movement and survival
to better inform recommendations to reduce predation.

Under section 7 of the ESA, our 2009 Biological Opinion for the
Long-term Operations of the Central Valley Project and State Water
Project (OCAP BiOp) required that the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
(Reclamation) in coordination with the California Department of Water
Resources (DWR) take actions that would improve the survival and growth
of juvenile salmonids. Multiple actions required under the OCAP BiOp
are expected to minimize the effect of predation on juvenile salmonids.

Additionally, NMFS prioritized and completed a programmatic section
7 consultation in order to help expedite Sacramento River salmonid
rearing habitat restoration projects being implemented through the
Central Valley Project Improvement Act Fish Program. These projects
(some of which have been completed and others that are in the planning
stages) are intended to increase the amount and diversity of salmonid
rearing habitat in the Central Valley, which is expected to result in
faster juvenile salmonid growth rates and reduced vulnerability to
predation.

In addition, NMFS is currently partnering with the Golden Gate
Salmon Association and CDFW to work with the city of Redding to reduce
light impacts at the Sundial Bridge over the Sacramento River in order
to minimize predation on juvenile salmonids. NMFS also regularly
provides engineering support to help design or modify structures in a
way that minimizes predation opportunities for striped bass and other
predators.

Question 3. Do you believe that spring-run and winter-run Chinook
salmon can be recovered without addressing predation by non-native
black bass and striped bass? If not, what steps is NMFS prepared to
take to address the issue?

Answer. Although predation is one of several key threats that will
need to be addressed before spring-run and winter-run Chinook salmon
can be recovered, as stated in our testimony, no single factor holds
the key to recovering Pacific salmon and steelhead stocks. Each factor,
each threat, must be addressed and reduced.

Addressing sources of predation is a key component of our strategy
to recovering threatened and endangered Pacific salmon and steelhead,
but it is not the only effort we are taking to restore these
populations. NMFS has made great progress in recent years toward
completion of high-quality salmon and steelhead recovery plans that
provide a roadmap to conservation of these listed icons of the West
Coast. Our Final Central Valley Chinook Salmon and Steelhead Recovery
Plan contains a suite of actions aimed at reducing juvenile mortality
and lays out specific objectives for recovering the species. In
addition, NMFS recently announced our Species in the Spotlight program,
which highlights winter-run Chinook as one of eight most at-risk
endangered species nationwide. As part of the Species in the Spotlight
effort, NMFS has released a Sacramento River winter-run Chinook
Priority Action Plan, which contains a suite of actions NMFS and our
partners can take in the next 5 years to promote species recovery,
including improved temperature management of Shasta Reservoir,
restoration of key spawning and rearing habitat, reintroduction to
historic habitat and actions to improve through Delta survival of
juveniles.

With respect specifically to non-native predation impacts, NMFS is
taking multiple steps in order to execute a predation minimization
strategy that includes restoring rearing habitat at a large scale,
providing protective flows during juvenile out-migration, minimizing
the exposure of juvenile salmonids to areas of high predation (e.g.,
non-physical barriers to deter juvenile salmonids produced in the
Sacramento River from being pulled south into the central and south
Delta), modifying predation ``hot spots'' so conditions at those sites
are more in the favor of juvenile salmonids, and conducting research to
expand our knowledge of and ability to manage predation impacts on
juvenile salmonids.

Question 4. Results of juvenile salmon survival studies in the
south Delta and lower San Joaquin River have shown consistent high
levels of mortality (>95 percent) for juveniles migrating through the
Delta over the past decade. There is speculation that predation by
largemouth bass, striped bass, and catfish is a significant factor
contributing to the high mortality rates.

4a) What is NMFS doing to better characterize the importance of
predation mortality in the Delta on juvenile salmonid survival?

Answer. NMFS has been working for several years with DWR and CDFW
to study dynamics of predation on Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta
salmonids and to evaluate predation by non-native fish and birds on
juvenile steelhead in rivers and lagoons on California's central coast.
This work has included striped bass studies and potential removal
methods for use in the Pajaro River and the Carmel River lagoon. Our
recent focus on predation in the Delta and elsewhere in the Central
Valley was triggered by observations of unexpectedly high and localized
areas of mortality, coming from tagging studies conducted annually
since 2008. In 2016, with funding from CDFW, NMFS SWFSC scientists will
investigate the distribution, abundance and habitat associations of
significant predators of juvenile salmon and identify areas of high
predation mortality. Results of this study will give insight into
potential management actions that could reduce predator impacts on
juvenile salmon.

4b) What is NMFS doing to determine where predation mortality is
greatest?

Answer. In collaboration with the University of California-Davis,
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and CDFW, NMFS has been
tagging juvenile salmon with acoustic transmitters and monitoring their
movement and survival from rivers through the Delta and into the ocean
since January 2007. This monitoring has identified a variety of areas
where predation is especially high, and the data are being used to
develop a model of migration and survival that will allow us to examine
how water project operations (including physical and non-physical
barriers) influence survival rates by altering salmonid migration paths
and fish residence times in the Delta.

4c) How do environmental conditions such as San Joaquin River flow
and SWP/CVP exports affect the vulnerability of juvenile salmonids to
predation?

Answer. While it is clear that high flows are associated with high
survival of salmonids, and low flows are associated with low survival,
incremental flow adjustments may not have corresponding incremental
effects on salmonid survival because flow is probably not directly
influencing predation on salmonids in a linear, straightforward way.
Depending on the time scale of interest, flow can affect the behavior,
activity, and distribution of predators, salmon, and alternative prey
throughout their habitats.

Predation is an important proximate cause of low salmon survival,
but the predator-prey interactions happen in an environment that is
strongly influenced by current and historical management actions, such
as channelization, bank armoring, highly altered hydrographic
conditions, numerous introduced species, including piscivorous fish,
various other fish prey species, and vegetation, etc. Thus, the context
matters.

Below are some key citations to support the general scientific
understanding about the relationship between flow and predation. More
detail and citations can be provided, if desired.

FLOW AND PREDATION CITATIONS

High salmonid survival is associated with high flows, as
shown in coded-wire-tag and acoustic tag survival studies.

--  Newman, K.B. and Brandes, P.L. (2010). Hierarchical
modeling of juvenile Chinook salmon survival as a function of
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta water exports. North American
Journal of Fisheries Management, 30(1), 157-169.

--  Newman, K.B. (2003). Modelling paired release-recovery
data in the presence of survival and capture heterogeneity with
application to marked juvenile salmon. Statistical Modelling,
3(3), 157-177.

--  Michel, C.J., Ammann, A.J., Lindley, S.T., et al. (2015).
Chinook salmon out-migration survival in wet and dry years in
California's Sacramento River. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences, 72(11), 1749-1759.

Salmon returns are often higher after periods of high
flows during juvenile migrations. (This is clearly observed
in escapement data, but it has also been shown
statistically.)

--  Speed, T. (1993). Modelling and managing a salmon
population. Pages 267-292 in V. Turkman and K.F. Barnett,
editors. Statistics for the environment. J. Wiley and Sons, New
York.

High (natural) flows often are associated with high
turbidity, which reduces the vulnerability of prey to
visual predators.

--  Gregory, R.S. and Levings, C.D. (1998). Turbidity reduces
predation on migrating juvenile Pacific salmon. Transactions of
the American Fisheries Society, 127(2), 275-285.

Juvenile salmon migrate faster when flows are high, which
may reduce their exposure time to predators.

--  Smith, S.G., Muir, W.D., Hockersmith, E.E., et al.
(2003). Influence of river conditions on survival and travel
time of Snake River subyearling fall Chinook salmon. North
American Journal of Fisheries Management, 23(3), 939-961.

--  Connor, W.P., Burge, H.L., Yearsley, J.R., et al. (2003).
Influence of flow and temperature on survival of wild
subyearling fall Chinook salmon in the Snake River. North
American Journal of Fisheries Management, 23(2), 362-375.

--  Connor, W.P., Steinhorst, R.K. and Burge, H.L. (2003).
Migrational behavior and seaward movement of wild subyearling
fall Chinook salmon in the Snake River. North American Journal
of Fisheries Management, 23(2), 414-430.

--  Michel, C.J., Ammann, A.J., Chapman, E.D., et al. (2013).
The effects of environmental factors on the migratory movement
patterns of Sacramento River yearling late-fall run Chinook
salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha). Environmental Biology of
Fishes, 96(2-3), 257-271.

--  Anderson, J.J., Gurarie, E., and Zabel, R.W. (2005). Mean
free-path length theory of predator-prey interactions:
application to juvenile salmon migration. Ecological Modelling,
186(2), 196-211.

High flows (if high enough) inundate floodplains where
salmonid growth and survival conditions are better.

--  Sommer, T.R., Nobriga, M.L., Harrell, W.C., et al.
(2001). Floodplain rearing of juvenile Chinook salmon: evidence
of enhanced growth and survival. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences, 58(2), 325-333.

4d) Can the San Joaquin River fall-run Chinook salmon population
remain self-sustaining in light of the high levels of juvenile
mortality?

Answer. San Joaquin River fall Chinook (SJRFC) is not listed under
the ESA, but is managed by NMFS, in conjunction with the Pacific
Fishery Management Council (PFMC) and state of California, under the
authority of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management
Act (MSA). The PFMC's Pacific Coast Salmon Fishery Management Plan
(FMP) and associated documents provide more information on the status
of the stock and how ocean fisheries that affect that stock are
managed. SJRFC is one of three stocks in the Central Valley fall
Chinook complex. Because there is less information for SJRFC,
Sacramento River fall Chinook is used as the indicator stock for the
larger stock complex. Additional information related to how the stocks
are managed is provided in Question 4e (below).

4e) Although fall-run Chinook salmon have not been listed for
protection under the Federal Endangered Species Act, what is the
responsibility and authority of NMFS to address management issues such
as predator control under the provisions of Essential Fish Habitat or
other authority given the commercial importance of fall-run Chinook
salmon?

Answer. As discussed in question 4d (above), NMFS manages SRFC via
its authority under the MSA. NMFS monitors the status of the stock and
manages ocean fisheries that affect the stock to insure that it is
neither overfished or subject to overfishing. Although predation on the
stock is not assessed by NMFS directly, it is one of the many sources
of mortality that is accounted for implicitly as NMFS monitors spawning
escapement and compares it to the conservation objective for the
stock's management (contained in the Pacific Coast Salmon FMP). The
record of escapements for SRFC and SJRFC are available in the PFMC's
stock assessment documents (Tables B1 and B2 in http://
www.pcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/
Review_of_2015_Salmon_Fisheries_FullDocument.pdf).

The MSA and the Pacific Coast Salmon FMP provide additional
protection for SRFC by considering the effects of actions to Essential
Fish Habitat (EFH). The MSA established a requirement for Federal
agencies to consult with the NMFS on actions that may adversely affect
EFH, and for NMFS to provide EFH Conservation Recommendations to
Federal agencies to avoid, minimize, mitigate, or otherwise offset
adverse effects to EFH. [Under the regulations implementing the EFH
provisions of the MSA, EFH is defined as ``those waters and substrate
necessary to fish for spawning, breeding, feeding, or growth to
maturity,'' and necessary is defined as the ``habitat required to
support a sustainable fishery and the managed species' contribution to
a healthy ecosystem.'' An adverse effect is defined as ``any impact
that reduces the quality and/or quantity of EFH.'']

Although compliance with NMFS' EFH Conservation Recommendations is
not mandatory, the Federal action agency must provide a written
response within 30 days that either describes the measures the agency
proposes to avoid, minimize, or offset the impact of the activity, or
explains the reasons for not following the recommendations. In
addition, Regional Fishery Management Councils and NMFS are required to
review the EFH provisions of FMPs and revise or amend them as warranted
based on the best available information at least every 5 years. The
most recent EFH revisions for the Pacific Coast Salmon FMP were made in
2014.

4f) What management actions is NMFS planning to implement to help
reduce predation mortality at specific predation hot spots and on a
broader regional scale?

Answer. As stated in Question 3 (above), NMFS is using its
authorities and partnerships to pursue a predation minimization
strategy that includes restoring rearing habitat at a large scale,
providing protective flows during juvenile out-migration, minimizing
the exposure of juvenile salmonids to areas of high predation (e.g.,
non-physical barriers to deter juvenile salmonids produced in the
Sacramento River from being pulled south into the central and south
Delta), modifying predation ``hot spots'' so conditions at those sites
are more in the favor of juvenile salmonids, and conducting research to
expand our knowledge of and ability to manage predation impacts on
juvenile salmonids.

NMFS' role under section 7 of the ESA is to work with Federal
action agencies on projects to operationalize predator control efforts.
NMFS provides the action agencies with technical assistance and
expertise on the design of such programs. Under the 2009 OCAP BiOp, the
action agencies (Reclamation, in partnership with DWR) removed the
gates at Red Bluff Diversion Dam in 2012 to reduce predator
congregation in the area. Removing the dam gates greatly improved the
flow conditions at the structure in the favor of juvenile salmonids,
making them less vulnerable to predation at that site. Consequently,
predator densities at the dam decreased after the gates were removed.

This year, DWR will be initiating a capture and relocation program
for striped bass in Clifton Court Forebay to fulfill another action
required by the NMFS 2009 OCAP BiOp to improve juvenile salmonid
survival. As you know, survival of juvenile salmonids through Clifton
Court Forebay, on the State Water Project in Contra Costa County,
California, is extremely low due to an abundance of striped bass. As
part of DWR's effort this year, the striped bass will be released in an
isolated section of the forebay, eliminating their access to juvenile
salmonids in the forebay's open waters. This effort is intended to
improve salmonid survival while also enhancing striped bass fishing
opportunities in the isolated area.

Question 5. Several years ago the California Department of Fish and
Wildlife recommended that the California Fish and Game Commission adopt
changes to striped bass recreational harvest limits in the Delta and
rivers that would promote greater harvest of adult striped bass thereby
reducing the abundance of one of the major predatory fish impacting
juvenile salmon and steelhead survival. NMFS supported the proposed
management changes.

5a) What other management actions is NMFS considering to reduce
predation mortality?

Answer. As stated in Question 1 (above), NMFS' efforts in 2010 to
modify striped bass fishing regulations were developed with our
partners at the CDFW, as striped bass is a state fishery managed by the
California Fish and Game Commission. We continue to work with our
partners at CDFW to identify actions to enhance salmonid recovery
including efforts to reduce predation by non-native predatory fish
species. We stand ready to support the state of California with any
future considerations to address non-native predation, potentially
including modifications to state fishing regulations. Any future
efforts considered would be based on our best available scientific
information and likely include an adaptive management component in
order to address scientific uncertainties.

NMFS is otherwise using its authorities and partnerships to pursue
a predation minimization strategy that includes restoring rearing
habitat at a large scale, providing protective flows during juvenile
out-migration, minimizing the exposure of juvenile salmonids to areas
of high predation (e.g., non-physical barriers to deter juvenile
salmonids produced in the Sacramento River from being pulled south into
the central and south Delta), modifying predation ``hot spots'' so
conditions at those sites are more in the favor of juvenile salmonids,
and conducting research to expand our knowledge of and ability to
manage predation impacts on juvenile salmonids.

5b) In the Pacific Northwest, bounties have been placed on
predatory fish such as pikeminnow. Has that program on the Columbia
River proven to be successful in reducing predation mortality?

Answer. The northern pikeminnow bounty program, funded by
Bonneville Power Administration, has a goal of maintaining an
exploitation rate of 10 to 20 percent on fish 9 inches or longer.\1\ A
recent evaluation \2\ indicates that, as a result of this program,
pikeminnow predation on juvenile salmon has declined by about 40
percent, saving 3 to 5 million juvenile salmon annually that would
otherwise have been eaten by this native predator.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Northern pikeminnow are a relatively long-lived species, often
taking 4 to 6 years to reach a length of 9 inches. Smaller fish (
9 inches)
feed primarily on fish, including juvenile salmon, and crayfish.
\2\ BPA, COE, and USBR. 2014. 2014 Annual Progress Report, Section
2, pg 71.

5c) Is NMFS considering a similar action for the Sacramento and San
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joaquin Rivers and Delta?

Answer. NMFS is not currently considering recommending bounties on
predatory fish in the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and Delta. We
stand ready to support the state of California, CDFW and the California
Fish and Game Commission with any future considerations to address
predation, potentially including modifications to state fishing
regulations.

5d) Is NMFS considering recommending implementation of management
actions such as a mark-select fishery similar to that in Washington and
elsewhere as a method to improve survival of wild Central Valley
Chinook salmon?

Answer. NMFS is in the process of evaluating the risks and benefits
of a mark-selective salmon fishery off the CA coast. A report will be
prepared once results from this study are available.

5e) What other alternative management actions is NMFS investigating
or proposing to implement that would contribute to reducing juvenile
mortality and contributing to meeting recovery plan objectives?

Answer. As stated in Question 3 (above), NMFS has made great
progress in recent years toward completion of high-quality salmon and
steelhead recovery plans that provide a roadmap to conservation of
these listed icons of the Pacific West Coast. Our Final Central Valley
Chinook Salmon and Steelhead Recovery Plan contains a suite of actions
aimed at reducing juvenile mortality and lays out specific objectives
for recovering the species. In addition, NMFS recently announced our
Species in the Spotlight program, which highlights winter-run Chinook
as one of eight most at-risk endangered species nationwide. As part of
the Species in the Spotlight effort, NMFS has released a Sacramento
River winter-run Chinook Priority Action Plan, which contains a suite
of actions NMFS and our partners can take in the next 5 years to
promote species recovery, including improved temperature management of
Shasta Reservoir, restoration of key spawning and rearing habitat,
reintroduction to historic habitat and actions to improve through Delta
survival of juveniles.

Question 6. Results of monitoring juvenile winter-run Chinook
salmon production and survival in the Sacramento River upstream of Red
Bluff have shown evidence of high egg-fry mortality (approximately 95
percent mortality) in 2014 and 2015.

6a) What changes in management actions does NMFS anticipate will be
implemented in 2016 to improve juvenile winter-run Chinook salmon
abundance?

Answer. Sacramento River winter-run Chinook continue to be greatly
affected by California's extended drought, as evidenced by high egg-fry
mortality in 2014 and 2015. Winter-run Chinook is one of eight species
that NOAA is highlighting in our ``Species in the Spotlight''
Initiative, focusing our attention and resources to managing this
species carefully and hopefully reverse its trajectory toward
extinction. This species is important not only because it is the last
population of winter run in the Sacramento River, but also because its
population affects a host of activities in the Bay Delta, including
ocean, commercial and recreational fishing; Delta operations and
pumping regimes; and probably most significantly in the last 2 years,
the timing and extent of rice growing in the Sacramento Valley.

Winter run are highly vulnerable to water temperatures in their
current spawning range below Shasta Reservoir. We will need to be very
conservative with Shasta Reservoir operations from now through early
fall 2016 in order to augment and stretch out the cold water pool,
given that two out of three winter-run cohorts are likely to have
suffered year class failures. The California State Water Resources
Control Board had a hearing on issue of the 2016 Shasta Temperature
Management Plan on March 18. In addition, on March 25, Reclamation
submitted to NMFS their temperature management plan for ESA concurrence
prior to issuing their initial Water Year 2016 allocations. Looking to
the long term, it is critical that we continue to pursue efforts to
reintroduce these salmon to their historic spawning range in the upper
Sacramento River watershed, and also Battle Creek, if we hope to
achieve recovery.

6b) Will juvenile winter-run salmon production in the Livingston-
Stone hatchery be increased in 2016?

Answer. Juvenile winter-run Chinook salmon production in Livingston
Stone National Fish Hatchery was tripled in 2014 and doubled in 2015 in
anticipation of a smaller quantity and quality of water in Shasta
Reservoir that would not provide sufficient habitat for wild winter-run
salmon throughout their incubation period (through October). It is too
early at this point in the water year to determine how the hydrology
and Shasta Reservoir (storage and cold water pool) will shape up to
evaluate whether there is a need to increase winter-run Chinook
production at Livingston Stone National Fish Hatchery in 2016.

6c) Will the recreational salmon and trout fisheries be closed or
modified to protect winter-run adults prior to spawning in the upper
Sacramento River?

Answer. Yes. The California Fish and Game Commission adopted CDFW's
proposed closure to all fishing, effective April 1 through July 31,
2016, from 650 feet below Keswick Dam to the Highway 44 Bridge.

6d) Does NMFS anticipate that the low juvenile production in 2014
and 2015 will result in greater constraints on water project operations
or ocean commercial fisheries? What management changes are expected?

Answer. All of the surviving juvenile Sacramento River winter-run
Chinook salmon from broodyear 2014 are currently in the Pacific Ocean.
March is typically the month when the majority of juvenile winter-run
Chinook stop rearing in the Delta and out-migrate into the Pacific
Ocean. NMFS' 2009 OCAP BiOp already includes requirements to protect
juvenile winter-run Chinook in the Delta for the remainder of broodyear
2015's freshwater residence time. Therefore, NMFS does not anticipate
that the low juvenile production in 2014 and 2015 will result in
greater constraints on water project operations.

Ocean salmon fisheries are managed in direct response to the status
of ESA-listed salmonids. If the status of listed salmonids diminishes,
it is reasonable to expect that ocean salmon fisheries would be further
constrained and that those constraints would last longer into the
future than would have otherwise occurred. Ocean salmon fishery
management measures are discussed at the March and April meetings of
the Pacific Fishery Management Council each year.

Question 7. In 2012, the Golden Gate Salmon Association produced a
California salmon rebuilding plan. Your agency and the other fish
agencies provided technical assistance in developing that plan. The
plan included 39 hot spot predation locations where physical changes
would reduce predation. It is my understanding that none of these
projects have been implemented. What are the reasons these projects
have not been implemented? Does NMFS support these projects and feel
that they would reduce predation effects and improve species recovery
efforts?

Answer. NMFS is supportive of projects that address physical
conditions at specific locations in order to reduce predation on
juvenile salmonids. This approach to reducing predation is consistent
with our Final Recovery Plan for Central Valley Chinook salmon and
steelhead, and it is standard practice for NMFS engineers to help
modify or design in-water structures to minimize predation
opportunities.

NMFS has been providing technical assistance to Golden Gate Salmon
Association (GGSA) on their current salmon projects since 2012. GGSA's
salmon rebuilding plan identifies 39 total projects that address a
variety of stressors, and a small subset of these projects focus on
addressing predation hot spots. Within that subset, efforts to address
predation at two of the hot spots (Sundial Bridge and Clifton Court
Forebay) have been or are currently being implemented. In addition,
NMFS is currently providing technical assistance for a project to
address a third hot spot (Freeport pipeline).

Question 8. Clifton Court Forebay, at the site of the State Water
Project pumping plant, is a known source of serious predation. A recent
study indicated that 81 percent of the juvenile salmon pulled into
Clifton Court perish from predation. In 2009, NMFS released a number of
biological opinions that required changes to protect the ESA listed
winter- and spring-run salmon. One of these was RPA IV.4.2(2) requiring
a reduction of the predation at Clifton Court Forebay to 40 percent of
what it was. That RPA required full compliance by March 31, 2014. It is
our understanding that NMFS has approved continued delays for this
action. Please explain why these delays were approved and what has been
the impact of those delays on the near total loss of the listed winter-
run salmon.

Answer. To achieve RPA IV.4.2(2) in the NMFS 2009 OCAP BiOp, DWR
initially proposed creation of a fishing pier to provide additional
fishing opportunity and increase fishing pressure on predators of
juvenile salmonids in Clifton Court Forebay. Further analyses of this
proposal indicated that it would likely not meet the predation
reduction requirements included in this RPA action. As a result of this
analysis, NMFS continued to provide technical assistance to DWR
identify new actions that could achieve the 40 percent predation
reduction target at Clifton Court Forebay included in RPA IV.4.2(2).

This year, DWR will be initiating a capture and relocation program
for predators in Clifton Court Forebay to fulfill RPA Action IV.4.2(2).
As part of this effort, the striped bass will be released in an
isolated section netted off from the rest of the forebay, eliminating
their access to juvenile salmonids in the rest of the forebay. This
effort is intended to improve salmonid survival while also enhancing
striped bass fishing opportunities in the isolated area.

Question 9. In 2009, NMFS issued a biological opinion and RPA
IV.4.3 that required a 50 percent reduction in the predation that takes
place at the Department of Water Resources discharge points where
juvenile salmon from the pump salvage system are discharged into a
pipe. Predation at those locations is known to be high. The RPA also
required an evaluation of a ``net pen'' system as a potential better
technology for discharging the juveniles. It is my understanding that
this evaluation has not taken place and that instead, DWR has installed
another $6 million pipe location. Can you please explain why this RPA
was not carried out as directed? The RPA also required monitoring of
results. Can you please provide a monitoring report on the success or
failure of the $6 million installation to achieve the 50 percent
reduction?

Answer. In May 2010, DWR released a Final Release Site Predation
Study Report to describe predation upon release salmonids following
their salvage at the Federal and state facilities of the Central Valley
and State Water Projects (respectively). In August 2010, DWR followed
with a release of an Evaluation of Mortality and Injury in a Fish
Release Pipe report. Following plans outlined in these reports, a
complete refurbishment of the Curtis Landing release site was completed
in 2014, and the site became operational in early 2015. Predation
monitoring has been ongoing at the Curtis Landing and Horseshoe Bend
sites since the Curtis Landing site returned to operation.

In addition, DWR is currently developing a comprehensive plan to
monitor predation at the new and existing discharge sites. Two new fish
release sites on Sherman Island are currently under final design and
permitting. These sites are scheduled for completion in 2017.
Reclamation has taken the lead on analyzing opportunities for
transporting and releasing fish by barge to these new release
locations. We anticipate receiving a proposal from them for review in
the coming year.

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Stelle. Excellent testimony and
perfect timing, sir. You are a model for all of us.
Mr. Grossman, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GARY D. GROSSMAN, PROFESSOR OF ANIMAL ECOLOGY,
WARNELL SCHOOL OF FORESTRY AND NATURAL RESOURCES, UNIVERSITY OF
GEORGIA, ATHENS, GEORGIA

Dr. Grossman. My name is Gary Grossman. Since 1981, I have
been a professor of animal ecology at the University of
Georgia. I would like to thank the Chair and Ranking Member for
the honor of this appearance, and reserve the right to revise
my written testimony.
My primary research areas include population and community
dynamics and habitat selection in fishes, and I have published
over 115 scientific papers cited over 5,000 times. For the last
20 years, I have advised fisheries agencies in California, and
in 2013 led a public hearing on the effects of fish predation
on endangered salmonids that produced a technical report. I
have recently completed a general review of the effects of
predators on Sacramento and San Joaquin Delta fishes to be
published in the State of the Delta Science.
I will focus on California's Central Valley endangered
salmon, but my comments also apply to other species and
habitats.
Unfortunately, the endangered salmon in the Central Valley
reside in a highly altered habitat. Thus, it is difficult to
establish a hierarchy of factors affecting salmon mortality.
Consequently, assigning a value to the potential increases in
salmon abundance that would be produced by predator control is
problematical, when compared to increases potentially produced
by remediation of other negative influences, such as degraded
habitat, altered flow regime, and contaminants.
Pacific salmon are born in rivers and streams, migrate to
the ocean to mature, and then return to home streams to
reproduce and die. To survive, they run a predatory gauntlet
ranging from aquatic insects to predatory fishes, mammals, and
birds. Most predation on salmon occurs when young fish migrate
downstream to their oceanic adult habitat. When considering
salmon mortality, one must distinguish between proximate and
ultimate causes of death, because management efforts, expensive
as they are, only will be successful if they address ultimate
causes.
Predation is frequently a proximate cause of mortality,
because virtually any factor that weakens or disorients a
salmon will increase the probability of predation. For example,
copper concentrations commonly found in Delta waters produce
abnormal behaviors in coho salmon that render them much more
susceptible to predators. In this case, predation may be the
proximate cause of mortality, but a contaminant actually is the
ultimate cause.
An additional complication potentially negating the effects
of predator control measures is compensation by other
predators. The removal of one invasive predator could easily
result in an increase in abundance of a second invasive
predator, with no net increase whatsoever in salmon abundance.
The law of unintended consequences is alive and well on Mother
Earth.
My review of extant data indicates that six species of
fishes and two bird species feed on endangered salmon in
Central California, but 24 other predatory species have the
potential to consume endangered salmon. Nonetheless, I cannot
reach a definitive conclusion regarding the effects of
predation mortality on Central Valley endangered salmon,
because the database is neither extensive nor thorough.
Mathematical models suggest that predators may influence salmon
mortality, but these results have not been confirmed
empirically.
Finally, with the exception of lamprey control--and lamprey
is not a predator of issue here on the West Coast--there really
is no strong evidence that historic predator control efforts
have resulted in substantial increases in salmon populations,
despite considerable reductions in predator abundance.
California's endangered Central Valley salmon live and
migrate through altered habitats that support a multitude of
invasive predators. Control of predatory fishes has the
advantage of being logistically feasible by elimination of
catch and gear restrictions, or even bounties, as we have seen
with northern pikeminnow. Predator control also, to be frank,
is more politically tractable than some aspects of habitat
remediation, such as reducing water exports from the Delta.
From a scientific perspective, there is nothing wrong with
trying invasive predator control as an experimental management
strategy. After all, nature is full of surprises. Nonetheless,
I would not predict it will yield clear positive results, and
it does divert funds from other, potentially more productive,
management approaches. Based on the evidence at hand, I believe
efforts to increase endangered salmon should focus on habitat
and flow restoration, contaminant remediation, and alteration
of artificial structures that disorient and trap fish.
And thank you for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Grossman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Professor Gary D. Grossman, Warnell School of
Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
My name is Gary Grossman and since 1981 I have been a professor of
animal ecology at the University of Georgia. I received my BSc degree
from the University of California at Berkeley in 1975 and my PhD from
the University of California at Davis in 1979. I would like to thank
the Chair and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Water, Power and
Oceans, for the honor of this appearance and reserve the right to
revise my written testimony if further information will aid the
subcommittee.
My primary fields of research are population and community dynamics
and habitat selection in fishes and I have published over 115
scientific papers which have been cited over 5,000 times. In 2014 I won
the American Fisheries Society's Sullivan Award for excellence in
fisheries conservation and in 2015 I was elected to the first class of
Fellows of that Society.
My expertise in the issue of predation on endangered salmon is
based on 20 years of fisheries advisory work in various forms for the
state and Federal agencies that manage the Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta. In 2013 I led the public hearing on the effects of fish
predation on Steelhead Trout and endangered Chinook Salmon populations
in the Delta and senior authored the report produced by the technical
panel from the hearing. At present I have completed a general review of
the effects of predation on Delta fishes that will be published in the
upcoming volume on ``State of the Delta Science.''
My testimony is based on my experience with endangered Central
Valley Chinook Salmon, but the principles I discuss are general and
likely apply to many species and habitats. Unfortunately, the
endangered salmon in California's Central Valley both live and traverse
highly altered habitats, which make it difficult to create a hierarchy
of factors limiting their abundance. In addition, many of the factors
that are known to negatively affect endangered salmon, such as habitat
alterations and water diversions for agriculture, domestic and
industrial consumption, and toxicant burdens, are difficult to alter.
Consequently, at present it is problematical to assign a value to the
potential increases in endangered salmon abundance that will be
produced by a reduction in invasive predators versus the potential
increases produced by remediation of the many other factors that
negatively affect endangered salmon populations (e.g. degraded habitat
and flow regimes, contaminants, and artificial structures that
disorient salmon and alter migration routes).
For those of you who are not from Pacific states, it should be
helpful to briefly review the life history patterns of Pacific salmon.
All salmon are born in rivers and streams, and spend between several
months and 2 years in freshwater. The young, called smolts, then
migrate downstream through estuaries and out into the open ocean where
they quickly grow to adult size. Pacific salmon spend 1-4 years in the
ocean before migrating home to their birth streams, reproducing and
dying. This complex life history forces Pacific salmon to run a
predatory gauntlet beginning with aquatic insects that consume eggs to
predatory fishes, birds, mammals, and perhaps a few reptiles and
amphibians that consume young salmon and smolts. Indeed, most of the
mortality experienced by salmon occurs in the freshwater stage or on
the migration to the ocean. Adults also face predation from a few large
oceanic fishes such as sharks and mammals like seals and bears.
Nonetheless, for hundreds of millions of years Pacific salmon co-
existed with native peoples and predators; it is only when humans
altered the environment substantially and introduce non-native
predators that problems started to occur.
When considering the effects of predators on endangered salmon it
also is necessary to examine the impact of proximate and ultimate
factors on mortality. Proximate causes are factors that contribute to
mortality but are not the main causal factor. They represent factors
that even if substantially reduced, may have little effect on
mortality. By contrast, an ultimate factor is the primary causal agent
influencing a process like mortality. Manipulation of an ultimate
factor for predation should produce a significant positive effect on
abundance. In general, predation may be either a proximate or ultimate
cause of mortality, but for endangered salmon in California's Central
Valley it is likely the former rather than the latter. This obtains
because, virtually any environmental factor that weakens or disorients
a young salmon will increase the probability that it will be eaten by a
predator. Unfortunately, endangered salmon in California's Central
Valley face a constellation of factors that likely weaken or confuse
migrating smolts including: habitat alterations, altered flows and
water removals, and contaminants. It is these factors that could easily
be the ultimate cause of predation mortality.
To examine just one of these factors, the presence of contaminants
in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta; researchers have detected the
presence of the following harmful agents: estrogen disruptors,
psychoactive drugs, ammonia, Triclosan, and metallic compounds such as
selenium, mercury, copper, and aluminum. Before endangered salmon
smolts can reach the Pacific Ocean, they must traverse the Delta, where
these contaminants are present in concentrations capable of causing
abnormal behavior in fishes (Sloman and Wilcox 2006, Connon et al.
2011, Brooks et al 2012, Conner et al. 2016). In fact, Sandahl et al
(2007) demonstrate that copper concentrations commonly found in Delta
waters produce abnormal anti-predatory behaviors in coho salmon. Their
video (http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/es062287r) shows control
salmon ceasing movement and dropping to the bottom of the tank when
exposed to a fright stimulus, whereas fish exposed to copper continue
moving around the tank in an agitated and highly visible manner. This
behavior almost certainly renders young salmon more susceptible to
predation and illustrates the principle of proximate and ultimate
causes. In this case, predation would be the proximate cause of
mortality but contaminants would be the ultimate cause. The greater the
number of factors that stress young salmon, the greater the number of
potential proximate causes of mortality and the greater the difficulty
of undertaking management actions that will unambiguously result in
decreased mortality and increased abundance of endangered salmon.
An additional issue that must be addressed when evaluating the
impact of predators on endangered salmon is compensation by other
predators. Most predators on salmon are generalized feeders that
consume a diverse array of prey. Consequently, a management strategy
that reduces the abundance of an invasive predator, say striped bass in
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, might not result in an increase in
endangered salmon abundance, because another predator might increase in
abundance and consume an identical amount of salmon. Even worse,
eliminating a predator also has the effect of eliminating a potential
prey (young of the predator) for other predators and in the worst case
scenario might lead to these predators increasing their predation rate
on endangered salmon. The law of unintended consequences is alive and
well on Mother Earth.
I have surveyed the scientific literature and ongoing studies on
predators of fishes in the Delta (Grossman 2016) and recorded eight
species that fed upon endangered salmon: striped bass, largemouth bass
and smallmouth bass, black crappie, white catfish, channel catfish,
Caspian and California Least Terns. Nonetheless, 24 other predatory
species have the potential to feed on endangered salmon. Despite the
wide range of potential predators it is problematical to reach a
conclusion regarding the effects of predation mortality on California's
Central Valley endangered salmon because the database is neither
extensive nor thorough (most data depict the presence or absence of
salmon from a few samples). For example, data are completely lacking
for some potentially major predators such as river otters. Predation on
endangered Chinook Salmon does occur, but its impact on populations of
this species cannot be ascertained given the data at hand. Several
mathematical models (Lindley and Mohr 2003, Loboschefsky et al. 2012,
Nobriga et al. 2013) do suggest that predation may have significant
impacts on endangered salmon, but these studies, although yielding
insights regarding the potential impacts of predators on this species,
have not been verified empirically.
Finally, the history of predator control to increase salmon
abundance has not been markedly successful. The Northern Pikeminnow
Sport-Reward Program began in 1991 in the Columbia River and pays
anglers to harvest predatory size fish (Porter 2010). The program
removed over 2.2 million fish during 1998-2009 and is believed to have
reduced predation on juvenile salmonids, but positive effects on
salmonid populations have been difficult to detect (Carey et al. 2012).
California's endangered Central Valley salmon live and migrate
through altered habitats that support a multitude of invasive predators
capable of consuming endangered salmon. Control of predatory fishes has
the advantage of being logistically feasible (managers can just remove
restrictions on catch and gear, or even set a bounty on the fish as per
pikeminnow control in the Columbia River). Predator control also is
likely more politically tractable than some aspects of habitat
remediation such as reducing water exports from the Delta. From a
scientific perspective, there is nothing wrong with trying invasive
predator control as an experimental management strategy. After all,
nature is full of surprises. Nonetheless, I would not predict it will
yield clear positive results and it does divert funds from other,
potentially more productive management approaches. Based on the
evidence at hand, I believe efforts to increase endangered salmon
should focus on habitat and flow restoration, contaminant remediation
and alteration of artificial structures that disorient and trap fish.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the House Subcommittee on
Water, Power and Oceans, and I will be glad to answer any questions you
may have.

[References for this statement are included in the record and retained
in the Committee's official files]

______

Dr. Fleming. Very good, Mr. Grossman. You came even a
little bit closer to the limit.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Grossman. I would normally take a couple of weeks to
cover this subject in class, so I apologize for reading, but it
is a lot of material to cover.
Dr. Fleming. No. Hats off to you to pack all of that in 5
minutes. Thank you.
And finally, we have Mr. Doug Demko. Sir, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DOUG DEMKO, PRESIDENT, FISHBIO, CHICO, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Demko. Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity
to be here. I am going to review a few of the key points from
my written testimony and then, obviously, look forward to
questions later on today.
I have been in fisheries since the 1980s. This was around
the time when ESA was just resulting in large-scale efforts to
conserve or to save salmon. I now have a company that
specializes in research, monitoring, and conservation of fish,
with a few offices in California and one in Asia. So, I like to
think that I have a lot of good, on-the-ground, practical
research experience.
Over the years, I have worked with Native tribes, all of
the state agencies from the West Coast, many Federal agencies,
and now, for the last 5 or 6 years, foreign and even Communist
governments. So, I think I understand competing interests,
which I think a lot of this is about, regulatory processes and,
certainly, I am used to red tape.
As was mentioned, salmon start their lives in riffles in
the upper river reaches. Over the decades of my career, we have
spent tens of millions of dollars restoring these riffles so
that more fish can spawn so we could provide or produce more
baby salmon.
We soon realized that these baby salmon had a perilous
journey downstream to the ocean, due to water diversion. So, we
spent two decades spending hundreds of millions of dollars
screening diversions. My first job in fisheries was the Glenn-
Colusa Irrigation District, which was a fish screen that cost
$50 million to build. Of course, that was the largest one, I
believe, in northern California.
Additionally, we have spent tens--and I am not an
economist, but I would even say maybe hundreds--of millions of
dollars on various studies and monitoring. We have life history
monitoring, behavior studies, habitat use, predation, influence
of flow on survival. So, where are we now? I would say we have
a couple of decades gone, and we have certainly spent billions
of dollars. And I think the spending continues, and I don't
think it is going to stop or slow down in the near future.
Additionally, we have a contentious and costly fight for
water, and I think we are always going to have that in the
state of California, as well. Yet native salmon continue to
decline, and hatchery fish continue to increase, as was noted.
It is estimated that 90 to 95 percent of the fish, the salmon
in California, are currently hatchery fish.
I think an objective person, and certainly an economist,
would say that this has probably been a pretty dismal failure,
considering how much money we have spent and the state of the
system we have today.
The one thing that I think most Central Valley biologists
would agree on today, at least the field biologists that I deal
with on a regular basis, is that predation is a huge, huge,
problem, and the more we look, the more we see, the more we
learn about this.
NMFS, in their 2009 recovery plan for salmonids, said that
reducing abundance of striped bass and other non-native
predators must be achieved to, and I quote, ``prevent
extinction or prevent the species from declining
irreversibly.'' Now this was NMFS's 2009 recovery plan for
salmonids. So I don't know how I would argue against predation
being a problem.
The California Department of Fish and Wildlife later
admitted this. They had to be sued in 2008 or 2009. In 2011,
they settled out of court, and admitted that this was a
problem. We still spend billions on research, monitoring,
restoration, but this is really all so we could feed the
predators downstream. These are expensive salmon that we are
producing upstream and feeding to downstream fish.
Perplexingly, under the Central Valley Project Improvement
Act (CVPIA) there is a legal requirement to double the striper
population, similar to the anadromous salmon population.
Perhaps the only invasive species in the world that has legal
protection, and certainly the only one in the world that has a
legal requirement to double its population. I did not look
extensively, but I don't know of another situation like that.
So, it is not often that we have a free, fast, and effective
solution to any problem, especially an environmental problem.
But I do believe predator control is one such solution, and I
think we need to implement what the state of California agreed
to in their settlement lawsuit in 2011, but have yet to do.
Simple, straightforward changes to California's
sportfishing regulations are needed. We either need to
liberalize or completely remove harvest limits on striped bass
and other non-native fish. This will increase harvests of these
fish, decrease predator abundance, and ultimately increase
survival of out-migrating salmon, steelhead, and other
protected fish.

Thank you. I look forward to elaborating on my comments
further.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Demko follows:]
Prepared Statement of Doug Demko, President, FISHBIO, Chico, California

The Overview: A Policy of Predation

California resource agencies sink tens of millions of dollars every
year into a failing effort to protect native and endangered fish
species, while also bolstering introduced top-level predators that are
decimating the very fish they are required to maintain. Without
question, California's capital and time investments rival other
successful fish recovery programs exemplified in the Pacific Northwest
and Columbia River, but long-standing conflicting statutes and policies
create fatal flaws that hinder native fish recovery. Decades of
research, declining populations, and confused policies show that
management of California fisheries is painfully ineffective. Resource
agencies have acknowledged, but not addressed the problems.

Instead of addressing the issue of predation, policy mandates to
maintain non-native gamefish (i.e. predators) and placate the problem
by producing more hatchery salmon have resulted in further
deterioration of wild stocks and an alarming reliance on hatcheries.
The Central Valley Project Improvement Act (CVPIA) of 1992 actually
requires protecting and improving both introduced predatory striped
bass and salmonids--an illogical contradiction of science and policy.
Fisheries managers have used hatcheries as a band-aid to partially
cover a gaping wound. It is acknowledged that supplementing wild salmon
populations with hatchery fish is currently necessary to ensure future
native fish populations, but hatchery fish are a poor substitute to
wild fish. These policies result in both flawed economics and science.
For example, increased flow appears to be the popular red herring for
recovering native fish populations, but scientific studies continue to
indicate that water releases from rim dams are no silver bullet: more
water doesn't equal more fish (or it's impact on survival is small
enough as to be difficult to establish). There is strong evidence that
high flows in wet years are beneficial to fish, but recent studies have
not been able to establish a relationship between smolt survival and
river flow, within the managed flow range. Both the problem and the
solution are evident, but the question is whether appropriate action
will be enacted.
The Problem: Ignoring Unnatural and Excessive Predation of Native
Fishes

The overwhelming majority of predation on juvenile Chinook salmon
is the result of non-native predators that were intentionally stocked
by California Department of Fish & Wildlife. Most of the non-native
fish species (69 percent) in California, including major predators,
were intentionally stocked by CDFW for recreation and consumption
beginning in the 1870s.

Numerous studies conducted by both agency and private researchers
documented that predation poses a serious threat to juvenile salmon in
California. A variety of non-native gamefish species, such as striped
bass, largemouth bass, smallmouth bass, white catfish, black crappie,
and spotted bass, prey on juvenile salmon in the San Francisco Bay-
Delta and its watershed. (Shapovalov 1936; Stevens 1966; Thomas 1967;
Pickard et al. 1982; Merz 2003; Gingras 1997; Tucker et al. 1998;
Nobriga and Feyrer 2007). However, only recently has the existing body
of science on predation been recognized among fisheries managers as a
major source of juvenile salmon mortality.

By virtue of their abundance, habits, and size, predation by
striped bass has been implicated as a substantial contributor
to the poor survival of young salmon used in experiments to
estimate reach- and site-specific survival rates through the
Delta and in the Sacramento River (Bowen et al. 2009; Gingras
1997; MacFarlane et al. 2008; Michel 2010; Newman and Brandes
2010; Perry and Skalski 2008; Perry and Skalski 2009; Tucker et
al. 1998; Vogel 2010; Vogel 2011). By plausible extension,
listed salmon (and steelhead) also suffer poor survival rates
due to predation, including predation by striped bass. (CDFW
2011)

It has now become clear that predation may significantly limit the
success of salmon recovery efforts (NMFS 2009b; Dauble et al., 2010).
The NMFS Draft Recovery Plan (2009b) for Chinook salmon and Central
Valley steelhead considered ``predation on juveniles'' one of the most
important specific stressors. Further, reducing abundance of striped
bass and other non-native predators must be achieved to ``prevent
extinction or to prevent the species from declining irreversibly''
(NMFS 2009).

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As CDFW noted on the first page of their lawsuit settlement
report in 2011 recommending revisions to sportfishing regulations:

While predation by striped bass is only one of numerous
stressors on the listed species, by previously stocking striped
bass and by enacting the striped bass sportfishing regulations
currently in effect, the Department of Fish and Game
(Department) and the Fish and Game Commission (Commission) may
have inadvertently contributed to this stressor by helping
establish and maintain the current population of predatory
striped bass. More importantly, this particular stressor not
only has roots in the actions of the Department and the
Commission, but standard fisheries management practices
indicate it may be alleviated, at least in part, by further
action on the part of the Department and Commission. (CDFW
2011)

Further, also on page one:

Although studies of striped bass predation show each of the
listed species to constitute a relatively small part of the
striped bass diet, and although the actual level of striped
bass predation on these species is unknown and likely
unknowable, the enormous volume of fish (up to 110 million
pounds annually) consumed by striped bass and the widespread
distribution of striped bass within the geographic range of the
listed species indicate the impact of striped bass predation on
the listed species could be substantial; and . . .

The recreational fishery for striped bass is very popular, and
many anglers will harvest substantially more striped bass if
they are allowed to keep smaller fish. (CDFW 2011)

Despite the documented predation of such species on native fishes,
high densities of introduced top predators are not being controlled,
but in some instances enhanced. For example, changes in Federal
statutes in the CVPIA required a doubling of natural production of
Central Valley populations of anadromous fish within 10 years. Non-
native striped bass were included, thus creating competing goals of
doubling both salmon and their introduced predators that were enacted
in 1992. Hatchery outplanting of striped bass ended in 1992 (Kohlhorst
1999). While it is clearly stated that predation is a significant
impact on salmonids, it is also evident that policy to date has
resisted any effort to challenge the `very popular' striped bass
fishery.
The History: Research Identifying a Growing Problem

The issue of predation did not occur overnight and the research to
show its effects has progressed over decades. For instance, in the San
Joaquin Basin between 1986 and 2006, paired releases of large groups of
marked young salmonids (smolts) were made near the upper extent of
spawning and near the mouth of several tributaries of the San Joaquin
River: the Stanislaus, Tuolumne, and Merced rivers. Survival of fish in
these tributaries was estimated based on the numbers of tagged smolts
from the upper group relative to the lower group that were later
recovered in the San Joaquin River at Mossdale. These mark-recapture
studies provided the first direct estimates of very poor tributary
survival in some years.
Rotary screw trapping to monitor juvenile salmonid out-migration
from the Stanislaus River began in 1995, and comparisons of estimated
abundance at an upstream site relative to a downstream site near the
confluence with the San Joaquin River indicate survival is poor in many
years. This data is valuable because it provides estimates of survival
for naturally produced juvenile salmon of all life stages migrating
volitionally throughout the varying conditions observed during each
migration season.
In 1998 and 1999, a pilot study using radio telemetry in the
Stanislaus River was the first in the San Joaquin basin to directly
confirm predation by electroshocking a large striped bass and
retrieving a radio tag (from a tagged, digested salmon smolt) from its
stomach. This early research was important for establishing that:
predation was occurring; suspected predation was occurring more
frequently in substantially altered habitats, such as mine pits and
deep scour holes; and non-native predators were present and relatively
abundant in the Stanislaus River, even under the wetter hydrology
observed in the years studied.
The Stanislaus River counting weir, which has been in operation
since 2003, was the first of its type used in the Central Valley. Weir
monitoring has documented migration characteristics of adult striped
bass, and has demonstrated that striped bass live in the river year-
round and are abundant, especially in dry years (when salmonids are
most stressed).
In 2012, after more than 15 years of juvenile out-migrant survival
studies and monitoring indicating that predation is a major problem in
the Stanislaus River, the USFWS estimated smolt survival in the river
using radio telemetry. The survival estimate of 7 percent in 2012 was
much lower than the 40-60 percent previously estimated by mark-
recapture studies conducted by CDFW.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Differences in catches between upstream and downstream rotary
screw traps in the Tuolumne River between 2007 and 2012 also indicate
high losses, ranging from 76 percent to 98 percent. In 2012, a study of
rotary screw trap monitoring on the Tuolumne River documented 96
percent mortality of juvenile Chinook out-migrants between these two
trapping stations. As part of the FERC relicensing of the Don Pedro
Project, a predation study conducted later the same year found that,
based on observed predation rates and the estimated predator abundance
between the traps, it is plausible that most of the losses of juvenile
Chinook salmon between the two traps could be attributed to predation
by non-native predatory species. A second year of more comprehensive
investigation of predation in the Tuolumne River was planned for 2014
following on the heels of this ground-breaking work completed in 2012;
however, permits have not been issued by CDFW.
In addition to the evidence in the Stanislaus and Tuolumne rivers,
the Vernalis Adaptive Management Plan (VAMP) investigated the
relationship between salmon smolt survival through the San Joaquin
Delta and flow, exports, and operation of the Head of Old River Barrier
between 2000 and 2011. A peer review (Dauble et al. 2010) of this work
and the results of similar, earlier studies, concluded that ``high and
likely highly variable impacts of predation, appear to affect survival
rates more than the river flow.'' Since 2003, smolt survival through
the San Joaquin Delta has consistently been less than 12 percent, while
flows at Vernalis ranged between 2,000 cfs and 27,000 cfs.
During spring 2014, a predation study in the lower San Joaquin
River near Mossdale was conducted by NOAA Fisheries. Predators were
found to outnumber Chinook salmon by a ratio of roughly 200 predators
for every 1 Chinook salmon. Similar to recent studies conducted by NOAA
Fisheries on the Sacramento River, live Chinook salmon were tethered to
quantify the frequency of predation events. On some nights, 100 percent
of the tethered Chinook salmon were preyed upon within one hour,
indicating much heavier predation rates in the San Joaquin River than
observed during the studies conducted on the Sacramento River. Out of
2,064 deployments of Predation Event Recorders, there were 672
predation events (15-60 percent per reach). Of the positive
identifications of predators (121 had video footage), striped bass were
responsible for 99 percent of the predation (Hayes et al., 2015).
Similar to previous work in the tributaries, this study confirmed
that low survival rates could be explained by predation by introduced
fish species such as striped bass and largemouth bass. This more recent
work supports the large amount of evidence that suggested that
predation was the primary source of mortality of migrating juvenile
salmonids. The best estimates averaged about 30 percent (range 3-99
percent) from previous studies (Gingras 1997; Hanson 2009; Merz 2003;
NMFS 2009).
The Response: What Response?

A large body of evidence has been accumulated since the 1990s that
all points to the conclusion that predation by non-native predators is
having large impacts on sustainability and recovery of native fish
species (see previous section). While predation impacts are not the
sole reason for declines in native species in California, they remain
an important and largely unresolved topic in managing fisheries.
Fisheries management in California to this day continues to attempt to
manage all fish species in the Central Valley on approximately equal
footing--that is, attempting to manage introduced sportfish (i.e.,
promote striped bass fishing opportunities) while at the same time
managing for sensitive and native species (e.g., Chinook salmon,
steelhead, and Delta smelt), most of which are federally protected.
This highlights the conflicting fisheries management goals of
government agencies, which in turn, create and promote conflicts
between various stakeholders in the state. In the past decade, the
response by the CDFW to the predation issue has largely been the result
of litigation and the subsequent settlement agreement (Table 1). Two
CDFW workshops were held to address predation, but little action
resulted from them, even though decades of research and examples of
successful predator control programs were available for review and
consideration. The CDFW settlement agreement only resulted in a
relatively small funding opportunity ($1 million) to study predation in
the Bay-Delta; no changes in sportfishing regulations, and, to date, no
meaningful actions of any kind have been taken to accept or address the
problem.

Table 1. California Department of Fish and Wildlife Predation Response
(1990s to Current)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Year                                Action
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992                         Formal stocking of striped bass ended due
to concerns on impacts to winter-run
Chinook salmon.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
May 2006                     Report from predation workshop to summarize
current state of knowledge on predation
associated with southern Delta pumping
facilities.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2008                         2008 striped bass lawsuit filed.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2011                   Settlement required CDFW to:
(1) Develop proposal to modify striped
bass sportfishing regulations
(2) Set aside $1 million for predation
research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2011                Proposal to modify regulations released.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
February 2012                Fish and Game Commission rejects pursuing
proposal to modify regulations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2013                    CDFW holds second predation workshop in an
8-year period to summarize current state
of knowledge on issue.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
September 2013               Expert panel issues report from predation
workshop finds that primary research needs
to include estimation of predation risk
and exploitation risk requiring accurate
estimates of both predator and prey
abundance encompassing spatial and
temporal variation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
September 2014               Request for Proposals notice released $1
million to fund predation research.
Proposals were due November 2014 with
funding to be awarded in spring/summer of
2015.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
February 10, 2016 (Today)    Despite continued pressure on CDFW through
various mechanisms (through research and
monitoring studies and through the
litigation and settlement process), no
action has been taken to address predation
or predation impacts in any meaningful
manner. Perhaps more importantly, striped
bass sportfishing regulations have
remained unchanged.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Simple and straightforward changes to California sportfishing
regulations should be implemented to remove harvest limits and size
limits on striped bass and other non-native predators. Sportfishing
regulation changes could decrease the overall numbers of striped bass
and other predators that consume the most salmon per capita. The change
would only be one additional tool, among many already required by law
(e.g., habitat restoration, water management, etc.), to aid in the
long-term conservation and persistence of native fish species. A change
in policy on this issue is not unprecedented. In Fall of 2015,
fisheries managers in both Oregon and Washington removed many harvest,
season, and size limits for warm water species (e.g., largemouth and
smallmouth bass, walleye, catfish, bluegill, crappie, other sunfish,
and northern pikeminnow, among others). The changes in regulations are
most drastic on the Columbia River system in order to further support
salmonid population recovery. The purpose of the regulation change was
to lower the rate at which non-native predators prey on salmon and
steelhead smolts, and to simplify complex fishing regulations. More
importantly, fisheries managers in both states sent a clear message
they are committed to the continued persistence of native fish species.
A similar policy change in California, coupled with focused removal and
suppression efforts, could lead to improved survival conditions for
native species as has been demonstrated on the Columbia River (see
section ``The Solution'').
The Economics: Salmon Have the Greatest Impact

The economic contribution of salmon in California is significant.
Viewing salmon through the prism of economics allows one to see not
only the cultural and iconic value of the fish, but also the tangible
and significant economic contribution to California. This is an
important consideration in the ongoing discussion about the effects of
predation and the many millions of dollars spent each year on
monitoring, regulations, research, hatchery supplementation and
conservation projects for salmon.
Overall, California's marine recreational and commercial fisheries
for all fish species have more economic impact than any other West
Coast state, including Alaska (NMFS 2013). The greatest economic impact
to California comes from commercial salmon fishing; however,
recreational in-river harvest provides the greatest value per fish. The
striped bass fishery also provides an economic benefit to the state,
but at the cost of high predation to valuable salmonids. The cost for
salmon recovery due to striped bass may offset any perceived value.
Salmon represent the primary fisheries target species and economic
driver. California's commercial salmon fishery is small compared to
other West Coast states, but likely persists as a result of the premium
price of local commercially harvested salmon.
The 2013 recreational salmon fishery in California produced an
overall economic impact of approximately $104.4 million for the state,
while the commercial salmon industry produced approximately $244.4
million (NMFS 2013; PFMC 2014; Ransom 2001). In 2010 (most recent
available estimate), the California striped bass fishery had an
estimated economic impact of $28.7 million (CDFW 2011). The striped
bass fishery in California is popular, based on harvest and angler
hours. However, the economic impact from striped bass angling is
considerably lower than the recreational salmon fishery: a striped bass
harvested in-river by a recreational angler provides an estimated
economic impact of approximately $494, while an in-river harvested
salmon offers an impact of approximately $1,176 (Ransom 2001; CDFW
2001). Increasing striped bass harvest in California could lower
predation pressure on juvenile salmonids, increase juvenile survival
rates, and significantly reduce costly ongoing salmonid population
recovery effort. As the economic value of in-river salmon sport harvest
is considerably higher than that of striped bass, there would be a net
economic benefit.
These estimates of economic impact are conservative compared to
other estimates that are available. The American Sportfishing
Association (2010) reported that the 2009 closure of the salmon fishery
in California cost the state $1.4 billion in economic activity and over
23,000 jobs. The same study estimated that a full recovery of
California's Chinook salmon runs could provide $5.7 billion in economic
activity and 94,000 jobs for the state.
The Hatcheries: Adding Fish is Not a Long-Term Solution

Considering the staggering economic impact of the salmon fishery,
it is logical to assume that hatcheries are an easy solution to the
problem of predation. California's anadromous fish hatcheries produce
upwards of 50 million fish per year. In the Central Valley alone, the
cost of this production totals nearly $9 million dollars annually (HSRG
2012). However, many would argue that hatcheries are simply treating
the symptoms, and not the causes, of salmon decline. It may seem
illogical that hatcheries could actually undermine the very species
they are meant to proliferate, yet many studies have raised concerns
about hatchery practices, backed up by empirical evidence.
Multiple fish hatcheries were constructed in California's Central
Valley to mitigate for lost spawning habitat created by dams (Shasta,
Folsom, Oroville, Camanche, and New Exchequer) built for both the
Central Valley and State Water Projects. Over time, fall run Chinook
salmon propagated at the five Central Valley hatcheries have comprised
increasing proportions of the fishery, and best available estimates
indicate that approximately 90 percent of the current commercial catch
is composed of hatchery fish (Barnett-Johnson et al. 2007; Kormos et
al. 2012; Palmer-Zwahlen and Kormos 2013; Palmer-Zwahlen and Kormos
2015). Clearly, without artificial supplementation, there would not be
a commercial salmon fishery currently in the state.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hatchery fish are inferior to their wild counterparts for
numerous reasons. Overwhelming evidence indicates that hatchery fish
have much lower survival rates once released in nature (e.g., Waples
1991; Unwin 1997; Kostow 2004). Unlike wild fish, hatchery fish are
selected for traits that allow them to perform well in a captive
environment, but are maladaptive in the natural environment. Hatchery
fish are raised in predator-free concrete raceways and fed from above
by automatic feeders and, consequently, are less able to avoid
predators and feed sufficiently once outside of the hatchery. Because
of their reduced genetic diversity, hatchery fish are more susceptible
to diseases and are less able to adapt to new environmental conditions,
such as freshwater flow extremes and warmer ocean temperatures. Indeed,
research has demonstrated that hatchery salmonids have relatively small
brains and slow sprint swimming speeds, and both factors likely
contribute to their relatively low survival rates observed in nature.
Salmon are famous for their ability to home back to their
birthplaces to reproduce after traveling hundreds to thousands of miles
in the freshwater and marine environments. The precise mechanism(s) for
salmonid homing are not completely known, but are believed to result
from juveniles imprinting on odors during downstream migrations, with
subsequent recognition of olfactory cues by adults during pre-spawning
upriver migrations (Quinn 2005). Homing promotes adaptations to unique
local environmental conditions and increases the likelihood that adult
salmon will find mates and adequate spawning conditions. Because of
homing, each population has developed local genetic adaptations over
time that best fit the unique conditions of their environment.
Over time, juvenile hatchery salmon have been trucked farther
downstream and released in larger numbers (Huber and Carlson 2015).
Fish are released en masse in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta and San
Francisco Estuary in order to boost survival rates by satiating
predators, such as striped bass, and limiting exposure to harmful water
quality by encouraging rapid emigration to the sea. Reduced mortality
of juvenile fish has resulted in higher contributions of adult fish to
the commercial and recreational fisheries overall. However, the lack of
olfactory imprinting in hatchery fish has promoted exceptionally high
rates of adult straying (approximately 70-80 percent compared to
natural rates of
