- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON CHANGING DEMANDS AND WATER SUPPLY UNCERTAINTY IN CALIFORNIA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHANGING DEMANDS AND WATER SUPPLY UNCERTAINTY IN CALIFORNIA

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, July 12, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-49

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-918 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2016

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Democratic Chief Counsel

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, POWER AND OCEANS

JOHN FLEMING, LA, Chairman
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                        CNMI
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Norma J. Torres, CA
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Debbie Dingell, MI
Thomas MacArthur, NJ                 Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, July 12, 2016...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Fleming, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
LaMalfa, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:
Azhderian, Ara, Water Policy Administrator, San Luis & Delta-
Mendota Water Authority, Los Banos, California.............    23
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Borck, Bob, Skipper, Fishing Vessel Belle J II, Eureka,
California.................................................    19
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Murillo, David, Mid-Pacific Regional Director, Bureau of
Reclamation, U.S. Department of the Interior, Sacramento,
California.................................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Sutton, Jeffrey, General Manager, Tehama-Colusa Canal
Authority, Willows, California.............................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Hamilton, Scott, Ph.D., Center for California Water Resources
Policy & Management, ``Will Increasing Delta Outflow Help
Delta Smelt?''.............................................    46

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON CHANGING DEMANDS AND WATER SUPPLY UNCERTAINTY IN
CALIFORNIA

----------

Tuesday, July 12, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. John Fleming
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fleming, Gosar, McClintock,
Lummis, LaMalfa, Denham, Newhouse, Bishop (ex officio),
Huffman, Costa, Ruiz, and Torres.
Dr. Fleming. The Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans
will come to order.
The Water, Power and Oceans Subcommittee meets today to
hear testimony on an oversight hearing entitled Changing
Demands and Water Supply Uncertainty in California. We will
start with opening statements, beginning with myself.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN FLEMING, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Dr. Fleming. Today's hearing is about fostering government
accountability and restoring balance to a region devastated by
natural and man-made drought. Achieving these objectives will
help give the Federal Government the metrics to improve our
environment, while allowing California's farmers to provide
food and fiber to our Nation and the world.
This subcommittee is all too familiar with the historic
drought that has impacted California. While there are various
estimates of job losses, no one can disagree that number is in
the thousands. With California providing the vast majority of
fruits, nuts, and vegetables to grocery stores and tables
nationwide, the drought has impacted all of us. With this
year's El Nino, things were finally looking better for
California. Many reservoirs are at historic capacity and
farmers can use their water allocations as collateral for
financing their planting season.
There are continued disappointments, however, as evidenced
by the chart on the TV screen, which compares outflows to the
ocean from this year to the last. It basically says that 350
percent more water flowed through the Delta so far this year,
but that water users in Southern California were only allowed
to capture 50 percent more than last year. As a result, they
only have 5 percent of their water allocation.
Despite some general improvements, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service have
done their best to, as one of our water witnesses will say,
``pull the rug out from under our feet'' with proposed Federal
regulations. These additional bites at the apple contradict
what another arm of the Federal Government, the Bureau of
Reclamation, has provided in the form of water allocations.
This proves two things: what one Federal agency gives, another
can take away; and Federal agencies are not communicating with
each other, a recurring theme under this and prior
administrations.
What makes matters worse is that many are charging that the
proposed fish flows were not based on scientific justification
or peer review. Once again, the so-called most transparent
administration in history is anything but. I am not aware of
anyone who wants to see a species go extinct, but Federal
actions need to be justified and have tangible goals. As we
will hear later, the proposed flows for these 3-inch Delta
smelt lack any controls or metrics to measure the results of
the action and lack any impact analysis on water users,
refuges, and other fish and wildlife needs.
To add insult to injury, these proposed Delta smelt flows
are to the detriment of the salmon flows. Of course, fish need
water, but real science, not political science in this case,
should dictate how much water a species needs.
These agencies also need to be communicating with
communities who depend on water from the same system. Instead,
the proposals took most of the communities by surprise and
continue to put a cloud over water supplies in parts of
California.
While the focus of today is on California, this is a case
study of Federal unaccountability and confusion that could be
imposed anywhere else in the Nation. This hearing is part of an
effort to provide a blueprint for Federal transparency in order
to avoid further man-made issues. The Federal Government can
clearly do better, although the bar is pretty low in this case.
We have before us experts who understand these matters
firsthand. I thank them for traveling here. I also want to
thank our colleague, Mr. LaMalfa, for asking for this hearing.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Huffman, for his
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fleming follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. John Fleming, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Water, Power and Oceans
Today's hearing is about fostering government accountability and
restoring balance to a region devastated by natural and man-made
drought. Achieving these objectives will help give the Federal
Government the metrics to improve our environment while allowing
California's farmers to provide food and fiber to our Nation and the
world.
This subcommittee is all too familiar with the historic drought
that has impacted California. While there are various estimates of job
losses, no one can disagree that they number in the thousands. With
California providing the vast majority of fruits, nuts and vegetables
to grocery stores and tables nationwide, the drought has impacted all
of us.
With this year's El Nino, things were finally looking better for
California. Many reservoirs are at historic capacity and farmers can
use their water allocations as collateral for financing the planting
season. There are continued disappointments, however, as evidenced by
the chart on the screen (see below), which compares outflows to the
ocean from this year to the last. It basically says that 350 percent
more water flowed through the Delta so far this year, but that water
users south of there were only allowed to capture 50 percent more than
last year. As a result, they only have 5 percent of their water
allocation.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority

Despite some general improvements, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service have done their best
to, as one of our water witnesses will say, ``pull the rug out from
under our feet'' with proposed Federal regulations. These additional
bites at the apple run contrary to what another arm of the Federal
Government--the Bureau of Reclamation--has provided in the form of
water allocations. This proves two things: what the Federal Government
gives, it can certainly take away; and Federal agencies are once again
contradicting each other, a recurring theme under this and prior
administrations.

What makes matters worse is that many are charging that the
proposed fish flows were not based on scientific justification or peer
review. Once again, the so-called most transparent administration in
history is anything but. I'm not aware of anyone who wants to see a
species go extinct, but Federal actions need to be justified and have
tangible goals. As we will hear later, the proposed flows for the 3-
inch Delta smelt lack any controls or metrics to measure the results of
the action and lack any impact analysis on water users, refuges, and
other fish and wildlife needs. To add insult to injury, these proposed
Delta smelt flows would have been contrary to the salmon flows. Of
course fish need water, but real science--not political science in this
case--should dictate how much water a species needs.

And there needs to be prior conversation with the communities who
depend on water from the same system. Instead, the proposals took most
communities by surprise and continue to put a cloud over water supplies
in parts of California.

While the focus of today is on California, it is a case study of
Federal unaccountability and confusion that could be imposed anywhere
else in the Nation. This hearing is part of an effort to provide a
blueprint for Federal transparency in order to avoid further man-made
issues.

The Federal Government can clearly do better, although the bar is
pretty low in this case. We have before us experts who understand these
matters firsthand. I thank them for traveling here and I also want to
thank our colleague, Mr. LaMalfa, for asking for this hearing.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome the witnesses, especially my constituent,
Mr. Borck, who has come a long way from Humboldt County,
California.
This is the last week, Mr. Chairman, that we are here
before heading back to our districts for 7 weeks. I think it is
important to point out that when we return, we will have only 8
weeks left in this Congress. There are a number of very
important issues that we ought to be addressing; unfortunately,
we are here once again in this subcommittee wasting taxpayer
dollars on a farce of a hearing to attack the Endangered
Species Act and blame environmental protections for
California's drought, even though this preposterous claim has
been debunked time and again. But I guess I really shouldn't be
surprised.
The standard bearer right now for the Republican party,
Donald Trump, famously said a few weeks ago in California's
Central Valley that there is no drought. He went on to make the
same claims that we are going to hear today, blaming water
shortages on the Endangered Species Act. His statement on
California's drought was rightfully mocked by experts, found to
be false by nonpartisan, independent fact checkers, and yet
apparently that fact checking did not sink in here in this
Congress.
So, let me share a few facts. Fact one, the 2014 water year
was the third driest in recorded history, and according to
experts, paleontologists, folks who study tree ring records,
they conclude the current drought in California is likely the
most severe in 1,200 years. According to the U.S. Drought
Monitor, 100 percent of the state is currently experiencing
some level of drought. To say there is no hydrological drought
in California is absurd.
Another fact, the Department of the Interior estimates that
the Endangered Species Act accounted for a mere 2 percent of
the water supply reduction in the Central Valley Project (CVP)
water deliveries in the year 2014 and similar small impacts in
2015. In other words, if there was no Endangered Species Act,
if my Republican colleagues got everything they want, simply
eliminated the Endangered Species Act, they would get about 2
percent more water in the year 2014, maybe a little bit more
than that in 2015.
Third fact, California's State Water Board estimated that
in 2015, of all the runoff in the Bay Delta watershed that
flowed to San Francisco Bay, in other words, the water that
Donald Trump says was being ``shoved to the sea by
environmentalists,'' only 2 percent of this runoff actually
flowed out to the ocean solely for environmental protection.
The vast majority was released to keep the system from salting
up, for salinity control, so that we could continue to have
that water used by agriculture, by cities, by millions of
people who depend on it.
While we are in fact check mode, I want to also examine
this notion that somehow California's farming industry is not
getting water because of the Endangered Species Act. While some
people with vested interests continue to peddle this fiction,
the numbers tell a different story. Even in this fifth year of
a historic drought, millions of acre-feet of water are being
delivered to major agricultural water users. For example, one
of the Republican witnesses today, the Tehama-Colusa Canal
Authority, will get 100 percent of its maximum water allocation
this year. The other Republican witness represents a large
group of Ag. users in the San Joaquin Valley that includes the
San Joaquin Valley exchange contractors, and they are projected
to get 100 percent of their maximum water allocation of around
800,000 acre-feet, for free by the way.
So, make no mistake, Mr. Chairman, a tremendous amount of
water is being delivered to agriculture during this drought. In
fact, if you average together all the CVP deliveries for all
the different contractors, most of whom are agricultural water
users, the CVP is expected to deliver about 60 percent of
maximum contract quantities this year.
Now, some junior contractors will be significantly impacted
much more than those that are getting 100 percent or those that
are getting high allocations. That is because they have no
water rights, that is because that is the way the system works.
But it does not mean they will have no water, because they will
buy water from some of those that are getting the high
allocations, they will turn to other sources, and they will
have some water, even though there will be sacrifice, as you
would expect in the fifth year of a critical drought.
It is true that much of the water has been made available,
and this is an important point because year after year state
and Federal agencies have taken water that was supposed to be
used to sustain California's fisheries and they have redirected
it, primarily to powerful agricultural interests. Fisheries
protections have been cut to the bone and the result has been a
disaster for salmon fishermen. There is a zero buffer for
endangered fish in this drought.
Federal officials recently announced that there was a 97
percent mortality rate for juvenile Sacramento River winter-run
salmon in 2015. The year before that it was 95 percent
mortality. So, there is extreme hardship for the families,
communities, and tribes who depend on salmon. There are jobs on
the ecosystem side of this water system as well, and that is
something that we will continue to point out.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Huffman follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Water, Power and Oceans

Mr. Chairman, this is the last week that we're here before heading
back to our districts for 7 weeks. I want to point out that when we
return, we only have 8 weeks left in this Congress. Yet instead of
working on a number of important issues we've failed to address, we're
here once again wasting taxpayer dollars on another farce of a hearing
to attack the Endangered Species Act and blame environmental
protections for California's drought, even though this preposterous
claim has been debunked time and time again.

I guess I shouldn't be surprised. The leader of the Republican
Party, Donald Trump, said recently, ``There is no drought,'' and went
on to make the same claims we'll hear today blaming water shortages on
the Endangered Species Act. The Donald's statement on California's
drought was rightfully mocked by experts and found to be false by non-
partisan, independent fact checkers. Apparently my Republican
colleagues ignored the memo on this, so let me share some facts now.

Fact one, the 2014 water year was the third driest in
recorded history and according to paleontological and tree-
ring records, some experts conclude the current drought is
California's most severe in 1,200 years. According to the
U.S. Drought Monitor, 100 percent of California is
currently experiencing some level of drought. To say there
is no hydrological drought in California is simply absurd.

Another fact, the Department of the Interior estimates
that the Endangered Species Act accounted for a mere 2
percent of the water supply reduction in CVP water
deliveries in 2014 and current estimates suggest a
similarly small impact in 2015.

Third, California's State Water Resources Control Board
estimated that in 2015, of all the runoff in the Bay Delta
watershed that flowed to San Francisco Bay--in other words
the water that Donald Trump said was being ``shoved out to
sea''--only 2 percent of this water flowed out to the ocean
solely for environmental protection. The vast majority of
this water was released for salinity control to protect
California's farm and drinking water supplies from being
spoiled.

While we're in fact check mode, I also want to examine this notion
that somehow California's farming industry is not getting water because
of the Endangered Species Act. While some people with vested business
interests have tried to peddle this fiction, the numbers tell a very
different story. Even in this fifth year of historic drought, millions
of acre-feet of water are being delivered to major agricultural water
users. For example, one of the Republican witnesses before us today,
the Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority, is expected to receive 100 percent
of its maximum water allocation in 2016.
The other Republican witness represents another large group of
agricultural water users--the Exchange Contractors--which is projected
to receive 100 percent of its maximum water allocation of around 800
thousand acre-feet. Make no mistake, Mr. Chairman, a tremendous amount
of water is being delivered to agriculture during this drought. In
fact, if you average together total water deliveries this year for all
CVP contractors, most of whom are agricultural water users, the CVP is
projected to deliver approximately 60 percent of maximum contract
quantities this year.
It's also true that much of this water has been made available
because year after year state and Federal agencies have taken water
that was supposed to be used to sustain California's fisheries and
redirected it, primarily to powerful agricultural interests. Fisheries
protections have been cut to the bone and the result has been a
disaster for salmon fishermen.
Federal officials recently announced that there was a 97 percent
mortality rate for juvenile Sacramento winter-run salmon in 2015. The
year before, we had a 95 percent mortality rate. Fishery managers have
severely restricted the commercial salmon season off the West Coast
because of high salmon mortality in California. This comes after a
failed salmon season last year and a virtually canceled Dungeness crab
season.
Right now, many fishermen and their families are hanging on by a
thread. Fishermen are struggling to pay mortgages. Boats are being sold
or scrapped because their owners can't pay mooring fees. Homes have
been repossessed. Restaurants, hotels and other retail and service
businesses are struggling. Simply put, the human impact has been
devastating on the many small business owners and workers whose
livelihoods depend on healthy fish runs. Any further weakening of
existing fishery protections will put many of California's fisheries
and the jobs they support on the path to extinction.
While I agree that California's agricultural industry is important,
it's long past time for the Republican Members of this subcommittee to
recognize that there are thousands of other jobs in non-agricultural
industries that also rely on California's water supply. Healthy
ecosystems create and support jobs as well, and this subcommittee needs
to recognize that the thousands whose jobs and livelihoods depend on
water to maintain salmon and other fisheries matter in this debate.

I yield back.

______

Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields.
Dr. Gosar is now recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL A. GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing.
Today, we will hear another narrative of Federal
dysfunction. Thanks to much needed precipitation this year,
many Californians began to see the light at the end of the
drought tunnel. Yet, here we are today holding another hearing
on how two Federal fish agencies are making the light dimmer by
undermining the water supply mission of another Federal agency,
the Bureau of Reclamation.
Many in the western water world have been frustrated for
years that the Bureau of Reclamation has not been able to stand
up to the never-ending demands of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, the National Marine Fisheries Service, and the
litigants who fuel their missions. Based upon the testimony,
today's circumstances are no different.
The fish agencies have based their latest demands on the
premise that more water equals more fish. That notion has
failed to work, as more water has been dedicated to fish, but
their populations continue to dwindle, mainly due to ocean
conditions, predatory fish, and other natural factors.
These agency proposals for more water midway through the
irrigation season were not based on transparency. They not only
failed to communicate adequately to water users, but they
couldn't even communicate to each other. For example, one
agency wanted to hold back water in reservoirs to supposedly
benefit salmon, while the other wanted to drain the water to
protect the Delta smelt.
These two agencies have direct jurisdiction over the
Endangered Species Act, and it is clear they cannot harmonize
their views on two different fish within the same watershed. It
is time for a holistic approach on managing these species and
to have one proposal, not two. Furthermore, these agencies need
to be reorganized to avoid this situation. But don't take my
word for it, take our President's, who proposed the same ideas
a few years ago. So if you will look at the video, I would like
to play 22 to 45.
[Video shown.]
Dr. Gosar. He is referring to management of Pacific salmon
and steelhead. Both agencies also manage Atlantic salmon and
sea turtles, but as you will see today, both agencies manage
species within the same watershed and there is simply no
coordinated plan when these species' supposed needs conflict
with each other. Meanwhile, the Bureau of Reclamation and its
water users are left hanging in the political whims of this
Administration.
For this reason, I am working with Mr. LaMalfa on this much
needed reorganization proposal. This is just one way to fix
this mess. There needs to be more transparency, more
independent peer review, and more collaboration between Federal
agencies themselves and with those who work with them.
What is clear is that the process is broken and that the
Federal status quo is not working for species, farmers,
ranchers, and communities that depend on our natural resources.
Defending the way the agencies have done business in this
latest California saga is similar to a doctor ignoring the
causes of sickness that could be cured.
I look forward to today's hearing. And with that, I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gosar follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Paul Gosar, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Arizona
Thank you for holding this important hearing.
Today, we will hear another narrative of Federal dysfunction.
Thanks to much-needed precipitation this year, many Californians began
to see the light at the end of the drought tunnel. Yet, here we are
today holding a hearing on how two Federal fish agencies are making
that light dimmer by undermining the water supply mission of another
Federal agency, the Bureau of Reclamation.
Many in the western water world have been frustrated for years that
the Bureau of Reclamation has not been able to stand up to the never-
ending demands of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National
Marine Fisheries Service, and the litigants who fuel their missions.
Based upon the testimony, today's circumstance is no different.
The fish agencies have based their latest demands on the premise
that more water equals more fish. That notion has failed to work, as
more water has been dedicated to the fish, but their populations
continue to dwindle mainly due to ocean conditions, predatory fish and
other natural factors.
These agencies proposals for more water midway through the
irrigation season were not based on transparency. They not only failed
to communicate adequately to water users, but they couldn't even
communicate to each other. For example, one agency wanted to hold back
water in reservoirs to supposedly benefit salmon while the other wanted
to drain the water to protect the Delta smelt.
These two agencies have direct jurisdiction over the Endangered
Species Act and it's clear that they cannot harmonize their views on
two different fish within the same watershed. It's time for a holistic
approach on managing these species and to have one proposal, not two.
Furthermore, these agencies need to be re-organized to avoid this
situation. But, don't take my word for it, take our President's, who
proposed the same idea a few years ago.

Watch video clip at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFcWz9eyovA

Now, he's referring to management of Pacific salmon and steelhead.
Both agencies also manage Atlantic salmon and sea turtles. But, as we
will see today, both agencies manage species within the watershed and
there's simply no coordinated plan when those species supposed needs
conflict with each other. Meanwhile, the Bureau of Reclamation and its
water users are left hanging in the political whims of this
Administration.
For this reason, I'm working with Mr. LaMalfa on this much-needed
reorganization proposal.
This is just one way to fix this mess. There needs to be more
transparency, more independent peer review and more collaboration
between Federal agencies themselves and with those who work with them.
What's clear is that the process is broken and the Federal status
quo isn't working for species, farmers and ranchers and the communities
that depend on our natural resources. Defending the way the agencies
have done business in this latest California saga is similar to a
doctor ignoring the causes of sickness that could be cured.

I look forward to today's hearing.

______

Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman.
We are now ready to hear from our panel of witnesses. I
will remind our panel that you will have 5 minutes to give your
testimony, but whatever the length of your written testimony,
it will be accepted as a permanent record.
First we have Mr. Jeffrey Sutton, General Manager of the
Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority, from Willows, California.
Mr. David Murillo, Director of the Mid-Pacific Region of
the Bureau of Reclamation in Sacramento, California. Mr.
Murillo is accompanied by two individuals, Dr. Ren Lohoefener,
Director of the Pacific Southwest Region of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service in Sacramento, and Mr. Barry Thom, Deputy
Regional Administrator of the National Marine Fisheries Service
in Portland, Oregon.
Then we have Mr. Bob Borck, a boat skipper based out of
Eureka, California.
And finally, Mr. Ara Azhderian, Water Policy Administrator
of the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority, which is based
in Los Banos, California.
I now recognize Mr. LaMalfa to introduce the first witness.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LaMALFA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having this hearing and your attention to this tough issue we
have going in California.
Over the last several decades, we have seen increasing
regulatory requirements imposed on the Central Valley Project
that have strangled its ability to provide water for all
Californians. CVP is now operated with a stronger emphasis on
managing flows for fish than for the millions of Californians
who have built it and rely upon it.
Today, we are discussing two contradictory proposals by two
wildlife agencies who, clearly, do not communicate with each
other. One, NMFS, proposes drastically cutting water releases
from the Shasta Reservoir to allegedly assist salmon, and cut
Californians' water supply. The Fish and Wildlife Service
proposes drastically increasing water releases from Shasta
Reservoir, allegedly to assist Delta smelt, and cut
Californians' water supplies.
I am really glad that Jeff Sutton could join us today. I
have worked a long time with him in Northern California. He
comes from the Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority. As their General
Manager, he has worked tirelessly to find solutions on all
sides of the issues, working collaboratively with the
conservation interests as well as keeping the water flowing.
So, Jeff, thank you for joining us today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to introduce
and comment.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Mr. Sutton, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY SUTTON, GENERAL MANAGER, TEHAMA-COLUSA
CANAL AUTHORITY, WILLOWS, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Sutton. Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
speak today. Again, my name is Jeff Sutton. I am General
Manager of the Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority.
I represent 17 water districts through 4 counties on the
west side of the Sacramento Valley. We have a 140-mile canal
system serving a variety of crops, about 1,000 family farms.
This California drought, everyone has suffered, communities
have suffered, the environment has suffered, the fish have
suffered, and the farmers have suffered. It has been a rough
time. And let me tell you, this is an area that I am very
passionate about. My family farming operation that I am
involved in goes back to the 1870s. I am fifth generation and
my son is number six, so we have been there a long time working
for something we are proud of. A lot of our communities are a
church, a Ford dealership, a John Deere dealership, and a
fertilizer store. These are family farms that are proud of what
they do, and finding ourselves kind of being defensive for the
folks that provide the water that feeds our country and the
Nation. It is just a strange place to be to see our farmers
vilified in recent times. We believe we provide a lot to the
country and the world.
The recent drought--2008 and 2009 were tough years. We had
a couple good years between then, but 2014 and 2015 were
extremely hard. For the Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority Service
Area, we are those junior water right holders. We are CVP water
service contracts, all 17 districts. We had zero percent
allocation for 2 straight years. During that time, we fallowed
upwards of 70,000 acres. We had to go through amazing
gymnastics to prevent the destruction of permanent crops that
could not be fallowed through some of those water transfers
that, by the way, when we do those water transfers, we have to
work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, because if the
water cannot be delivered, a lot of land was put out because of
the lack of ability to deliver. But if you want to transfer
some from a senior water right holder, you have to jump through
a lot of hoops and regulatory issues, CEQA, NEPA, to deal with
the fact that you are going to fallow lands that have
endangered giant garter snakes on them. And that is another
species that is harmed by some of those actions that we are
talking about today that are not even really analyzed in the
scheme of this entire regulatory regimen. So, those are
challenges that we have to work together to get through.
2015 came along--did it solve the problem? No. Congressman
Huffman, is the drought completely over? No. But I will tell
you, reading the Sacramento Bee flying in yesterday, Shasta
Reservoir, that most of us rely on as the largest reservoir in
California, is 108 percent of historical average today.
Finding ourselves at a time we rejoiced with 100 percent
allocation, you are absolutely right, our district did get 100
percent allocation, and it actually set us up for what was a
scarier year than 2014 and 2015 with these actions that have
been proposed. We had National Marine Fisheries come in and
want to reduce releases out of Shasta to the point that we
could not even take water anymore. We would have been
completely cut off, this after we had planted all our crops and
made that investment, taken out loans, and taken our documents
preparing for a bad year to do water transfers and threw them
in the garbage can--they wouldn't have done us any good anyway,
because it was too late to do water transfers. The lack of
certainty after your planting date, after you have been awarded
this, and the circumstances that would have befallen our
farmers were an absolute tragedy.
Further--and I see my time is running terribly short--but
we are also--independently of our own volition and cost, the
NMFS action would have stopped us from doing something that we
are spending our own money on to help Delta smelt, to run it
through a bypass. We are pumping the water, we are operating
and maintaining everything, and that would have been prohibited
by what NMFS was doing.
In conclusion, we just have to find a way. The water users
are engaged. Congressman Huffman, you know our Red Bluff
project. I mean, we have done a lot. The fish have a better
situation than ever, but we have to start working together. We
need one biological opinion and we need collaboration and
science-driven process while we work together to get one
biological opinion, and help our farmers and the fish. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sutton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeffrey P. Sutton, General Manager, Tehama-Colusa
Canal Authority
Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
introduction
My name is Jeff Sutton, and I am the General Manager of the Tehama-
Colusa Canal Authority (TCCA), a Joint Powers Authority comprised of
seventeen (17) Water Districts, all of whom are Central Valley Project
(CVP) Water Service Contractors.
The 150,000 acre service area that the TCCA serves spans four
counties (Tehama, Glenn, Colusa, and Yolo Counties) along the west side
of the Sacramento Valley, providing irrigation water to a diverse
agricultural landscape and over 1,000 family farms that produce a
variety of crops, including almonds, pistachios, walnuts, olives,
grapes, prunes, rice, tomatoes, sunflowers, melons, vine seeds,
alfalfa, and irrigated pasture. The water provided to these lands
results in an annual regional economic benefit of over $1 billion.
The TCCA diverts water from the Sacramento River through the
recently constructed Red Bluff Fish Passage Improvement Project, a
quarter mile long, positive barrier, flat plate fish screen (one of the
largest of its kind in the world), and new pumping plant, that provided
for the retirement of the operation of the Red Bluff Diversion Dam, and
the elimination of the fishery impacts associated therewith. This
Project, implemented in partnership with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
(USBR) created the capacity for reliable diversions of irrigation
within the TCCA service area while also providing for unimpeded fish
passage to prime spawning habitat on the upper Sacramento River for
several threatened and endangered species (Winter and Spring Run
Chinook Salmon, Steelhead, and Green Sturgeon). Included in the project
is a 20+ acre mitigation site that includes extensive riparian habitat
and a shallow side channel off the main stem of the Sacramento River
designed specifically to benefit juvenile salmonid rearing habitat. The
Red Bluff Fish Passage Project was recognized with the Association of
California Water Agencies Clair Hill award for water project of the
year, and the large water project of the year award from the district
and western regional divisions of the American Society of Civil
Engineers.
the california drought
From 2012-2015, California suffered greatly as a result of severe
drought conditions. This prolonged dry period pushed the California
water supply system to the breaking point at a time when it was already
vulnerable due to a variety of factors including: continued population
growth coupled with a lack of corresponding investment in new water
infrastructure; and, most impactful, an increasingly burdensome
regulatory environment that has continued to erode the supply side of
the equation, reducing the flexibility, reliability, and operational
viability of both the Central Valley Project and the State Water
Project. As a result, severe and lasting impacts have been felt in all
sectors during this drought crisis--urban, environmental, and
agricultural.
In 2014 and 2015, for the first time in the history of the TCCA
service area, all 17 water districts and 150,000 acres of prime
farmland received an allocation of zero percent pursuant to their CVP
water contracts. This resulted in extensive fallowing of farms
(estimated at approximately 70,000 acres). In order to survive, TCCA
growers resorted to the only alternative available to them. Paying
others to fallow their fields, at great near-term expense in order to
avoid the long-term economic catastrophe that would occur with the loss
of permanent orchard crops.
These impacts have reverberated throughout our communities, and are
not merely being felt by the farmers who have had to forego the
planting of their fields. This crisis has also caused secondary impacts
to agricultural based inputs (such as fuel companies, tractor
companies, parts stores, fertilizer and seed companies, dryers, mills,
and the local labor force), and tertiary impacts to other local
businesses (stores, restaurants, auto dealers, etc.), as well as
greatly affected local municipal services.
This historic lack of water supply has been felt throughout the CVP
service area, with the Friant Water Authority and San Luis Delta
Mendota Water Authority water districts also receiving a zero percent
allocation in 2014 and 2015. That represents well over 2 million acres,
of some of the most productive farmland in the world, receiving not a
drop of surface water from the CVP. In these rural counties, these
farms are the factories that fuel our economy. Without the water
necessary to fuel this engine, it all comes to a screeching halt.
While the extremely dry period of hydrology currently being
experienced in California has greatly contributed to the dire
situation, regulatory actions, based on questionable science that have
failed to provided the stated intentions of improving the fishery and
environmental conditions, have frustrated efforts to effectively manage
our water resources in an effective and efficient manner.
During similar California dry periods in 1977, and the drought
experienced from the late 1980s through the early 1990s, while
challenging, did not present the same desperation and impacts that are
being felt today. During those experiences, reduced allocations
occurred, but we were able to receive deliveries of 25-60 percent of
the water to CVP agricultural water service contractors. Water storage
projects were built to serve as our savings accounts during times of
drought, a dynamic that had served us well. However reduced
flexibility, lack of investment, and the repurposing of these resources
for environmental purposes threaten the continued viability of our
water supply system.
What has changed? First, legislative mandates and regulatory
actions have resulted in lost water supply yield and reduced
operational flexibility for our existing facilities. Second, permitting
hurdles and a lack of coordination have prevented new projects from
being realized.
Specifically, actions taken pursuant to the Central Valley Project
Improvement Act, the USFWS and NMFS Endangered Species Act biological
opinions related to the operations of the CVP, the Clean Water Act, and
the Trinity Record of Decision have collectively impacted the
deliveries of the CVP and the State Water Project (two of the largest
water supply projects in the United States) by millions of acre-feet.
When combined, an absence of coordination coupled with regulatory
hurdles have prevented any significant investment in new statewide
water storage in California since the 1970s, during which time the
population of the state has more than doubled. In short, while the
demand for water has increased, our tools to manage and supply this
vital resource have eroded. This is a recipe for disaster, and has
resulted in impacts to California communities, agriculture, and the
environment.
2016, a hope for relief
During the winter of 2016 significant rains in Northern California
relieved drought conditions at CVP and SWP facilities. For example,
Shasta, Oroville, and Folsom reservoirs, all of which had been reduced
to historic lows in the previous drought years, filled to over 100
percent of their historical capacity. The Sacramento, Yuba, and Feather
River systems, as well as many of their tributaries, ran high
throughout much of the winter and well into the spring, resulting in
surplus conditions in the Bay Delta. Shasta's recovery, in particular,
was a welcomed relief to the CVP, climbing from a low point of 1.3
million acre-feet (AF) (which was at 1.0 million AF in 2014) to peaking
at over 4.2 million AF (with a capacity of 4.5 million AF). A
significant improvement compared to the previous years, where the high
water marks were 2.4 million AF and 2.7 million AF.
Further, the winter of 2016 provided a significantly increased and
welcomed snow pack from previous years, as well as served to greatly
benefit the regional aquifers that had been greatly exercised
throughout the previous dry years. While the rumored ``Godzilla El
Nino'' did not show up in full force, failing to provide complete
recovery for all of California from the previous 4 dry years, it did
significantly and substantially improve hydrologic conditions
throughout the state, foretelling of an anticipated reprieve from the
draconian water reductions and mandated conservation measures that
befell California water agencies the previous 2 years.
On April 1 of 2016, the good news became official for TCCA water
users and others, an allocation announcement from USBR of 100 percent
for TCCA water users and other north of the Delta agricultural water
service contractors, the Sacramento River Settlement Contractors, the
San Joaquin Exchange Contractors, and for CVP M&I water users.
Friant water users did not see the same increases due to less
recovery on the east side of the San Joaquin Valley, but did see
significantly increased water allocations and it appeared would not
have to fear a call on their water as a result of the inability to pump
sufficient water to meet the contract terms for the Exchange
Contractors, who have senior water rights on the San Joaquin River.
Due to regulatory conditions that greatly reduced USBR's ability to
pump from the Delta throughout the winter and spring, despite the
incredibly significant flows being experienced, the SLDMWA contractors
continued to experience severe cutbacks, but did receive an allocation
of 5 percent, with hope that circumstances could improve as the water
year went on. This was a slight improvement over the previous 2 years
that were zero percent. Unfortunately, hundreds of thousands of acre-
feet of water were lost to the project as a result of the biological
opinions that prevented water from being pumped and stored to provide
some desperately needed relief to the farms and refuges on the west
side of the San Joaquin Valley. This lost opportunity places further
burden on the upstream reservoirs later in the year due to the
inability to operate the CVP as planned. The Delta facilities allow for
pumping to capitalize on the winter and spring flows below Shasta, and
that accrue to the Delta, to be stored in San Luis Reservoir. This lost
opportunity, due to regulatory constraints, continues to impair the
ability to operate the CVP as designed, causing significant impacts
throughout an integrated system.
fws and nmfs proposals
Shortly thereafter, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) proposed actions mandating
mutually exclusive prescriptions that I believe posed a significant
threat to the 2016 water operations plan of the CVP and its
contractors.
The USFWS called for increased summer outflow that would require
the release from upstream reservoirs of up to 300,000 AF of water for
the stated purpose of improving smelt habitat. To my knowledge, summer
outflow had never been considered as an action to benefit smelt and it
is not a requirement pursuant to either of the last two intensive
efforts to produce an ESA Biological Opinion for Delta smelt conducted
by the USFWS. Further, the proposal failed to provide substantial
scientific justification to merit what appeared to be little more than
a high-risk gamble lacking an identifiable reward. The proposal also
lacked adequate mechanisms to measure the outcomes of summer outflows
giving rise to concerns that those proposing them might do so again in
subsequent years regardless of the fact the potential benefits to the
smelt could be non-existent while the negative impacts to those relying
on the water being re-distributed would be certain. Additionally, the
summer outflows were proposed well after the opportunity to acquire the
needed quantities of water to achieve them had passed. There was no
identification of funds to implement the action and it was implemented
with complete disregard and lack of analysis to the impacts such an
action would place on water users, refuges, other fish and wildlife and
needs. Further, it ignored the impacts associated with repurposing this
Federal funding that had been dedicated to other important
environmental purposes.
Simultaneously, NMFS called for planned releases out of Shasta
Reservoir to be reduced down to 8,000 cfs (significantly less than the
temperature plan had called, up to 2,500 cfs less during peak demand
periods in July) throughout the entire summer under claims that this
was required to provide sufficient cold water throughout the season for
endangered winter run Chinook salmon. NMFS claims mortality in 2014 and
2015 of 95 percent and 97 percent of winter run juveniles due to
coldwater concerns. This claim is not wholly accurate due to their
admitted lack of any monitoring during high flows on the upper
Sacramento River at the Red Bluff facilities during high winter flows,
the time these fish are most likely to migrate downstream. Further,
NMFS proposed this ultra-conservative approach, despite assurances from
USBR modeling that they could meet the requested temperature thresholds
(that were greater than even called for in the NMFS BO).
As such, we had one agency calling for increased releases from
upstream reservoirs for one species, while another called for severely
reduced releases for another species. This, despite the fact that these
actions are not included in any peer-reviewed regulatory requirement
that has been through the prescribed Federal process or other analysis
in regard to the potential impacts on the environment, the economy, or
the health and welfare of the state of California.
the impacts
The impacts of the NMFS proposed action have already occurred to
some degree, despite ultimately an agreement obtained by USBR's valiant
efforts to ensure a more balanced interagency process. Throughout the
months of May and June, reduced releases caused havoc on Sacramento
River operations, resulting in some senior water contractors being
shorted water supply, harm to irrigation pumping facilities due to low
river elevations, water users having to alternatively pump groundwater
wells at increased cost and from overly exercised aquifers due to the
recent drought. Further, this has caused reduced ability to pump from
the Delta to meet water allocations already announced south of the
Delta, potentially resulting in shortages, after farmers had already
taken out loans and expended significant funds to plant crops in
reliance on receipt of water that was promised.
Had the prescribed operation that NMFS pursued been implemented, it
would have led to an array of consequences, including the following:

1.  TCCA water users and other north of the Delta water service
contractors would likely have been substantially or
completely deprived of the 100 percent allocation they were
allocated, well after all their crops had been planted.
This would have occurred after the time that they could
have pursued water transfers, leaving them with little or
no alternatives except to try to pump groundwater, where
available, to enable their crops to survive. It is likely
that most or all of the $1 billion of regional annual
economic benefit that results from this farming activity
would have been substantially lost. Most or all of the
annual crops would have been destroyed, including the
accompanying habitat benefits provided thereby, that
provides significant waterfowl and wildlife habitat,
including habitat for the endangered giant garter snake.
Worse yet, tens of thousands of permanent crops would
likely have been devastated as well. Permanent loss of
these investments would have long lasting and deeply felt
economic impact to the regional economy. Agricultural
businesses and lending institutions would likewise be hard
hit.

2.  Settlement Contractors with senior water rights likewise would
not have been able to divert all of the water that they are
contractually entitled to, well after they had already
planted and incurred substantial cost. This would have
resulted in further significant losses in the Sacramento
Valley as described above, and great loss of significant
quantities of the primary habitat for a variety of
specifies, including waterfowl and giant garter snake.

3.  It is likely that this action would have led to the inability to
meet the contractual obligation to the Exchange Contractors
as well, resulting in them making a call on the water
allocated to the Friant Water Users in Millerton Reservoir.
This would cause significant impacts to both of these
constituencies.

4.  The actions to date still may, and certainly would have if fully
implemented, deprived the contractors served by the SLDMWA
of the slim 5 percent water allocation they received and
planned for this year.

5.  This action would have resulted in severe reductions to the
refuge water supply to the detriment of the fish and
wildlife, in particular the benefits to the waterfowl
dependent on the Pacific Flyway.

6.  The actions taken already have in increased pressure on Folsom
Reservoir, requiring increased releases to make up for the
reductions from Shasta. The proposed action, if fully
implemented, likely would have placed the American River
urban area in another year of panic, as bad, or worse than
experienced the past 2 years.

In summary, the action proposed by NMFS would have had a domino
effect throughout the entire CVP, resulting in severe impacts to
communities, farms, and other fish and wildlife needs.
conclusion
The CVP is suffering from a thousand cuts due to inconsistent and
unbalanced regulatory requirements. Despite many of the reservoirs
being filled in 2016, CVP operations are running on the ragged edge,
failing to fulfill the needs of its contractors or the authorized
purposes of the Project.
Despite billions of dollars of investment and millions of acre-feet
being repurposed to benefit the fishery needs, as prescribed by the
fishery agencies, we continue to see a continued decline in fish
populations. CVPIA required 800,000 AF of water to be utilized for
fishery purposes. The water users have funded the ecosystem restoration
fund to provide billions in resources directed by these agencies to
assist in fishery recovery. Every major upstream diversion has been
fitted with a state-of-the-art fish screen. A temperature control
device was added to Shasta Reservoir to benefit salmon. The biological
opinions have continued to mandate further actions, reducing pumping
and adding habitat restoration that have resulted in the rededication
of more water to the environment and away from water users. Conditions
for fish, according to the actions prescribed by the agencies, have
never been better. Despite all of these efforts, the populations
continue to decline. A more coordinated, science-driven and outcome-
based approach is needed.
Single species management is not working, as evidenced by the
current conflict between the above described smelt and salmon actions.
For every action, there is a reaction. We need to pursue a coordinated,
holistic, and more all encompassing approach to our problems in order
to be successful. Working toward the development of a single NMFS and
USFWS Biological Opinion for smelt and salmon would be a good place to
start.
California water users are committed to working toward fishery
solutions, but not at the expense of their livelihoods and this
Nation's food supply. The Sacramento River Settlement Contractors have
undertaken several actions in an effort improve fishery conditions,
actions undertaken at their own volition and at their own expense.
South of Delta SWP and CVP contractors have invested hundreds of
millions of dollars trying to pursue viable solutions to identify
workable solutions to the Delta problems. TCCA is currently partnering
to assist on a project to increase food availability to Delta smelt, an
action that the NMFS proposal would have prohibited. The Fish Passage
Improvement Project at Red Bluff championed by the TCCA is further
evidence of our commitment to solving problems.
A more robust process is needed to ensure that proposed regulatory
actions are informed by sound science and directed at achieving
measureable outcomes. In addition, greater priority should be given to
ensure the interagency coordination needed to quantify how potential
actions will impact all CVP water users and the environment.
If we do not find a way to work together in a more coordinated
fashion that takes into account and respects all water needs, including
the needs of our communities, agriculture and the environment, I fear
we are headed for a future where both the Delta smelt and agriculture
are extinct in California.

______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Sutton.
Mr. Murillo, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MURILLO, MID-PACIFIC REGIONAL DIRECTOR,
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Murillo. Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the subcommittee, I am David Murillo, Regional
Director of the Mid-Pacific Region of the Bureau of
Reclamation. I am pleased to be here today to discuss changing
demands on the Central Valley Project in California and actions
we are taking to manage flow and temperatures for the benefit
of fish, wildlife, and our water and power customers.
Joining me are Ren Lohoefener from the Fish and Wildlife
Service, and Barry Thom from the National Marine Fisheries
Services.
My written statement has been submitted for the record, so
I will summarize that in the interest of time.
As of this month, the effects of an El Nino winter across
California have left us with widely varying water supplies.
Some facilities are near full, others are less than half
capacity. As you know, despite the variability, Reclamation
water users, like those beside me today, must operate
facilities to balance competing demands and to comply with a
suite of legal requirements.
In the case of the CVP, that means water rights permitting
conditions from the California State Water Resource Control
Board and biological opinions for the protection of fish listed
under the State and Federal Endangered Species Act.
This spring and early summer, our agencies have been
working on a temperature management plan for the Sacramento
River, as required by the 2009 NMFS biological opinion and
State Order 90-5, with the primary focus of protecting winter-
run Sacramento River Chinook salmon. The plan is geared toward
meeting obligations and maintaining commitments for operations
of the CVP and State Water Project. The plan has also been
developed to limit impacts to other beneficial uses, such as
Folsom Reservoir levels, American River temperature, and Delta
water quality.
The other option proposed, temperature management point, is
at a location called Balls Ferry in Shasta County, keeping the
river there at a 56-degree average daily temperature, as
required under Order 90-5. Decisionmaking for significant
changes in real-time operations is being coordinated among the
partners, including Reclamation, NMFS, the Service, California
Department of Water Resources, California Department of Fish
and Wildlife, and the State Board.
As always, to the extent that Reclamation and the state can
maximize export pumping from the Bay Delta, particularly during
any sudden increases in Delta in-flow, we will continue to do
so, just as we have done in the past. However, since the plan
does fall somewhat short of the planned schedule for releases
to the Sacramento River this summer, some adjustments to the
2016 CVP allocations are possible. Throughout this process, we
work closely and transparently with CVP water users to explore
this possibility. We will continue that collaboration.
That said, and with progressively dryer conditions this
summer, we are encouraging communities to continue to conserve
water and operate as efficiently as possible. We recognize that
has become business as usual for most water users, some of whom
are alongside me here today. While I cannot give any guarantees
as to how the year will play out, Reclamation stands ready to
adjust operations to improve temperature conditions if needed.
Equally, Reclamation expects the real-time monitoring and
adjustment opportunities provided for in the plan to allow
essential flexibility to enable to us meet our commitments,
while operating within what will be close confines of the law.
I hope that the many jointly funded projects our agencies
pursue each year with the water users and environmental
communities are evidence of our strong ongoing partnership. At
the operational, financial, and policy levels, we are committed
to helping California succeed in all years, not just in times
of drought, flood, or environmental crises.
In closing, we would like to thank the subcommittee for its
attention to this issue. These past several years have been
incredibly challenging, and we are proud of the collaboration
and creativity the stakeholders have shown in finding ways to
manage this complicated and important system.
This concludes my statement. I would be pleased to answer
any questions at the appropriate time. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murillo follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Murillo, Regional Director, Mid-Pacific
Region, Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the Interior
Chairman Fleming, Ranking Member Huffman and members of the
subcommittee, I am David Murillo, Regional Director for the Mid-Pacific
Region of the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation). I am pleased to
represent the Department of the Interior (Department) today to discuss
changing demands on the Central Valley Project (CVP) in California, and
actions we are taking with our partner agencies to manage river flow
and temperatures in 2016 for the benefit of fish, wildlife, and our
water and power customers.
In February of this year, Reclamation presented testimony before
this subcommittee describing how 4 years of brutal drought in
California were transitioning into an El Nino water year in 2015-2016.
We discussed how these 4 drought years have severely reduced snowpack,
drawn down reservoir levels and brought about significant groundwater
withdrawals that have taken their toll on California's water users, the
environment, the economy and communities across the state. We cautioned
against the misguided hope of many that one El Nino year would be
enough to correct for the long running, persistent drought. Against
that backdrop, we referenced what I continue to see as innovative local
agreements, adaptive management, and resilience that have all been
essential to the survival of many farms and small communities.
Today I can provide an update on conditions, and on the temperature
and flow considerations that have occupied a great deal of the time,
energy, and concern for me and the other witnesses here today.
As of this month, the effects of an El Nino winter across
California have left the state with widely varying water supplies in
its network of local, state, and Federal reservoirs. Precipitation
above the CVP's Shasta Lake was abundant enough this past winter that
Shasta Dam spent several weeks during the spring in or near flood
control operations. Conditions in the Trinity River Division of the CVP
were also improved over recent years. Trinity Reservoir is currently at
70 percent of the 15-year average as of today, and significant releases
have been made to the Trinity River to support the Trinity River
Restoration Program consistent with the Program's 2000 Record of
Decision. Further to the south, while Folsom Lake on the American River
reached elevations requiring flood control releases during the winter,
drought conditions on that basin can still be felt. Unfortunately,
conditions on the San Joaquin River Basin were much dryer, such that
New Melones Reservoir is at only 44 percent of its 15-year average for
this date. These storage levels illustrate the challenging results of 1
year of average to below-average hydrology when combined with long-
standing drought in these important basins.
Even in the face of these varying hydrologic conditions,
Reclamation must operate the CVP to balance the competing demands and
to comply with a suite of legal requirements, including water rights
permitting conditions by the California State Water Resources Control
Board (State Board) and biological opinions (BiOps) for the protection
of fish species listed under the state and Federal Endangered Species
Acts (ESA). The National Marine Fisheries Service's (NMFS) 2009 BiOp
covers ESA-listed steelhead, Chinook salmon and sturgeon, and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service's (Service) 2008 BiOp applies to Delta smelt.
Temperature considerations are required under the 2009 NMFS BiOp as
well as State Board Order 90-5 for the benefit of species in the
Sacramento River and conditions in the Bay Delta. This spring and early
summer our agencies have been working on a 2016 temperature management
plan for the Sacramento River as required by the 2009 NMFS BiOp and
Order 90-5, with the primary focus of protecting critically endangered
Sacramento River winter-run Chinook salmon. I know the 2016 Sacramento
River Temperature Management Plan (SRTMP) is one of the central topics
of the subcommittee's interest today, and I will focus the remainder of
my statement on this matter.
In late June and early July, Reclamation, NMFS and the state of
California finalized plans to operate the CVP and Shasta Dam consistent
with temperature requirements for winter-run Chinook salmon and
transmitted the plan to the State Board. We believe the plan avoids
excessive mortality to winter-run Chinook salmon that would violate the
ESA while allowing some flexibility to operate the CVP and State Water
Project (SWP) to allow Reclamation to take other actions, recommended
by scientists at the Service, to augment Delta outflow for the benefit
of critically imperiled Delta smelt, also listed under the ESA. The
SRTMP recommends an approach to maintain a 56.0+ F daily average
temperature through the end of September, while ensuring that the
limited supply of cold water behind Shasta Dam can be fully and
strategically utilized throughout the season. In addition, this
approach helps Reclamation meet other obligations and maintain
commitments for operation of the CVP and SWP. The SRTMP has also been
developed to limit impacts to other beneficial uses, such as Folsom
Reservoir levels, American River temperature management for species
protection, and Delta water quality. The over-arching proposed
temperature compliance point is a location called Balls Ferry in Shasta
County, and Order 90-5 requires, keeping daily average water
temperature in the River at this location at 56.0+ F. The SRTMP calls
for actual daily releases to be based on real-time monitoring to ensure
that temperature compliance is accomplished, and other downstream
diversion, flow, and Delta requirements are met. Decision-making for
significant changes in real-time operations is being further
coordinated among the partners including Reclamation, NMFS, the
Service, California Department of Water Resources (DWR), California
Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the State Board (collectively, the
state and Federal agencies).
The SRTMP includes monitoring activities throughout the summer and
fall, and check-in points to ensure that sufficient cold water reserves
are being maintained to meet the temperature management objectives
identified in the plan. In the event that monitoring shows that cold
water reserves are being depleted in a way not envisioned in the plan
(i.e., if the volume of Shasta Reservoir water
Delta smelt are an endangered fish in California's
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta and Estuary that, for the most
part, live for just one year. Listed in 1993, its numbers
have declined severely and they now persist at less than 1%
of their number at the time of listing.

The status of delta smelt, as a species, is gauged by
calculating ``abundance indexes'' from several fish surveys
in the estuary. An abundance index is intended to provide
an indication of how well a species is doing in relative
terms but doesn't translate into a specific population
size. The best known are the Fall Midwater Trawl (FMWT)
Index, summer Tow Net Survey (TNS) Index \1\ and the 20-mm
Survey Index. The indexes are now at record low levels. The
20-mm Index, for example, has been as high as 39, averages
11, and in 2015 was at 0.3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Also referred to here as the STN Index

Increased flow could help aquatic species in a variety of
ways: spawning habitat area and volume, spawning habitat
access, habitat space, predation avoidance through
turbidity and shallows access, reduced entrainment, toxics
dilution, increased entrapment zone residence time, habitat
diversity, more favorable water temperatures, strengthened
gravitational circulation, migratory cues, and higher food
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
production (EET 1996, Kimmerer 2002b)

Increased outflow has been proposed as one measure that
might help delta smelt in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta
because abundance of some other species is correlated with
outflow.\2\ Outflow if often quantified using ``X2'' as a
metric. X2 designates the location of the 2% bottom
salinity (grams of salt per kilogram of seawater) along the
axis of the estuary and is measured in km from the Golden
Gate Bridge. The lower X2, the higher the outflow. It is a
sensitive index of the estuarine community's response to
net freshwater inflow.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Kimmerer et al 2009, IEP MAST 2015
\3\ Jassby et al 1995, p.272

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
(Bullets correspond numerically with the executive summary)

Spring Flows

1.   Kimmerer et al. (2009) studied the relationship between spring X2
and abundance of delta smelt in the summer and fall and found: \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ As reported in Table 2

a statistically significant (p=0.018) positive
relationship (abundance increases as spring outflows decrease)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in the summer Tow Net Survey for the period 1959-1981,

a slight negative but insignificant (p=0.38)
relationship in the summer Tow Net Survey for the period 1982-
2007,

a slight positive relationship but of marginal
significance (p=0.14) in the Fall Midwater Trawl, and

a slight negative but insignificant (p=0.6)
relationship in the Bay Midwater Trawl. That is, Kimmerer
showed that spring outflows were either bad for delta smelt or
not significant, and, consistent with earlier studies,\5\
concluded \6\ ``abundance of delta smelt did not vary with
X2''.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Jassby et al (1995), Kimmerer (2002a)
\6\ Kimmerer 2009, p.385
\7\ Here and in other places throughout this document, balding and
underlining is emphasis added in this document and does not occur in
the source documents

2.   Using 20-mm abundance (representing young fish, as opposed to
summer and fall abundance used by Kimmerer et al 2009 and representing
older fish) Figure 79 of the IEP MAST (2015) report (reproduced as
Figure 1 below) depicts a non-linear relationship between spring X2 and
abundance, with abundance increasing as X2 moves westward to 64 km and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
then abundance decreasing as X2 moves further westward.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.008

.epsFigure 1. Plots of the Delta Smelt 20 mm survey abundance index as
a function of spring (February-June) X2.
Source: IEP MAST (2015), Figure 79.

The IEP MAST report notes \8\ that ``after 19 years, the 20mm
survey now provides barely enough annual abundance data points
(indices) to conduct multiple regression analyses with up to
two predictor variables.'' Consequently, we looked to see if
the same relationships held with the STN Index (See Figure 2
below). Similar to Figure 1, we observed the response curve has
flattened in recent years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ p.154

The relationship depicted in Figure 1 provides no guidance as
to causality. Indeed the report specifically calls out that
``individual and interactive effects of additional factors were
not considered in this analysis, but are likely also
important.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ p.153

Even if spring abundance is increased, a comparison of the
abundance indexes for the different life stages of delta smelt
shows the least correlation between summer and fall. This
suggests that even if spring abundance is increased, it is
unlikely to result in an increased number of adults unless the
problems in late summer and fall, which could include factors
such as predation and lack of food, are addressed.
Consequently, the correlations between spring outflows and 20mm
abundance have not been found with abundances in the fall.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Kimmerer et al 2009
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Relationship between Summer Abundance and Spring Flows

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.009

.epsFigure 2. Relationship between summer abundance, as determined by
the STN Index, and spring outflow, determined by the average X2
location between February to June, 1980-2015.
Sources: TNS Survey, Dayflow.

A check of the 2003-2013 data from the IEP MAST report (see
Appendix A, below) found the nonlinear term to be insignificant
and X2 itself to be barely significant (p=0.046) with a
coefficient of -0.345. That is, for every 1 km X2 is moved
westward, the spring abundance index would increase by 0.345.
But there is considerable uncertainty around this coefficient
because of the limited number of data points and wide
variability in the data--the standard error is 0.146 suggesting
the 95% confidence interval for the coefficient is 0.053 to
0.637.

The 20mm survey, which began in 1995, was specifically designed
to improve the sampling of young delta smelt. As such, it has
advantages over other surveys. However, the period from 1995 to
1999 was wetter than normal. And the last several years, ending
in 2015 has been drier than normal. Throughout the period the
abundance of delta smelt has generally been decreasing. Delta
smelt abundance may be decreasing as a result of hydrology, or
it may be decreasing due to some other factor not quantified,
but the coincidental trends with hydrology may provide more
significance to hydrology than is warranted. Consequently, we
suggest that survival and recruitment should be considered, in
addition to abundance.

Summer Flows

3.   Few studies seem to have been published on the relationship
between increased summer outflow and delta smelt abundance. Nobriga et
al. (2008) considered long-term trends in summertime habitat
suitability finding relationships between summer abundance \11\ and
salinity, water clarity and water temperature. Flows can influence each
of these factors. Nobriga et al (2008) found significant relationships
between the presence of delta smelt and the abiotic factors at a
regional level but found no significant relationships between any of
the water quality variables and delta smelt relative abundance at the
estuary-wide level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Nobriga et al (2008) used delta smelt data from the summer Tow
Net Survey

A regression analysis of survival from summer to fall using
covariates of prior abundance, summer outflow and a trend
variable does not indicate summer flows were a significant
factor (see Appendix B). Figure 3 below shows the relationship
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
between average X2 location and summer survival.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.010

.epsFigure 3. Relationship between summer survival, as determined by
the ratio of the FMWT Index divided by the STN Index, and
summer outflow, determined by the average X2 location June to
August, 1969-2014.
Sources: TNS Survey, FMWT Survey, Dayflow.

Lund et al (2015) depict a delta hydrograph \12\ that has
flattened over time with lower spring outflows and higher
summer outflows. Flows through the Delta, July through
September, are now higher than they would have been absent the
CVP and SWP due to reservoir reregulation from spring to
fall.\13\ Has this flatter hydrograph favored non-native
species at the expense of native species? Too many factors have
changed simultaneously to provide a definitive answer, but
providing even more summer outflow would be inconsistent with
the natural hydrograph.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Their Figure 1, p.4
\13\ Hutton et al (2015)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fall Flows

4.   MacNally et al. (2010) considered fall abundance of delta smelt
and found a relationship with fall outflow but the Odds Ratio was
0.14.\14\ An odds ratio greater than 3.2 is needed to conclude
substantial evidence, and greater than 10 to conclude strong evidence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ It was actually reported by MacNally et al. as ``1/7.1'' but
converted here for ease of comparison

Thompson et al. (2010) found no significant relationship
between delta smelt abundance and either spring X2 or autumn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
X2.

Feyrer et al. (2007) found that salinity (EC at individual
stations) during the fall explained 60% of the variation in
recruitment (summer abundance compared to prior fall) after the
clam invasion (post 1986). However, there appears to be no
significant relationship between the monthly average EC at FMWT
stations and monthly average X2 in the fall, suggesting that
increasing outflow to modify X2 will not necessarily result in
a change in the average EC at FMWT stations. Consequently it is
difficult to detect a relationship between Fall X2 and
recruitment (see Figure 4 below).

A graphical analysis of both survival during the fall and
subsequent recruitment suggest increased outflows during the
fall are just as likely to be bad for delta smelt as good for
them (see Figures 4 and 5 below). Some of the higher survival
and recruitment actually occurs when fall outflows are low (X2
greater than 80). This should be of particular concern. It
suggests that a clear understanding of the underlying
mechanisms is not known and that, in a variety of
circumstances, increasing flows may decrease abundance.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.011

.epsFigure 4. Relationship between Fall Survival, as determined by the
SKT Index divided by the prior STN Index, and fall outflow,
determined by the average X2 location, September to December,
2001-2015. The survival ratio of winter abundance to summer
abundance was used for the survival metric to avoid any overlap
with the explanatory variable of flows during the fall.
Source: TNS and SKT Trawls, X2 data from Dayflow. 2002 and 2003 SKT
Index was estimated from SKT CPUE.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.012

.epsFigure 5. Relationship between recruitment, as determined by 20MM
Index divided by the prior FMWT Index, and fall outflow,
determined by the average X2 location, September to December,
1994-2015.
Sources: 20mm Survey, FMWT Survey, and X2 location from Dayflow.
Mechanisms

5.   Delta smelt face many stressors in the Delta including:
degradation of habitat (loss of marshlands and flood plains, and
decreasing turbidity), increasing numbers of invasive species
(including aquatic weeds which have the potential to alter the
ecosystem significantly), increasing predation and competition,
increasing loading and toxicity of contaminants, decreasing quantity
and quality of food supplies, harmful algal blooms and entrainment. As
depicted in the IEP MAST conceptual model, outflow itself does not
affect delta smelt directly but hydrology affects delta smelt by
interacting with other dynamic drivers to impact landscape and habitat
attributes.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Figure 45, with additional discussion on p.153

Decreasing primary production in the Delta has been well
documented (e.g. Jassby et al 2002). Kimmerer (2002a)
considered potential mechanisms underlying relationships
between the abundance of numerous aquatic organisms and flow.
In regards to food, he concludes: \16\ ``For freshwater flow to
influence fish and shrimp through the food web would require
first that lower trophic levels have positive responses to
flow, and that these responses propagate up the food web.
Neither of these mechanisms is supported by the results
presented here.'' Furthermore ``In the Delta, in spring,
chlorophyll a actually decreased with increasing flow,
apparently because of decreasing residence time (Jassby et al.
2002).'' \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ p. 48
\17\ p. 50

In a detailed analysis of the volume of suitable habitat
determined primarily by salinity and flow, Kimmerer et al
(2009, p. 12) found that ``Despite the evident increase in the
amount of habitat, delta smelt abundance appears to be
regulated by other factors so far unidentified.'' Feyrer et al
(2010) developed a habitat index in the fall comprised of the
abiotic elements of temperature, turbidity (Secchi depth) and
salinity (electrical conductivity). Importantly, they show
graphical relationships \18\ where the habitat index increases
as outflow increases (X2 decreases), and an increase in
abundance as the habitat index increases, thus linking outflow
to abundance. Manly et al (2015), in a reanalysis, found the
importance of the abiotic elements was reduced when region was
considered as a covariate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ In Figure 2 of their paper

Turbidity results from: the transport of suspended sediment
during high flow events associated with winter and spring storm
events, and sediment resuspension through wind, wave and tidal
actions (Schoellhamer et al 2012). While there may be a general
relationship between flows and turbidity, artificially
increasing flows through reservoir releases may have little
influence on turbidity conditions in the delta if sediments
have largely settled out in upstream reservoirs. Merely
increasing outflows does not provide more inundation of flood
plains, nor release more food from them.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Yolo Bypass, a major floodplain on the Sacramento River
system, only flows at significant levels when the Sacramento River
reaches a sufficient height to over top the Freemont Weir. Merely
releasing additional water from reservoirs would not necessarily create
flows in Yolo Bypass. Modifications to Freemont Weir are being
considered currently, such that flows in the Bypass may be created at
much lower Sacramento River flows.

Marginal increases in flows have a minimal impact on the
dilution of contaminants and may in fact increase the transport
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of contaminants into the Delta.

The impact of increased flows on introduced species is
uncertain. Some studies show that increased flows help various
non-native species e.g. striped bass, American shad (Kimmerer
et al. 2009).
In trying to resolve uncertainties there have been continuing
warnings to focus on cause and effect relationships, and not
correlations. For example, an independent scientific review
warned: ``Many studies--and management decisions--rely on
correlations between water flows and fish populations. But the
decisions warrant fuller understanding of precisely how the
flows affect the fishes.'' \20\ ``Deeper causal understanding
is important for identifying and reducing risks to water supply
and fish populations.'' \21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Lund et al. 2015, p.i
\21\ Lund et al. 2015, p.i

While recognizing the correlations between flows and abundance
of some species ``may be due to several potential mechanisms''
Kimmerer (2002b) \22\ notes that ``no mechanism has been
conclusively shown to underlie the flow relationship of any
species'' (in the Delta). He goes on to say: ``Several flow-
based management actions were established in the mid-1990s,
including a salinity standard based on these flow effects, as
well as reductions in diversion pumping during critical periods
for listed species of fish. The effectiveness of these actions
has not been established.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ p. 1275

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uncertainty

6.   In considering the range of data points in Figures 2, 3, 4 and 5,
one can see that numerous data points exist where measures of fish
success are high at low outflows, and low at high outflows. Without
understanding the underlying mechanisms, it is possible that increasing
flows in certain seasons are just as likely to hurt delta smelt as
benefit them.

Would the increased outflow achieve the desired results? There
is considerable uncertainty about that. Dahm (2016) drawing on
Rose et al. (2014) suggests Delta flows are ``now largely
decoupled from good habitat'' (e.g. tidal marshes, floodplains
and riparian zones) implying there may be little benefit of
more flows if these flows are only going to occur through rip-
rapped channels. He does suggest that peak spring flows, access
to floodplains and marshes, higher turbidity, and sufficient
cool flows in the summer/fall benefit native fishes. Delta
water temperature is determined by the interplay between air
temperature, flows, winds and tides (Monismith et al. 2009).
While water temperatures in summer are primarily affected by
air temperatures, an analysis of historical data (see Appendix
C) suggests that additional flows in late summer will lower
water temperatures in some parts of the Delta. For example, an
additional 5,000 cfs of flow in August could lower water
temperatures by 0.3 degrees C at Rio Vista.

Regrettably, native species are simply not competing as well as
their introduced counterparts (see Figure 6). There has been a
significant increase in the abundance of several non-native
aquatic species in the Delta. Included among these are:
largemouth bass, Mississippi silversides, freshwater Goby and
bluegill.

SWRCB decisions protecting water quality and Biological
Opinions protecting native fish already ensure that more that
50% of Delta flows are dedicated to outflow. In an average year
18 million acre feet flow out the Delta. Resource managers are
faced with the question: will modest increase in flows change
the underlying dynamics?
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.013

.epsFigure 6. The change in species composition showing native species
decreasing from 18% to 4% and bass and sunfish increasing to
74%.
Source: Louse Conrad, DWR.

Water Costs

7.   The amount of water required to move X2 varies because the
relationship between outflow and X2 is a log-linear relationship. The
further west X2 is, the more water it takes to move it another
kilometer. Table 1 below shows the amount of water required to move X2
one kilometer west from the monthly average. For the period of February
through June, the water cost to move X2 one km is 1.1 million acre
feet. Said differently, the cost to increase the spring abundance index
by 1 would be 3.2 million acre feet. This quantity of water represents
a large proportion of the annual supply in the Sacramento valley and is
desperately needed for other purposes.
While the percentage increase in outflows will be small, the
corresponding percentage change in water supply is much larger.
For example, a million acre feet per year represents 7.8% of
outflow but 20.4% of exports.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Since the implementation of D-1641 in 2000.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary

8.   In summary, there is considerable scientific uncertainty
surrounding the potential benefits of additional outflow for delta
smelt. It appears that:

increased outflows at any time of the year are unlikely to
result in more spawning adults the following winter;

the underlying mechanisms are yet to be verified;

the increase will come at an enormous water cost--a
challenge for those concerned with a reasonable balancing
of beneficial uses; and

there is a real possibility of potential harm to the
species.

In short, there does not appear to be sufficient support at
this time for management actions that increase outflows for the
purpose of increasing the abundance of delta smelt.
Given the uncertainty surrounding the relationship between
outflow and the impacts on delta smelt, we would ask that the
Collaborative Science and Adaptive Management Program (CSAMP)
be asked to consider the issue. Lund et al. (2015) state it
well: ``Fish abundance is driven by many factors that may or
may not be influenced by water flows. The relative
contributions of these drivers and the significance of their
interactions are inadequately known.'' \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ P.6

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acknowledgements

This document has benefited from input from numerous reviewers.
It remains, however, work in progress and has not yet been
subject to independent peer review. Please e-mail comments on
this draft to:
[email protected]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0918.014

.epsThe above table and the equations presented in it were derived by
fitting a logarithmic function to monthly averages of outflow and X2
location. The resulting water cost estimates are necessarily
approximations. Despite the reasonably high goodness of fit
coefficients (R
2
), the estimates could be refined by
employing more precise models such as those employed by Hutton et al
(2015). The water cost estimates could also be improved by applying the
equations in the second column to the specific year type or flow
recommendation, rather than just applying it to an average condition.

Appendix A

Spring Analysis

Regression analysis of the relationship between 20mm Index (dependent
variable) and the covariates of Prior Fall Midwater Trawl Index and
Feb-Jun X2 for the period 2003-2013.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix B

Summer Analysis

Regression analysis of the relationship between summer survival (FMWT
Index/STN Index) (dependent variable) and the covariates of Summer
Townet Index and Jun-Aug X2 for the period 1995-2015.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix C

Analysis of Factors Affecting Water Temperature

Regression analysis of the relationship between average monthly water
temperatures at Rio Vista (dependent variable) and the covariates of 15
day average air temperature at Davis, Ca, and flows at Rio Vista during
the period 1983-2014.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The second and third columns are the calculated standard deviations
for 15-day average air temperature at Davis, in degrees Celsius, and
Rio Vista flows, in cfs, by month. The third and fourth columns show
the change is water temperature at Rio Vista resulting from the one
standard deviation change shown in columns two and three. These
equations were estimated using ordinary least squares regression, with
flows being converted to log form. The regression coefficient and t-
statistics are reported in the last three columns. Note that the
explanatory power of these covariates varies by month, from a high in
November to a low in August, suggesting that additional factors are
important in late summer. The consequence of a one standard deviation
increase in flows at Rio Vista varies from of a 1.0 degree decrease in
water temperature in May to a one 0.17 degree increase in January. The
temperature impacts are expected to become more muted the further west
temperatures are examined as water temperatures become more influenced
by tides.

There are more sophisticated and elegant treatments of the factors
affecting water temperature in the Delta (e.g. Monismith et al 2009).
The purpose of the above analysis was to distinguish the influence of
flows and air temperature.

References

Dahm, C. (2016) ``Delta Stewardship Council, Delta Science Program,''
Presentation to the SWRCB, April, 2016.

EET (1996) An assessment of the Likely Mechanism Underlying the ``Fish-
X2'' Relationships, Draft, Interagency Ecological Program, Estuarine
Ecology Team, June 1996. http://www.iep.water.ca.gov/eet/x2fish.html,
Downloaded 9/2/2008.

Feyrer, F., Nobriga, M., and Sommer, T. (2007) Multi-decadal trends for
three declining fish species: habitat patterns and mechanisms in the
San Francisco Estuary, California, U.S.A. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences 64:723-734.

Feyrer, F., Newman, K., Nobriga, M., and Sommer, T. (2011) Modeling the
effects of future outflow on the abiotic habitat of an imperiled
estuarine fish. Estuaries and Coasts 34:120-128. doi:10.1007/s12237-
010-9343-9. Available at: http://caestuaries.opennrm.org/assets/
46ab8c3f52c799c8f3ab3f2f514bd145/application/pdf/Feyrer_et_al.2011.pdf

Jassby, A., Kimmerer, W.J., Monismith, S.G., Armor, C., Cloern, J.E.,
Powell, T.M., Schubel, J.R., and Vendlinski, T.J. (1995) Isohaline
position as a habitat indicator for estuarine populations. Ecological
Applications 5:272-289.

Jassby, A.D., Cloern, J.E., Cole, B.E. (2002) Annual primary
production: patterns and mechanisms of change in a nutrient rich tidal
estuary. Limnol Oceanogr 47(3):698-712.

Hutton, P.H., Rath, J.S., Chen, L., Ungs, M.J., and Roy, S.B. (2015)
Nine decades of salinity observations in the San Francisco Bay and
Delta: Modeling and Trend Evaluations, Journal of Water Resources
Planning & Management, 142(3). Available at: http://ascelibrary.org/
doi/abs/10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000617

Kimmerer, W.J., Gross, E.S., and MacWilliams, M.L. (2009) Is the
response of estuarine nekton to freshwater flow in the San Francisco
estuary explained by variation in habitat volume? Estuaries and Coasts.
32:375-389. Available at: http://www.springerlink.com/content/
26pr3h5574605083/

Kimmerer, W.J. (2002a) Effects of freshwater flow on abundance of
estuarine organisms: physical effects or trophic linkages? Marine
Ecology Progress Series 243:39-55. Available at: http://
www.waterrights.ca.gov/baydelta/docs/exhibits/DOI-EXH-331.pdf

Kimmerer, W.J. (2002b) Physical, biological, and management responses
to variable freshwater flow into the San Francisco Estuary. Estuaries
25:1275-1290. Available at: http://www.springerlink.com/content/
184496u50723t617/fulltext.pdf

IEP MAST (2015) An updated conceptual model of Delta Smelt biology: our
evolving understanding of an estuarine fish, Interagency Ecological
Program, Management, Analysis and Synthesis Team. Technical Report 90.
Available at: http://water.ca.gov/iep/docs/
Delta_Smelt_MAST_Synthesis_Report_January%202015.pdf

Lund, J., et al (2015) Flows and Fishes in the Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta: Research needs in support of adaptive management--A review by
the Delta Independent Science Board. Available at: http://
deltacouncil.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2015/09/2015-9-29-15-0929-
Fina1-Fishes-and-Flows-in-the-Delta.pdf

MacNally, R., Thomson, J.R., Kimmerer, W.J., Feyrer, F., Newman, K.B.,
Andy Sih, A., Bennett, W.A., Brown, L., Fleishman, E., Culberson, S.D.,
and Castillo, G. (2010) Analysis of pelagic species decline in the
upper San Francisco Estuary using multivariate autoregressive modelling
(MAR), Ecological Applications 20:1417-1430. Available online at:
http://online.sfsu.edu/modelds/Files/References/
MacNallyetal2010EcoApps.pdf

Manly, B.F.J., Fullerton, D., Hendrix, A.N., and Burnham, K.P. (2015)
Comments on Feyrer et al. ``Modeling the Effects of Future Outflow on
the Abiotic Habitat of an Imperiled Estuarine Fish,'' Estuaries and
Coasts 38:1815-1820. DOI 10.1007/s12237-014-9905-3
Monismith, S.G., J.L. Hench, D.A. Fong, N.J. Nidzieko, W.E. Fleenor,
L.P. Doyle, and S.G. Schladow. (2009) Thermal variability in a tidal
river. Estuaries and Coasts 32:100-110. Available at: http://
www.centerforoceansolutions.org/sites/default/files/publications/
Monismith_et_al_2009_ESTUARIES.pdf

Nobriga, M.L., Sommer, T.R., Feyer, F., and Fleming, K. (2008) Long-
Term Trends in Summertime Habitat Suitability for Delta Smelt,
Hypomesus transpacificus, San Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science
6(1). Available at: http://eprints.cdlib.org/uc/item/5xd3q8tx

Rose et al (2014) Delta Interior Inflows and Related Stressors,
Presentation by the Independent Science Board, July 25, 2014. Available
at: http://deltacouncil.ca.gov/sites/default/files/documents/files/
Item_9_Kenneth_Rose_Presentation.pdf

Schoellhamer, D.H., Wright, S.A., and Drexler, J.Z. (2012) Conceptual
model of sedimentation in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. San
Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science 10(3). Available at: http://
www.escholarship.org/uc/item/2652z8sq

Thomson, J.R., Kimmerer, W.J., Brown, L.R., Newman, K.B., MacNally, R.,
Bennett, W.A., Feyrer, F., and Fleishman, E. (2009) Bayesian change-
point analysis of abundance trends for pelagic fishes in the upper San
Francisco Estuary. Ecological Applications 20:1431-1448. Available
online at: http://online.sfsu.edu/modelds/Files/References/
ThomsonEtal201OEcoApps.pdf

______

Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you for your indulgence, sir.
Dr. Fleming. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You may be wondering why a Member from Wyoming would come
to a hearing that is mostly a coastal states' issue. I got to
go to Fresno to a hearing on the Delta smelt, and I got to see
the dried up almond trees, the dead pistachio trees. We got to
meet the farmers who are out of work, both owners and workers
who are desperately trying to hang on to a culture, a way of
life, a community. And they came together to address these
issues, and it was kind of moving. So, I continue to have an
interest in this issue.
My question is for you, and I am going to need help with
your name. Is it Murillo, Mr. Murillo?
Mr. Murillo. Yes.
Mrs. Lummis. OK. And I can address this also to your
colleagues at the Department of the Interior. How do two
different agencies who are overseeing endangered species act in
contradiction to each other? We have Fish and Wildlife Service
and NMFS, each in a tug-of-war. One wants more flow, the other
wants less. They seem to be operating in a vacuum. Why
shouldn't there be one biological opinion that covers both the
smelt and the salmon?
Mr. Murillo. That would be optimal if we could have one
biological opinion. And hopefully, we can get there some day.
But with respect to the tug-of-war, what we do, like we do in
normal years, there are a lot of competing demands in the
system, just like there was this year. What we did is we
brought the directors together, Fish and Wildlife and NMFS
together, and myself, and we worked up a temperature plan that
would not only meet the NOAA requirements, but also leave some
flexibility so that we could provide the outflows for the Delta
smelt.
Mrs. Lummis. Gentlemen--and I am sorry, I just walked in so
I am a little behind the curve--could you also address that?
NMFS and Fish and Wildlife are both represented here, correct?
Oh, great. Could you enlighten me?
Dr. Lohoefener. Sure. I will try. I am Ren Lohoefener,
Regional Director for the Fish and Wildlife Service.
Actually, we tried that prior to 2008. We were under court
orders, both National Marine Fish Reserves and Fish and
Wildlife Service, to deliver opinions. Those court orders,
unfortunately, did not allow us the time to mesh those opinions
into one. I think both my colleague from NOAA Fisheries would
agree, ideally, we will have one coordinated biological
opinion. I hope that is the future.
Mrs. Lummis. And you can respond to this additional
question. Is the court's decision binding upon you in
perpetuity?
Mr. Lohoefener. No, we are no longer under that opinion. As
Congressman Huffman pointed out, those opinions have been
reviewed and found to be valid. There is nothing that keeps us
in the future from doing a coordinated single opinion.
Mrs. Lummis. OK.
Mr. Costa. Would the gentlewoman yield?
Mrs. Lummis. Yes.
Mr. Costa. Before you came in, I asked a question and Mr.
Lohoefener responded, on the summer outflow, was this a part of
the biological opinion or not? And he responded by saying that
no, it is not part of the biological opinion. So I think it is
important to note that. And the Bureau of Reclamation indicated
this was a voluntary action that they were taking.
Mrs. Lummis. Oh. So reclaiming my time, as I understand it,
there has been a decline from 10,500 cfs to 8,000 cfs. Why?
Mr. Murillo. The proposal was to have a plan where we
release 8,000 cfs. The final plan ends up with a July release
of 10,500.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
I do want to double back to the gentleman from NMFS.
Mr. Thom. Yes. Thank you. I would just second that. I think
in terms of dealing with the changing circumstances in May
where the scientists, in terms of temperature profiling,
realized there was less cold water in Shasta Reservoir for
fish, the Bureau came back to us to revise the plan so that we
could maintain temperature criteria. I just want to point out
that Mr. Murillo, Mr. Lohoefener, and myself worked together
with our staff to come to a plan that actually merged the
benefits to smelt and salmon in the system to come up with a
plan that would actually work and reach agreement and move us
forward this year.
So, I think that has been a success of the agencies working
together to get a plan that can actually operate through this
year and help protect winter-run fish in the river.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
My time is about to expire, so I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. The gentlelady yields.
Mr. Denham.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murillo, you and I have worked together quite a bit on
water deliveries and movement throughout the Central Valley. I
want to see if you can give me an update on New Melones and the
increased storage that we could possibly have there.
Mr. Murillo. I don't have the details on New Melones right
now. I know that that part of the system is drier than it has
been in the past. But I don't have any update on that. I
apologize.
Mr. Denham. OK. If you could get back to me on that. I know
it is an issue that we have talked about in the past.
Mr. Murillo. Absolutely.
Mr. Denham. I wanted to follow up on predation. At the
April 20 hearing, Mr. LaMalfa talked about predation, what the
Federal agencies have done already and what is being proposed
from the Federal agencies. What we got back was from the
Administration to fulfill an action required by the 2009 BiOp,
they are basically talking about capturing and relocating
striped bass.
Is the capture and relocation of the striped bass so that
they don't eat anywhere from 93 to 98 percent of the salmon we
are trying to save? First of all, do you agree with the
relocation? And if not, what else would you propose?
Mr. Sutton, let's start with you. I would just ask for a
quick response so I can get to everybody.
Mr. Sutton. Predation is a huge issue that is working
against everything we are doing, and it is a stressor that
needs serious and immediate attention.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Murillo?
Mr. Murillo. Yes. Predation, as we mentioned, is something
we do have to address. Whether we relocate the bass or not, I
am not sure what the benefit of that is, so I will leave that
up to the fisheries to maybe comment on that.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Thom. OK. And I would just add, Mr. Denham, we have
been supportive of predation efforts. We had this conversation
before. We are studying it, we are looking at hot spots. I
think predator removal, predator relocation, and getting the
predators out of these hot spots has been shown to be
effective. But there is ongoing research about the predator
effects throughout the system and other methods that might be
able to be taken to deal with them as well.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Borck?
Mr. Borck. I don't like invasive species, but I don't
believe that removing a single predator would fix a problem as
big as this. There are a lot of other predators out there. I
don't see it as a panacea. You can take the creel limits off
and let sportsmen catch all you want. I don't think that would
fix it.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Azhderian?
Mr. Azhderian. I do think that addressing hot spots is
certainly the right place to start. Dr. Hayes, with the
National Marine Fisheries Service, has done a lot of that
research. I think would agree with that conclusion.
I think the part that is most frustrating for us, though,
is that there is a great deal of uncertainty about standards in
the biological opinions that affect the rate of pumping, and
those are imposed with great vigor. When we are sitting down
and talking about other stressors such as predation, the
response is often, ``Well, we are not sure, so we are going to
study it.'' So, it is sort of the disproportionate response to
the problem that I think we struggle with quite often.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
And just to follow up, Mr. Borck, I am a little bit
surprised by your answer. Obviously, I don't think this is a
panacea either. I think we actually need more storage. The
storage would solve a lot of our problems. But if 98 percent of
the fish are getting--the fish that you want to fish, the
23,000 jobs that you want to make sure we still have, if 98
percent of the fish are getting eaten by non-native species,
isn't any type of help--I mean, if we could save an extra 3, 4
percent, doesn't that help your business?
Mr. Borck. Like I said, I am fine with the concept of
taking the creel limits off and allowing sports fishermen to
catch all the stripers they want. I just don't see it having
that big an impact ultimately. Unfortunately, if you take
stripers out, then shad get bigger, shad can eat salmon when
they are as small as a guppy. So we may just be trading one
predator for another. So, I don't see it as a good enough fix
to key in on it.
Mr. Denham. I don't see it as a good enough fix either, but
I certainly see a doubling goal of the fish that--if you are
doubling the amount of fish that are eating all of the
threatened and endangered species, that might not be the best
policy for our Federal Government to take.
I yield back the rest of my time.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields.
Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here this morning.
Being from the state of Washington, I am somewhat reluctant
to get engaged in this California water war. I am like Mr.
Costa, it is easy to let it drive you crazy. But if it weren't
so important to not only the economy, but also the food supply
of our whole country, as well as how you solve, or how we help
you solve, your water issues will greatly impact how we solve
water issues in the Pacific Northwest as well. So, this is a
big issue.
I heard from Mr. LaMalfa in his opening comments some
frustration about contrary policy by different agencies in the
basin, or in the state. I think I heard that there were
competing biological opinions and some interest in connecting
those or making them into one, if that is a possibility.
Mr. Azhderian, you also expressed some frustration
associated with a lack of transparency and collaboration. From
those of us from the outside looking in, these California water
wars have been going on for a long time. There must be a better
way. And I think maybe we have touched on some of those avenues
of doing this better, the collaboration, the transparency, all
looking toward a similar goal of increased water availability,
returning fish populations, habitat, but also protecting our
very important agricultural industry and fishing industry.
So what would a better model look like? All of you from
different perspectives. I will start with you, Mr. Azhderian.
Mr. Azhderian. Yes, I think a better model is one that is
inclusive. The Federal agencies have talked about improved
collaboration among them. And I do believe that that is true. I
think Reclamation, in particular, has done its level best to
try and communicate outcomes to users of CVP water. But
communicating outcomes is something very different than
actually collaborating on solutions.
So, I think broadening the inclusion in the questions and
testing hypotheses, developing solutions, and using the unique
abilities of water agencies, in particular, to solve the
problems is really an asset that we have underutilized, a great
tool moving forward. Moving away from the common processes
where we are relying strictly on statistical analyses, or
largely on that, and getting into doing the research and
understanding what the underlying biological factors are, is
another essential key if we are going to make our water
management and our environmental management actions more
efficient and more effective. After all, what we are all
interested in is effective environmental protection.
There are a lot of tools that are out there, there are
models from the Bay Delta Accord as far back as the early
1990s, all the way to recently with the Delta Reform Act that
talk about the importance of comprehensive solutions and
inclusive collaborations. And there are several recommendations
from a number of science panels as well about how that can be
achieved. There are minds greater than mine that have commented
on this. There is a wealth of information, we just need to
start using it.
Mr. Newhouse. Real quickly, could I ask the fisherman, Mr.
Borck, and I will go to our farmer as well. And then if there
is time, hopefully from the agencies.
Mr. Borck. The quick answer is I am a harvester. I have to
leave modeling and those kind of situations to scientists, guys
with Ph.D.'s. My trust has always been in the best available
science.
Mr. Newhouse. OK. I appreciate that.
Mr. Sutton.
Mr. Sutton. Similar answer. A more robust process is needed
to ensure those regulatory actions are informed by sound
science and there is accountability and a measure to achieving
outcomes. There is a model we can follow just within David's
region at Klamath where they spent 2 years on a collaborative
process bringing in all the stakeholders to form a VA and
resulted in one biological opinion. In my opinion, that effort
is something we need to focus on.
Mr. Newhouse. And then, Mr. Murillo, if you could speak for
the Federal Government, where can Congress help?
Mr. Murillo. Well, I agree with the statements made here
today that we try to be transparent. We can be more inclusive,
but inclusive means not just including the Ag. community, we
also have to include the environmental groups, the tribes, and
the power users, bringing them all together. So I think, as we
move forward, that is something that we will try to improve on.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, it is not going to get any easier with
California's population expected to double in the next 25 years
or so.
Mr. Murillo. It is getting bigger.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes, so we have a problem that we have to
solve.
Mr. Murillo. Absolutely.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. OK. We thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony today. Members of the subcommittee may have
additional questions for witnesses. We ask you to respond to
these in writing. The hearing record will be open for 10 days
to receive these responses.
Again, I would like to thank our staff. The preparation for
a hearing like this can take many hours, 40 or more hours, and
it is a lot of work. So, we appreciate our staff and all the
great work they do. I will certainly cite Kiel, in particular,
as being a real leader in all of this. We thank Kiel for that.
So, if there is no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:24 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
