- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S ROLE IN THE EPA'S ANIMAS SPILL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S ROLE IN THE EPA'S ANIMAS SPILL

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, December 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-867 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Parker, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, December 9, 2015......................     1

Statement of Members:
Beyer, Hon. Donald S. Jr., a Representative in Congress from
the Commonwealth of Virginia...............................     6
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lummis, Hon. Cynthia M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Jewell, Sally, Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior....    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    18

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
EPA/BOR Superfund Work Authorization Form, Page 1 submitted
by Chairman Bishop.........................................    60
List of documents submitted for the record retained in the
Committee's official files.................................    63
Petri, Elliot, E-mail to Subcommittee Staff regarding the
Gold King Mine Incident, submitted by Representative Lummis    62
Technical Evaluation of the Gold King Mine Incident, Pages 1
and 6 submitted by Representative Newhouse.................    61

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S ROLE IN THE EPA'S
ANIMAS SPILL

----------

Wednesday, December 9, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Rob Bishop
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Young, Gohmert, Lamborn,
Fleming, McClintock, Thompson, Lummis, Benishek, Duncan, Gosar,
Labrador, LaMalfa, Cook, Westerman, Graves, Newhouse, Hice,
Hardy, LaHood; Grijalva, Napolitano, Costa, Sablan, Tsongas,
Ruiz, Beyer, Torres, Dingell, and Gallego.
Also present: Representative Lujan.
The Chairman. All right, if I can have everyone please take
their seats, I think we have a critical mass here to get
started. I appreciate you being here; the committee is in
order.
I want you to notice the nifty new microphones that we have
in front of you, because our old ones broke, literally. We will
see how long these last before they break. But these, I
believe, are temporary; so at some point today, everyone is
just going to have to shout very loudly.
Today, the committee is hearing testimony on the Department
of the Interior's role in the EPA's Animas spill. Under
Committee Rule 4(f), oral opening statements are limited to the
Chair, the Ranking Member, the Vice Chair, and the Vice Ranking
Minority Member of Mr. Grijalva's choice. Therefore, I ask
unanimous consent that other Members' opening statements be
made part of the hearing record, if they are submitted to the
Committee Clerk by 5:00 p.m. today.
[No response.]
The Chairman. Hearing no objection, that will be so
ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that Mr. Lujan from New Mexico
be allowed to sit with this committee, when he arrives, and
participate in the hearing.
[No response.]
The Chairman. Without objection, that will also be so
ordered.
I also would politely ask everyone in the hearing room if
they would please silence their cell phones. This is going to
allow for minimum distractions for both our Members and our
guest, to ensure that we get as much out of this opportunity as
possible, especially since we have problems with the
microphones. I am afraid that your cell phones may interfere
with our sound system; if not, just while we are landing. And,
those of you in the audience, your cushions can also be used
for flotation devices if we ever get to that point, as well.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. With that, I would like to recognize the Vice
Chair, Mrs. Lummis from Wyoming, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Thank you for holding this hearing to follow up on the EPA's
Animas River spill. When we met last, EPA Administrator
McCarthy was here with us. Secretary Jewell, you were invited,
as well; but I know you did not attend because the Bureau of
Reclamation at Interior was chosen by the EPA to conduct the
independent investigation of the disaster, and the
investigation part was not yet complete. At least that was our
understanding of your decision not to attend at that time; and
that is fair enough.
In your absence during that previous hearing, Administrator
McCarthy repeatedly promised that the answers being sought
would be contained in an independent report produced by the
Department of the Interior. She also said the report would
answer who was negligent, who was liable, who would be
prosecuted, and how this type of spill could be prevented from
happening again.
Unfortunately, when we finally did get the independent
report from the Bureau of Reclamation, it did not hold anyone
accountable or find anyone at fault. It also did not explain
why the EPA team made the decision it did that resulted in the
spill.
It gives us the appearance that the Department of the
Interior apparently jointly decided with the EPA that these
areas were beyond the scope of view, when, in fact, these were
the precise questions that our previous hearing focused on. It
also failed to resolve a dispute between EPA and the Colorado
Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety.
We really appreciate you being here today, Secretary
Jewell, hopefully to help us find answers to these questions
that we cannot find in the report. We would like to know why
the decision was made to move ahead with digging at the Gold
King Mine site, if negligence contributed to that decision,
whether or not Colorado state officials approved the decision
to dig, and other questions the committee members still have.
I note that your written testimony today also quickly
shifts from discussing the incident to discussing the need for
cleanup of abandoned mine land sites. This committee has
already begun working on proposals toward that end, including a
bill by Subcommittee Chairman Doug Lamborn, that would
authorize BLM's Inactive and Abandoned Non-Coal Mine Lands
Program and Representative Jody Hice's bill to create a
Reclamation Foundation.
We do need to acknowledge that the increase in claim
location and maintenance fees, according to the change in
percentage interest, as required by law, resulted in the
relinquishment of more than 48,000 claims and a reduction in
revenue of $8.5 million from these sources. Any proposals to
fund further cleanup through these sources will have to be
carefully examined. Given the perilous state of the commodities
market, per ton fees on fill material moved, regardless of
economic value, for hardrock and uranium mining may also not
have the desired results, especially with concerns that
hardrock mining companies would not be able to pass on the fee.
Furthermore, I have developed some concerns about the
Administration's POWER + Program, such as, ``How do you propose
to set up an AML program for hardrock mining in which money is
actually applied for its intended purpose, instead of being
diverted into community development in regions where coal
mining is declining? ''--especially because the decline is
attributable to this Administration's war on coal.
So, Secretary Jewell, before we can fix a problem, we need
to know how and why it occurred. Back to Animas--I look forward
to you helping our committee get more information about Animas,
and I look forward to having a discussion about how the POWER +
Program could be used to actually remediate and reclaim, as
opposed to doing community development in communities that do
not want to redevelop. They want to do what they are doing now
with the people they have, the jobs they have, and the
community and culture they enjoy.

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mrs. Lummis follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Cynthia M. Lummis, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Wyoming

Thank you Mr. Chairman, and thank you for holding this hearing to
follow up on the EPA's Animas River spill. When we met last, EPA
Administrator McCarthy was here with us. Mrs. Secretary, you were
invited as well, but I know you didn't attend because the Bureau of
Reclamation at Interior was chosen by the EPA to conduct the
independent investigation of the disaster and the investigation part
was not yet complete, at least that was our understanding of your
decision not to attend at that time, and that's fair enough.

In your absence, Administrator McCarthy, during that previous
hearing, repeatedly promised that answers being sought would be
conveyed in an independent report produced by the Department of the
Interior and she said the report would answer who was negligent, who
was liable, who would be prosecuted, and how this type of spill could
be prevented from happening again. Unfortunately, when we finally did
get the independent report from Bureau of Reclamation, it didn't hold
anyone accountable or find anyone at fault, it also did not explain why
the EPA team made the decision it did that resulted in the spill. And
it gives us the appearance that the Department of the Interior
apparently jointly decided with the EPA that these areas were beyond
the scope of view, when in fact these were the precise questions our
previous hearing focused on, it also failed to resolve the dispute
between EPA and the Colorado Division of Reclamation, Mining and
Safety.

Now we really appreciate you being here today, Secretary Jewell,
hopefully to help us find answers to these questions that we can't find
in the report. We would like to know why the decision was made to move
ahead with the digging at the Gold King Mine site, if negligence
contributed to that decision, whether or not Colorado state officials
approved the decision to dig, and other questions the committee members
still have.

I note that your written testimony also today quickly shifts from
discussing the incident to discussing the need for cleanup of abandoned
mine land sites. This committee has already begun working on proposals
toward that end, including a bill by Subcommittee Chairman Doug Lamborn
that would authorize BLM's Inactive and Abandoned Non-Coal Mine Land
Program and Representative Jody Hice's bill to create a Reclamation
Foundation. We do need to acknowledge the increasing claim location and
maintenance fees according to the changed percentage interest as
required by law, resulted in the relinquishment of more than 48,000
claims and a reduction of revenue of $8.5 million from these sources.
Any proposals to fund further cleanup through these sources will have
to be carefully examined; given the perilous state of the commodities
market, per ton fees on fill material moved regardless of economic
value for hardrock and uranium mining, may also not have the desired
results, especially with concerns that hardrock mining companies would
not be able to pass on the fee.

Furthermore, I've developed some concerns about the
Administration's POWER + Program, such as ``how do you propose to set
up an AML program for hardrock mining in which money is actually
applied for its intended purpose instead of being diverted into
community development in regions where coal mining is declining? '' and
especially so because the decline is attributable to this
Administration's war on coal.

So Secretary Jewell, before we can fix a problem, we need to know
how and why it occurred. Back to Animas, I look forward to your helping
our committee get more information about Animas; look forward to having
a discussion about how the POWER + Program could be used to actually
remediate and reclaim, as opposed to doing community development in
communities that don't want to redevelop. They want to do what they are
doing now with the people they have, the jobs they have, and the
community and culture they enjoy.

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

______

The Chairman. Thank you.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Grijalva, for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being with us here to discuss the Gold King Mine
release.
Madam Secretary, it is interesting that the Majority
insisted you come here yourself to discuss an incident your
agency is not responsible for, as opposed to one of the experts
who worked on the technical review. I am not going to complain
about that, because I am ecstatic that the Majority is actually
taking on environmental concerns. And, I am glad you are here
to discuss the real problem: the hundreds of thousands of
abandoned mines that are leaking billions of gallons of toxic
wastewater into streams and rivers across the country.
These abandoned mines were created by the mining industry,
not the Environmental Protection Agency; and we should not
forget that. The dead fish, the ruined ecosystems, the orange,
lifeless rivers--these are the mining industry's legacy, not
the EPA's, and certainly not the Department of the Interior's.
This is a serious problem that is going to require serious
solutions.
Unfortunately, I do not believe the Majority's proposed
solutions are serious. Instead of requiring the mining industry
to take responsibility for their legacy, they simply ask for
volunteers. Instead of forcing the mining industry to live up
to the same polluter pays principle as other industries, they
ask the public to adopt an abandoned mine site, much as we have
asked the public to adopt a highway, adopt a school, or adopt a
park. We are now asking the public to adopt an abandoned mine
site that is potentially contaminated and dangerous.
And, faced with an abandoned mine problem that was recently
estimated to cost anywhere from $10 to $20 billion to clean up
on public lands alone, the Majority has proposed a grand total
of $30 million. Yes, $30 million. That is not a serious way to
address the problem.
There is no way to clean these sites without requiring the
mining industry to contribute to the legacy they created. That
is why the Hardrock Mining Reform and Reclamation Act places a
royalty on hardrock minerals such as gold, silver, and copper;
and it requires the industry to pay a small fee for each ton of
material they displace. That would raise hundreds of millions
of dollars each year, and that is what you need to start to
address the problem.
Now, the Majority has taken an important first step, and
fully admitted there is a problem with abandoned mines.
Hopefully, Madam Secretary, we can now convince them that
serious action is necessary to fix that problem.
Unfortunately, it appears from the Majority's memo for this
hearing, that the focus today is not going to be on the very
real problem of abandoned mines. Instead, it sounds like we are
going to focus on the imagined problems with the Bureau of
Reclamation's technical report. Sadly, it seems that the
Majority is falling back on their standard playbook of
attacking the messenger when a report does not agree with their
storyline.
Madam Secretary, I do not want to attack the messenger. I
want to attack the half-million abandoned mines throughout this
Nation, many of which are ticking time bombs that we need to
address sooner, rather than later. I hope that this will not be
the last hearing we have on this committee about abandoned
mines. I also hope we do not have to wait until we can blame a
Federal agency before we hold the next one.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam Secretary for being
here to discuss the Gold King Mine release.

Of course, it's interesting that the Majority insisted that you
come here yourself to discuss an incident that your agency is not
responsible for, as opposed to one of the experts who worked on the
technical review.

But I am not going to complain about that, because I'm glad that
the Majority is actually taking an environmental issue seriously.

And I'm glad that you're here to discuss the real problem here: the
hundreds of thousands of abandoned mines that are leaking billions of
gallons of toxic wastewater into streams and rivers across the country.

These abandoned mines were created by the mining industry, not the
Environmental Protection Agency.

We should not forget that.

The dead fish, the ruined ecosystems, the orange lifeless rivers--
this is the mining industry's legacy, not the EPA's, and not the
Department of the Interior's.

This is a serious problem, and it will take serious solutions.

Unfortunately, I do not believe the Majority's proposed solutions
are serious.

Instead of requiring the mining industry to take responsibility for
their legacy, they simply ask for volunteers.

Instead of forcing the mining industry to live up to the same
Polluter Pays principle as other industries, they ask the public to
Adopt an Abandoned Mine.

And faced with an abandoned mine problem that was recently
estimated to cost anywhere from $10 to $20 billion to clean up on
public lands alone, the Majority has proposed a grand total of up to
$30 million.

That's million with an M.

That's not a serious way to address this problem.

There is no way to clean these sites up without requiring the
hardrock mining industry to contribute.

That's why my Hardrock Mining Reform and Reclamation Act places a
royalty on hardrock minerals such as gold, silver, and copper, and
requires the industry to pay a small fee for each ton of material they
displace.

This would raise hundreds of millions of dollars each year, and
that's what you need to start to address this problem.

Now that the Majority has taken an important first step, and
finally admitted there is a problem with abandoned mines, hopefully,
Madam Secretary, we can now convince them that serious action is
necessary to fix it.

Unfortunately, it appears from the Majority's memo for this hearing
that the focus today is not going to be on the very real problem of
abandoned mines.

Instead, it sounds like we're going to focus on imagined problems
with the Bureau of Reclamation's technical report.

Sadly, it seems that the Majority is falling back on their standard
playbook of attacking the messenger when a report doesn't agree with
their storyline.

Madam Secretary, I don't want to attack the messenger. I want to
attack the half-million abandoned mines throughout this Nation, many of
which are ticking time bombs that we need to address sooner rather than
later.

I hope that this will not be the last hearing we have in this
committee about abandoned mines.

And I also hope we don't have to wait until we can blame a Federal
agency before we hold the next one.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Grijalva, I understand Mr.
Beyer is giving the other statement. So, Mr. Beyer, you are
recognized now for your opening statement.
Mr. Beyer. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you very
much, Madam Secretary, for being here.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DONALD S. BEYER, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Beyer. In the mid-1990s, when I was Lieutenant Governor
of Virginia, we had three mine blowouts in the Commonwealth,
three within 2 years. Yet, here we are today, discussing
another, but somehow not talking about how to prevent future
blowouts or improve efforts to clean abandoned mines.
The incident at the Gold King Mine is a clear reminder to
us here, and to the American public, that abandoned land mines
are an issue we can no longer ignore. We need to be looking at
meaningful Federal solutions to address abandoned mine lands;
we cannot ignore the cause of the problem and the lack of
funding to clean them up. None of the proposals that we have
heard in committee actually tackle the problem at hand. We are
having another hearing that ignores the elephant in the room.
Instead, we are here looking for a scapegoat, despite the
very clear paragraph in the Executive Summary of Interior's
report. Let me quote, ``The uncontrolled release at Gold King
Mine was due to a series of events spanning several decades.
Groundwater conditions in the upper reaches of Cement Creek
have been significantly altered by the establishment of
extensive underground mine workings, the extension of the
American Tunnel to the Sunnyside Mine, and the subsequent
plugging of the American Tunnel. The final events leading to
the blowout and the uncontrolled release of water occurred due
to a combination of an inadequately designed closure of the
mine portal in 2009, combined with EPA's misinterpretation of
the groundwater conditions when reopening the mine portal in
2014 and 2015.''
Previously, I had equated our discussion of EPA's role in
the Gold King Mine as blaming the cardiologist for failing to
save a heart attack patient who had been smoking and drinking
for 40 years; but this is actually worse, because this is like
blaming another physician not involved in the operation who was
asked to consult.
If you read the Majority's memo, you would think that the
Department of the Interior colluded with the EPA and hid
evidence of guilt in a whitewashed report designed to throw the
state of Colorado under the rug, and sweep the whole issue
under the rug. Let me be clear. The mine was not on Interior
land. The Interior Department was not working on this mine. The
Department was required to respond to the release, and the
Department certainly did not cause it.
Despite the claims in the Majority's memo, from the very
beginning, the Department said it was running a technical
review, not a criminal one. The statement of work from the EPA
dated August 20 is even titled, ``Technical Review of the Gold
King Mine Assessment.'' Even in the technical report, I do not
think the Bureau of Reclamation tried to sugarcoat anything.
There are a lot of really hard recommendations here. They took
a hard look at the issue; they were quite critical in their
assessment. This caused both the EPA's Inspector General and
the EPA's internal review team to expand the scope of the
inquiries.
Yesterday, the EPA released an addendum to their internal
report that more deeply investigates some of the very things
that the Reclamation report raised. So today, rather than
looking for a scapegoat, we should be looking in a mirror. We
have the power to address the abandoned mine lands issue.
We should be talking about something of substance, like
Ranking Member Grijalva's H.R. 963, the Hardrock Mining Reform
and Reclamation Act, which actually tackles this issue. Between
$9 billion and $21 billion is needed to clean up the abandoned
mine lands, just on BLM and U.S. Forest land. So, just as the
coal industry does for coal mines, we should be seriously
considering a royalty system for hardrock mining.
Thank you for being here, and we all look forward to your
testimony.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

The Chairman. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes or more.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

The Chairman. I appreciate Congresswoman Lummis mentioning
the bills that we are moving forward that deal with the
abandoned mines. There are a trifecta of bills. You forgot Mr.
Hardy's bill, that is part of that group. I want that to be
recognized, as well.
Even though some people may want to do that, today's
discussion is not about abandoned mines. The focus is simply on
the Department's role in the Animas River spill.
At our September joint hearing, we had testimony from
affected states and tribes. Today, we finally get to Secretary
Jewell, and we are pleased to have you here. We hoped to have
you earlier, but I understand you were in Paris. You really
picked a bad time to go to Paris, that's for sure.
The Interior Department is responsible for a myriad of
resources impacted by EPA's disastrous 3 million gallon spill.
The map on the screen shows all of the Department's resources
in the affected area. Incidentally, this particular map has
been derived from the committee's new Federal Footprint Map,
which I hope will illustrate the scope of the Federal
Government's vast ownership and control of land across the
United States. You may be interested in looking at that in the
future.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This is the Four Corners region with Colorado in the
northwest corner of the map. That red dot is the Gold King
Mine. The spill flowed from there south into New Mexico, and
then turned through Utah and Arizona, which are to the left.
Each color on that map represents a different bureau ownership
or land designation. This map illustrates that there are ESA-
protected species in the San Juan River, that there are BLM and
Park Service lands in this area, and that the plume flowed
through multiple Indian reservations.
And, as it turns out, the Bureau of Reclamation, the bureau
that conducted this so-called independent report, was
consulting with the Gold King Mine before the spill. USGS
worked with EPA to determine the volume of toxic water that was
spilled. Aside from the work on the mine, the Bureau of
Reclamation doubled its normal water release from the Navajo
Dam to try to dilute the spill, which caused greater impact on
the reservation lands than there was there before.
This is in addition to the financial resources the
Department of the Interior was providing to EPA for its
project, the Gold King Mine, and other mines in that area.
Given the breadth of Interior's involvement, the agency never
should have agreed to do this review in the first place. DOI
itself recognized that BLM, as a potentially responsible party
under CERCLA, should not be involved; so it is baffling why the
Bureau of Reclamation would be considered more objective.
I also must point out the Administration's double standard
regarding enforcing regulations. At the last hearing, many of
my colleagues pointed out that EPA would have aggressively
pursued criminal charges if a private company had caused the
spill instead of the Federal Government. Since then, we have
learned that EPA did not consult with the Fish and Wildlife
Service on its activities at the Gold King Mine prior to the
spill, and has not consulted with the Service on its response
or the cleanup, as well.
The Service's selective interpretation of the Endangered
Species Act's consultation requirement is as hypocritical as
the EPA's selective enforcement of its environmental
regulations. Average Americans are threatened and prosecuted
for failing to abide by the ESA, but when EPA spills millions
of gallons of contaminated mine water into a river with
critical habitat, or writes new rules for power plants to keep
manatees and Americans warm in the winter--these same laws just
simply don't apply.
Instead of holding the EPA accountable for its mistakes,
the Department issued a report in October that totally glossed
over the most critical questions about how and why the spill
occurred. I am sorry, but the BOR report is factually
inaccurate in parts, and sometimes downright misleading. While
the Interior Department may not have caused the spill, it is
responsible for--in the words of one New Mexico official, ``Its
invisible response following the spill,''--and for this so-
called independent report.
EPA publicly promised, including before this committee,
that their report would uncover whether there were wrongdoings;
and they even announced they were halting work on thousands of
mine sites nationwide pending the outcome of this report.
Unfortunately, the report does not give those answers, and
raises more questions than it answers.
That is why this committee has requested information from
the Department of the Interior to better understand the
agency's conduct before, during, and following the issuance of
this report. States, tribes, and Americans impacted by this
disaster expect a prompt, thorough, and transparent look at
this serious issue.
Unfortunately, the Department delayed its response to
information requests for weeks. Then they dumped thousands of
documents, hundreds of them heavily redacted, including many a
few days before this hearing. Rest assured, these tactics will
not stop this particular committee--and I do consider them to
be tactics.
Another thing that will not impede the committee's
investigation is EPA's astounding unveiling last night at 6:28
p.m. of entirely new information about the Gold King Mine
disaster. If you are not aware--I am sure you are all aware of
that, but it is an unusual thing to do.
One last thing I would like to note, as I look forward to
exploring these topics today, is that I appreciate your
willingness to be here with us, Ms. Jewell, as we go through
this important issue.

[The prepared statement of the Chairman follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rob Bishop, Chairman, Committee on
Natural Resources

Today's hearing will focus on the Interior Department's role in
EPA's Animas River spill. At our September joint hearing, we heard from
affected states and tribes--today, we finally will hear from Secretary
Jewell and we're pleased to have you here today.

The Interior Department is responsible for a myriad of resources
impacted by EPA's disastrous 3 million gallon spill. The map on the
screen shows all of DOI's resources in the affected area. Incidentally,
this map was derived from the committee's new Federal Footprint Map,
which I hope will help illustrate the scope of the Federal Government's
vast ownership and control of land across the United States.

This is the Four Corners region, with Colorado in the northeast
corner of the map. That red dot represents Gold King Mine, and the
spill flowed from there south to Farmington, New Mexico in the
southeast corner and then through Utah and Arizona on the left.

[See map on page 8]

Each color represents a different bureau ownership or land
designation.

The map illustrates that there are ESA-protected species in the San
Juan River. There are BLM and Park Service lands in the area. The toxic
plume flowed through multiple Indian reservations. And it turns out
that the Bureau of Reclamation--the bureau that conducted this so-
called ``independent'' report--was consulting on the Gold King Mine and
the Red and Bonita projects before the spill. USGS worked with EPA to
determine the volume of toxic water that was spilled. And aside from
its work on the mine, BOR doubled its normal water releases from the
Navajo Dam to try to dilute the spill. This is in addition to the
financial resources DOI was providing to EPA for its projects at Gold
King and other mines in the area.
Given the breadth of Interior's involvement, your agency never
should have agreed to do this review in the first place. DOI itself
recognized that BLM, as a ``Potentially Responsible Party'' under
CERCLA, shouldn't be involved. It is baffling why BOR would be
considered more objective.
I also must point out the Administration's double-standard
regarding enforcing regulations. At the last hearing, I and many of my
colleagues, pointed out that EPA would have aggressively pursued
criminal charges if a private company had caused the spill instead of
the Federal Government.
Since then, we've learned that the EPA didn't consult with the Fish
and Wildlife Service on its activities at Gold King Mine prior to the
spill, and it hasn't consulted with the Service on its response or
cleanup after.
The Service's selective interpretation of the Endangered Species
Act's consultation requirement is as hypocritical as EPA's selective
enforcement of its environmental regulations. Average Americans are
threatened and prosecuted for failing to abide by the ESA, but when EPA
spills millions of gallons of contaminated mine water into a river with
critical habitat--or writes new rules for power plants that keep
manatees and Americans warm in the winter--the same laws just don't
apply.
And instead of holding EPA accountable for its mistakes, your
Department issued a report in October that totally glossed over the
most critical questions about how and why the spill occurred. Parts of
the BOR report are factually inaccurate and downright misleading. While
the Interior Department may not have caused the spill, it is
responsible for its ``invisible'' response following the spill, as a
New Mexico official called it, and for this so-called ``independent''
report.
EPA publicly promised--including before this very committee--that
your report would uncover whether there was wrongdoing and even
announced it was halting work at thousands of mine sites nationwide
pending the outcome of your report. Unfortunately, the report raises
many more questions than it answers.
That is why this committee has requested information from you and
your Department to better understand the agency's conduct before,
during, and following the issuance of your report. States, tribes, and
Americans impacted by the disaster expect a prompt, thorough, and
transparent look at this serious issue.
Instead, your Department delayed its response to information
requests for weeks, then dumped thousands of documents, hundreds of
them heavily redacted, including many a few days before today's
hearing. Rest assured that these tactics will not stop the committee
from seeking complete answers.
Another thing that will not impede this committee's investigation
is EPA's astounding unveiling last night at 6:28 p.m. of entirely new
information about the Gold King Mine disaster. I'm sure you're already
aware of this, but over the last week, EPA has apparently been working
feverishly to create new ambiguous and redacted documents that
supposedly answer questions your report didn't even mention but that
this committee has been raising for months.
And on that note, I very much look forward to exploring these
topics during the hearing, and I thank you for appearing today.

______

The Chairman. With that, I am going to start the
questioning. Once again, I will remind everybody that every
Member will have 5 minutes to ask questions. I would ask
Members, as well as those who are responding, to--actually, we
are not going to start that; I have not given you a chance to
say something yet. I am so excited to have you here that I am
getting off script.
I will remind everyone again ahead of time, you have the
timer in front of you. The timer does work. I am asking two
things. As we get past the opening statement and start asking
questions, make sure that if you are going to ask a question,
give our guest time to answer the question, or don't ask it at
all. No questions should be asked within the last 30 seconds of
the time that is on the clock there, just for the fairness
within.
Now, with that, I want to thank the Honorable Sally Jewell,
who is the Secretary of the Department of the Interior, for
being here. You are accompanied today by--and I hope I get this
right--Mr. David Palumbo. Is that correct? I actually said it
right? I am proud. He is the Deputy Commissioner for Operations
at the Bureau of Reclamation.
Your written statement is, obviously, part of the record.
You know the drill. You have 5 minutes. The lights are there in
front of you.
Let me recognize Ms. Jewell for your testimony, and I
apologize for actually skipping that--you may be happier if I
actually skip past it, but this is your chance to respond. You
are on.

STATEMENT OF SALLY JEWELL, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Secretary Jewell. Thank you, Chairman Bishop, Ranking
Member Grijalva, and members of the committee. I am here to
discuss the Department's actions following the Gold King Mine
incident. I have submitted a written statement for the record,
and I will highlight a few key points that relate to the
Department's responses to the release, and to the larger
problem of abandoned mine lands, in general.
Joining me today is David Palumbo, Deputy Commissioner of
the Bureau of Reclamation, who oversees the Technical Service
Center, among other duties.
Let me begin by saying that once the Department of the
Interior was notified of the incident, its response was robust.
Our regional environmental officers in Denver, Albuquerque, and
San Francisco began sharing information with regional bureau
staff, and monitoring the situation. While the Gold King Mine
is on private land, DOI has management responsibilities in the
area, and our bureaus began carrying out coordinated response
activities to support EPA's on-scene coordinator to protect
resources and to meet management responsibilities.
Key actions by our bureaus included Reclamation increasing
the release of water from the Navajo Reservoir to help dilute
mine contaminants moving through the San Juan River, and
alleviate concerns that the river fish and wildlife might be
impacted.
On the ground, we were collecting and sampling water for
impacts, and carrying out field surveillance of fish
communities in the Animas and San Juan Rivers. These actions,
and those by other bureaus, were instrumental in providing
coordination and support to EPA during its continued response.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs also provided important
assurances to communities along the San Juan River that their
drinking water was safe. BIA conducted water sampling at five
Bureau of Indian Education schools along the river, and
activated an Incident Management Team in its Navajo region that
provided emergency livestock drinking water to users impacted
by closure of the San Juan River. Deputy Secretary Connor
recently visited the Navajo Nation and met with President
Begaye and members of the Nation who were affected by the
release, and reaffirmed our commitment to our trust
responsibility.
BIA has continued to monitor water used by tribes for
drinking, irrigation, and agriculture; and the Fish and
Wildlife Service is providing support on wildlife issues
related to the incident.
In addition to these on-the-ground actions, shortly after
the incident, EPA asked the Department to carry out a technical
review of the release. Led by Reclamation, this independent
review of the factors contributing to the incident also
provided recommendations to prevent such incidents in the
future.
It was carried out by career technical staff with expertise
in abandoned mine remediation, and was peer-reviewed by the
USGS and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This technical
review found the release was due to events spanning several
decades, and that actions taken by the EPA, in consultation
with the state of Colorado's Division of Reclamation, Mining
and Safety, led directly to the incident.
The report noted that the conditions and actions of this
incident are not isolated or unique, and are surprisingly
prevalent, underscoring the need for more focus and funding for
abandoned mine remediation across this country. The report
identifies that there are few written requirements or
consistent guidelines governing abandoned mine lands
remediation, specifically when it comes to engineering
standards.
Finally, this incident highlights a significant and costly
problem of abandoned mine lands, which are a threat on private,
state, and Federal lands. These sites are prevalent throughout
the West, where legacy hardrock mining activities were
concentrated. It is not a new problem. Many sites were mined
prior to the enactment of Federal laws that require
reclamation. For those sites where no responsible party is
found, the Federal Government and, ultimately, the taxpayer,
often bears the cost of addressing public safety risks and
threats to the environment.
Within the Department, the significant concentration of
abandoned mine lands occurs primarily on BLM and National Park
Service lands. BLM's program has identified approximately
50,000 sites with an average of 5,400 new sites discovered each
year. The National Park Service recently completed its first
comprehensive inventory and assessment of abandoned mine sites
in the system, and identified over 37,000 abandoned mine land
features. Over 10 percent of these, or 3,800, require remedial
action to mitigate public safety threats and environmental
impacts.
Reclamation work for dangerous sites requires cooperation
with state, local, and other Federal partners, and is a
resource-intensive operation. The Department continues to
request funds to address this problem, and prioritizes and
addresses these activities within available resources. Since
2012, the Administration has included in its budget request a
legislative proposal authorizing a reclamation fee on uranium
and metallic mines with receipts used for reclamation
activities on non-Federal and Federal lands.
It is unfortunate that the catalyst to address a problem is
often an incident like this. The Department stands ready to
work with this committee and Congress to address the issue in a
meaningful way.
Thank you, and I am happy to respond to any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jewell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sally Jewell, Secretary of the Interior,
Washington, DC
introduction
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the
committee, I am happy to appear before you today to discuss the
Department of the Interior's response to the Gold King Mine incident
and the Bureau of Reclamation's subsequent technical review and
assessment of the incident, which was carried out at the request of the
Environmental Protection Agency. The Department appreciated the
opportunity to brief your staff on several recent occasions on its work
related to the Gold King Mine incident.
Reclamation's ``Technical Evaluation of the Gold King Mine
Incident'' (``technical review''), made available in October, contains
a brief summary of the mine's history and the events that led to the
incident on August 5, 2015. While the Gold King Mine portal is not on
Federal land and is not under the Department's jurisdiction, several of
the Department's bureaus do have management responsibilities downstream
of the mine and took response actions, discussed in more detail below,
as a result of the incident.
An important point, also discussed in more detail below, is the
finding in Reclamation's technical review that the conditions and
actions that led to the incident are not unique to this situation and
are prevalent throughout the West where legacy hardrock mining
activities have impacted the environment. As is so often the case, it
is unfortunate that an incident like this has to happen to highlight an
issue that land managers in both the state and Federal Governments have
been grappling with for years--that addressing abandoned mine lands is
a nationwide problem, and mitigating toxic substances released from
many of them is a significant undertaking. Abandoned mine lands are
located on private, state, Federal, and tribal lands. There are tens of
thousands of abandoned hardrock sites on Federal lands alone. Many of
these abandoned mine land sites were mined prior to the implementation
of Federal surface management environmental laws that require
reclamation and remediation to take place. For those mine sites where
no viable potentially responsible party can be determined, the Federal
Government, and ultimately the taxpayer, often bears the burden of
addressing these threats to public safety, human health, the
environment, and wildlife, rather than the entities that developed and
profited from the operations.
Addressing the reclamation and remediation of abandoned hardrock
mine lands is a costly problem and one that requires a long-term
funding source. To better address the hardrock abandoned mine land
problem and to ensure that an equitable share of the costs of
reclamation of these abandoned mine lands (AML) sites are not solely
borne by the taxpayer, the Administration has proposed legislation that
would hold the hardrock mining industry responsible for the remediation
of abandoned hardrock mines, just as the coal industry is responsible
for remediating abandoned coal sites. The proposal would levy an AML
fee on uranium and metallic mines on both public and private lands, and
the receipts would be split between Federal and non-Federal lands. The
proposed hardrock AML fee and reclamation program will operate in
parallel with the existing coal AML reclamation program as part of a
larger effort to ensure the most dangerous abandoned coal and hardrock
AML sites are addressed by the responsible industries. We welcome the
opportunity to work with the committee and Congress to address this
significant challenge.
This statement will briefly discuss the Department's response in
the days immediately following the Gold King Mine incident,
Reclamation's technical evaluation of the incident, and will conclude
with a discussion of abandoned mine lands managed by the Department and
the Department's priorities moving forward.
gold king mine discussion
The Department's, and its bureaus', involvement in the August 5,
2015, incident began when it was notified of the release. At that time,
the Department's Regional Environmental Officers in Denver,
Albuquerque, and San Francisco began monitoring the situation and
sharing information with each other and with regional contacts in the
bureaus.
Our bureaus with management responsibilities in the impacted
region--the Bureau of Reclamation, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, and the
Bureau of Land Management--as well as the U.S. Geological Survey, began
carrying out coordinated response activities in support of EPA's On-
Scene Coordinator. A survey of those activities is detailed below.
At the request of, and in collaboration with, staff from the San
Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program in the FWS's New
Mexico Ecological Services Field Office, Reclamation increased the
release of water from Navajo Reservoir from 650 to 1,300 cubic feet per
second in order to maintain a target base flow through the endangered
fish habitat of the San Juan River. The increase helped dilute mine
contaminants moving through the San Juan River and helped alleviate
concerns that the river and endangered fish and wildlife might be
impacted. This increase did not result in any lost hydropower at Navajo
Dam.
The BIA conducted drinking water sampling as a precautionary
measure at five Bureau of Indian Education schools along the San Juan
River. BIE and the schools were advised that none of the potable water
at the facilities was impacted by the incident, but the testing
schedule was implemented to provide further assurance to the
communities. BIA has continued to monitor water used by tribes for
drinking, irrigation, and agriculture. BIA's Navajo Region also
activated an Incident Management Team, which provided emergency
livestock drinking water to impacted users along the San Juan River
within the Navajo Nation following its closure for agricultural and
livestock water uses. The Incident Management Team provided and managed
water tanks in various community locations for this effort. Incident
management assistance was also provided to EPA through the BIA's
Southwest Regional Office.
The FWS worked with the Navajo Dam operators on the increased water
releases into the San Juan River. With the New Mexico Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Office, FWS also conducted on the ground surveillance of
the fish community in the Animas and San Juan Rivers, as well as field
sampling of fish communities and surface water, to monitor impacts from
the incident. The San Juan River was determined to be at pre-incident
levels, and the Animas River was re-opened to recreation on August 14.
FWS is continuing to provide support on wildlife issues related to the
incident.
The NPS staff at Glen Canyon National Recreation Area provided
logistics and coordination support to EPA for water sample collections
both on the San Juan River and in the San Juan Arm of Lake Powell,
including a boat, a boat operator, housing, and equipment. NPS staff at
Aztec Ruins National Monument, where an irrigation canal off the river
extends into the park, independently collected and analyzed sediment
samples.
The BLM sent a team to assess the situation on the BLM land
downstream from the mine to determine if any mitigation efforts were
necessary, and worked with the EPA to provide access across BLM lands
to pipe water from the Gold King Mine to EPA's treatment plant. The BLM
also coordinated with San Juan and La Plata counties in Colorado to
verify safe access to BLM recreation areas and to notify the public
about the spill. In Utah, the BLM kept river permit holders and other
recreationists along the San Juan River abreast of the incident as it
evolved.
Finally, the USGS, in cooperation with the EPA, gathered streamgage
data in order to confirm the origin of the stream flow spike at Cement
Creek and the volume of the spike estimated at 3 million gallons. USGS
also took water and sediment samples and provided both current and
historical water quality data to EPA. Just last week, USGS launched a
new Web site that will make available to the public data, images,
interactive maps, and reports related to the Gold King Mine incident.
bureau of reclamation's technical assessment
Shortly after the incident, EPA asked the Department to conduct the
independent technical review of the incident. That review, led by
Reclamation, was designed to be an independent assessment of the
factors that contributed to the incident, including the cause of the
incident, and it was to provide recommendations to prevent such
incidents from occurring in the future.
The review was carried out in accordance with the Department's
scientific integrity policy by career staff at Reclamation's Technical
Service Center in Lakewood, Colorado, with expertise in abandoned mine
remediation. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the USGS peer-
reviewed Reclamation's research and findings and in October the final
report was made available online.
In conducting the technical review, Reclamation examiners adhered
to the areas of review that were delineated in the work authorization
between the two agencies. Reclamation defined the scope of that
authorization to include a review of the history of mining operations
and remediation activities in and around the Gold King Mine; site
conditions prior to and after the incident; the activities that led up
to the incident; the remediation work plan; and industry standards and
practices for abandoned mine remediation.
As discussed in the report of its technical review, Reclamation
concluded that the uncontrolled release at Gold King Mine was due to a
series of events spanning several decades. Groundwater conditions in
the upper reaches of Cement Creek have been significantly altered by
the establishment of extensive underground mine workings, the extension
of the American Tunnel to the Sunnyside Mine, and the subsequent
plugging of the American Tunnel. The final events leading to the
blowout and uncontrolled release of water occurred due to a combination
of an inadequately designed closure of the mine portal in 2009 combined
with a misinterpretation of the groundwater conditions when reopening
the mine portal in 2014 and 2015.
The report also made broader findings, including that the
conditions and actions that led to the incident are not isolated or
unique, but are quite prevalent. As specifically noted in the report:

The standards of practice for reopening and remediating flooded
inactive and abandoned mines are inconsistent from one agency
to another. There are various guidelines for this type of work
but there is little in actual written requirements that
government agencies are required to follow when reopening an
abandoned mine.

In effect, this incident highlights a significant and costly
problem, nationwide. Abandoned mines pose a serious threat on private
lands, on state lands, and on lands managed by the Department and there
is little standardized guidance, standards, or resources to address it.
abandoned mine lands
The issue of abandoned mine lands on Federal lands was last
highlighted by the Department in its Statement for the Record submitted
for the committee's September 17 joint hearing with the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee on the incident. This is not a new problem,
but instead one that governments at the state and Federal level have
been grappling with for a long time.
On Public Lands
In total, the Department manages over 500 million acres of land,
together with associated waterways and plant and animal species. Given
the amount of land managed by the Department, addressing hazards
created by abandoned mines on Federal lands is an important objective.
The significant concentration of known abandoned hardrock mines and
related features on lands under the Department's jurisdiction occur
primarily on BLM and NPS-managed lands and are associated with both
public safety hazards and human health, environmental, and natural
resource impacts resulting from exposure to heavy metals released from
mines and present in mine and mill tailings.
Over the last 150 years, much of the public land managed by the BLM
has experienced some form of hardrock mining activity, which has ranged
from exploration to full development. In many cases, this activity has
resulted in disturbed and sometimes contaminated land across parts of
the West. Mining activities conducted prior to January 1, 1981, the
effective date of the BLM's Surface Management regulations, were often
not properly reclaimed, and in many cases no financially responsible
party exists to help pay for the cleanup. The BLM's abandoned mine land
program, which is aimed at enhancing public safety and improving water
quality by reducing or eliminating the effects of past hardrock mining,
has identified over 50,000 AML sites on BLM administered public lands.
Each year an average of 5,400 new AML sites are discovered on
public lands, with many millions of acres of BLM lands remaining to be
inventoried. The BLM continues to develop new processes to more
effectively inventory priority AML sites on the nearly 250 million
acres of surface estate and 700 million acres of mineral estate that it
manages. This inventory work focuses on high-priority areas, as
established by physical safety, human health, and environmental risk
criteria. Over the last 6 years the BLM has mitigated physical safety
issues at 6,321 AML sites, restored the water quality on 8,435 acres of
BLM managed land, and conducted monitoring on 5,138 AML sites.
The BLM prioritizes abandoned mine reclamation work based on public
safety, human health, and environmental risk. The highest priority is
given to mines that present the greatest safety risk to the public,
such as those located closest to population centers, schools, or
recreation areas, and those with the greatest potential environmental
concern. Criteria for the ranking of environmental sites includes human
presence, threat to the environment, relative toxicity of contaminants,
impacted media and location of the site relative to surface water and/
or groundwater, aquifer characteristics, and soil or sediment
characteristics.
In Colorado, the BLM has prioritized site reclamation in the Gold
King Mine area and is coordinating with the local community and other
agencies to develop a comprehensive solution for the large number of
abandoned mine sites in the area, which are both on Federal and non-
Federal lands.
AML sites are also present on NPS lands throughout the country. The
NPS began to collect data on AML sites on park lands in 1983, and in
September 2014 completed the first comprehensive inventory and
assessment of AML sites in the park system. Extraction activities left
behind 37,050 AML features in 133 units of the park system. The vast
majority--81 percent--of features are located in the NPS Pacific West
Region, especially in Death Valley National Park, Mojave National
Preserve, and Lake Mead National Recreation Area. However, AML features
are distributed throughout the park system and are a significant
management issue in all regions.
The majority of AML features on NPS lands--31,437, or almost 85
percent--do not require remedial action either because they do not
constitute a threat to human health and safety or generally do not pose
a natural resource problem. Almost 1,800 features on NPS lands (about 5
percent) have already been remediated. However, over 3,800 of these
features (over 10 percent) in 76 park units do require remedial action
to mitigate public safety threats and natural resource impacts. The
NPS's 2016 budget request includes $5 million in Line Item Construction
funding to initiate AML remediation efforts; however, NPS is continuing
efforts to fund a comprehensive program that will fully and efficiently
mitigate safety hazards and resource impacts at AML sites through the
national park system.
According to the NPS, the principal cause of death at AML sites
nationwide is drowning in water-filled quarries and pits. Other risks
include vertical drop-offs; unstable structures and rock falls; deep
and unstable pit walls; deadly gases and radioactive air; abandoned
explosives; hazardous chemicals; and high concentrations of
contaminants inherent to the mineral deposit. Mine contaminant releases
can affect natural resources such as air, soil, and water quality as
well as plant and animal health.
The responsibility to reclaim dangerous AML sites is resource
intensive and requires cooperation with local, state, and Federal
partners. Even dangerous mines that have been properly sealed off are
sometimes vandalized, entered, and left open. AML sites are also prone
to erosion and de-stabilization of natural topography due to the
interruption of natural drainages by mining-related excavation and
tailing and waste rock placement. Impacts to scenic qualities of
natural areas also occur at AML sites. There are also other factors
that merit management attention in AML site assessment and treatment,
including the historic value of mines, some of which are listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, and the wildlife habitat value of
AML sites for species such as bats.
With this in mind, the goal of programs addressing AML issues in
the Department is to work to remediate the physical safety hazards,
such as shafts, adits, and entrances, and environmental threats
associated with hardrock abandoned mine sites.
U.S. Geological Survey's Work
At a recent hearing before the Energy and Mineral Resources
Subcommittee, the USGS testified about its role, since the early 1990s,
in providing impartial earth and biological science input to the EPA
and other agencies on Superfund sites and smaller sites appropriate for
Good Samaritan cleanup and other work associated with abandoned mine
lands. Related to this issue, it has worked with stakeholders to
develop detailed watershed-based AML assessment methodologies in
Colorado's Animas River and Montana's Boulder Creek.
The USGS has indicated that a continuing challenge to this process
is accurately estimating the scope of the AML problem across the United
States and the likelihood for individual mining sites to cause
potential environmental contamination. The USGS is developing an
enhanced geospatial database of the mines and mineral deposits of the
United States known as USMIN, which will capture the locations and
areal extent of mine features from current and historical USGS
topographic maps and satellite imagery. When enhanced by the
integration of information from other national databases on geology,
mineral resources, hydrology, water quality, soil quality, remote
sensing, ecology, and climate, the result should help us better
understand the national scope of AML issues and impacts.
The USGS has also developed methods to help reconstruct pre-mining
environmental conditions in these watersheds, because it is neither
cost effective nor technically feasible to remediate to environmental
conditions cleaner than were present naturally prior to mining. Other
work includes----

Interdisciplinary methods to help prioritize which of many
AML contamination sources in a watershed could be cleaned
up to have the biggest positive impacts;

Linked water quality sampling and flow measurements that
have helped pinpoint locations and amounts of specific
contaminant influxes into watershed streams;

Field- and lab-based ecotoxicological measurements to help
assess the impacts of AML contamination on food webs and
aquatic insect populations. Potential human health concerns
can be inferred based on the toxic metals and minerals
geologically likely to be present in mine wastes, soils,
and dusts;

Computer-based models that help predict impacts that
remediation of specific sites would have on downstream
water quality and aquatic ecosystems, allowing more
effective cleanup decisions. The economic and societal
value of ecosystem services can be evaluated in AML
watersheds, and extraction of valuable or useful metals in
mine waste materials may help offset cleanup costs at some
sites.

Addressing Priorities
Due to the abandoned nature of these sites, the public is often
left with the bill for remediation of legacy abandoned mines, rather
than the companies and individuals who originally developed the
resources. The Administration has continued to request funds to address
this significant problem; the Department prioritizes these activities
and addresses those priorities within available resources.
AML sites that are identified by the bureaus as posing significant
potential human health and environmental risks from exposure to toxic
metals are addressed using the response authorities established by the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act,
which have been delegated to the Department by Executive Order. Funding
for the investigation and cleanup of the Department's highest priority
CERCLA AML sites is often provided from the Department's ``Central
Hazardous Materials Fund,'' a Department-wide account that provides
funding to land-managing bureaus for CERCLA response actions, which
receives an annual congressional appropriation of approximately $10
million. The Department uses these funds only for AML sites where the
bureau has completed a CERCLA Preliminary Assessment and Site
Inspection and where the responsible bureau is undertaking additional
response actions using the Department's CERCLA authorities.
While there are a number of challenges to addressing AML sites on
public lands, there is both a necessity and a desire to address those
identified priority sites.
Since 2012, the Administration has included in its budget requests
a legislative proposal intended to address the legacy of abandoned
hardrock mines. The Administration's proposal would hold the hardrock
mining industry responsible for the remediation of abandoned hardrock
mines.
The proposal would levy an AML reclamation fee on uranium and
metallic mines on both public and private lands, which would be
assessed on the volume of material displaced after January 1, 2016. The
receipts would be split between Federal and non-Federal lands, and the
Secretary would disperse the share of non-Federal funds to each state
and tribe based on need. States and tribes would select their own
priority projects using established national criteria.
The proposed hardrock AML reclamation fee and reclamation program
would operate in parallel with the existing coal AML reclamation
program as part of a larger effort to ensure that the most dangerous
abandoned coal and hardrock AML sites are addressed by the responsible
industries. With the number of identified sites increasing as
inventories are improved, we recognize that there is a very large unmet
need to address this problem.
conclusion
It is unfortunate that the catalyst to address a problem is often
an incident like this. The Department stands ready to work with the
committee and Congress to address the issue in a meaningful way. Thank
you and I am happy to response to any questions that you might have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Honorable Sally Jewell,
Secretary of the Interior

The Honorable Sally Jewell did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Chairman Rob Bishop

Question 1. What is the factual or documentary basis for the Bureau
of Reclamation's (BOR) assertion that portions of the pipes that the
Colorado Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety (DRMS) installed in
2009 were excavated and removed in 2014?

Question 2. What is the basis for BOR's assertion that the
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) plan was to insert a stinger
and use a pump to drain water impounded in the mine (i.e., was this
information communicated verbally by an EPA employee/contractor, or was
it contained in a specific document that BOR reviewed)? If this
information came from a specific document, which document?

Question 3. Did BOR interview all of the individuals on site on
August 5, 2015? If not, please explain why BOR did not conduct
interviews with each individual who witnessed the blowout?

Question 4. Were the authors of the BOR report aware that the image
shown in Figure 39 was drawn on August 11, 2015 (after the spill)? If
so, why did they not include this important information in the report?

Question 5. Why did BOR omit the affiliation of the BOR peer
reviewer on the cover and only list the affiliations of the other two
peer reviewers on page 3 (PDF) of the report?

Question 6. Was DOI aware that there was no pump and stinger at the
Gold King Mine site before it produced its report? If so, why was this
not mentioned in the report?

Question 7. Did BOR receive maps or photographs from DRMS or EPA
showing or depicting the DRMS work done at the Gold King Mine in 2009,
other than what is cited in the Technical Review?

Question Submitted by Representative Dan Newhouse
Question 1. Do you think having a Bureau of Reclamation (BOR)
employee--who is a subordinate of the BOR evaluation team members--peer
review his bosses' report makes for a very robust peer review process?

______

The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate that. Now we will get
to the question phase of this, with the Committee Rules--there
is a 5-minute rule that goes along with it.
I am going to break tradition, and I actually am going to
do the first set of questions myself. I apologize, but I think
other Members in this committee are going to have some
specific-ish questions that deal with portions of this report.
My job is going to be very technical here, so we are going to
go through some of the minutiae, the technicality, if I could.
So, I am ready to start.
Ms. Jewell, you received a letter on September 3 from me,
but it took over a month to respond to that letter. Your
initial response did not include any of the documents the
committee asked for. You waited to deliver about 3,600 pages
literally 1 day before this hearing. Of those, over 300 of them
were that--that is one of the pages you gave us, everything was
redacted in the entire page. Those documents produced still do
not include some of the specific documents that the committee
requested.
[Slide.]
The Chairman. So, I am going to give you a compound
question. Number one, why did the Department delay the delivery
of these documents for so many months, especially when EPA and
EPA's contractors provided us with more information than DOI
has, and they did it in less time? Why are so many of these
documents redacted like this? Why are you even giving us that
kind of stuff?
In addition to that, I want to compound that with the other
question that both EPA and DOI determined that BLM would be
excluded as an author or reviewer from this project, because it
was a potentially responsible party under CERCLA. How exactly
is the Department of the Interior, that is ultimately
responsible for BLM and its liabilities, independent enough to
conduct this review?
So, why did it take so long? Why are so many redacted? How
can you actually be considered as independent? Ms. Jewell?
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, we will continue to produce
all appropriate material. We have limited resources. There are
a lot of things to review. We do that in a thoughtful way, and
we get them to the committee as fast as we can with the
resources that we have.
The Chairman. Ms. Jewell, let me----
Secretary Jewell. Why is it redacted?
The Chairman [continuing]. Push back on that. We have
talked about this before. They are not coming in a timely
review. EPA was faster than you, their contractors were faster
than you. Why are they faster than you?
Secretary Jewell. I have no idea what resources EPA has to
allocate to this process. I do know what we have; and our
people work very hard, and they respond as quickly as they
can----
The Chairman. Ain't good enough.
Secretary Jewell [continuing]. With the amount of requests
that they have.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Secretary Jewell. In terms of why redacted, what you were
given is everything related to the Gold King Mine spill. I
receive weekly reports from the Department that are lengthy. I
receive daily reports on emergency operations. These reports
may or may not have anything related to the Gold King Mine
spill. So, you may get 50 pages of documents of which only one
or two paragraphs relate to the Gold King Mine spill.
As a subset of a document, that is why you would get a lot
of pages that did not have any information showing, because
none of it related to the Gold King Mine spill.
The Chairman. We would actually like to be part of the
decisionmaking process of whether that has--look, you can save
a couple of forests by not giving us black pages.
The Bureau of Reclamation was not only involved in the
report it produced, but it was also directly involved in the
project before the blowout took place. The Bureau of
Reclamation, including the report's lead author, was consulting
at the Gold King Mine project, and helped fund it. Why was the
potential liability enough to create a conflict for BLM when
they could not be part of it, but actual involvement was not
enough to create a conflict of interest for the Bureau of
Reclamation?
Secretary Jewell. I am not aware of any discussions with
regard to BLM. I am aware that the EPA wanted to get to the
bottom of what happened, technically, at the mine; and they
looked for people with that expertise.
The work of the Technical Service Center is very broad. A
tiny fraction of that, about a half percent or so, is done for
the EPA. The individual that was contacted by the EPA as an
expert in these areas has worked in the private sector in the
mining industry; and he has worked in the public sector,
including for the now no longer functioning U.S. Bureau of
Mines. The EPA contacted him because he has technical expertise
in this area.
The Chairman. OK. Well, then----
Secretary Jewell. He consulted on the Red and Bonita Mine--
--
The Chairman. Then let me go to the source of it. BOR
signed a contract with the EPA to provide technical assistance
for the cleanup just days after BOR signed another contract to
lead the so-called independent investigation. So, BOR went from
being a technical consultant to an investigator, then back to a
technical consultant in a matter of days.
How can you claim that this report is even remotely
independent, when the lead author was working with EPA, and has
been doing so for some time before he started his
investigation?
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, there are 30 seconds left,
so I am going to turn to my colleague, David Palumbo, who
oversees the Technical Service Center, to provide as quick an
answer as we can within the time remaining.
Mr. Palumbo. Thank you, Secretary. Thank you, Chairman. I
would just like to clarify. The work that the Technical Service
Center was doing was on the Red and Bonita Mine, as the
Secretary indicated. There was no work, there was no contract
for activities related to Gold King Mine until after the
incident.
The Chairman. All right. First, technically, I had 33
seconds, so I did not break the rule. Also, I am going to
challenge that statement later on.
With that, let me go on. Since I am now out of time, let me
go on to Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, part of the issue today is responsibility
in the first place. It was the mining industry that mined under
the mountains initially, it was the mining industry--that
tunnel--so we had that backup that occurred in parts of the
mountain. So, we can't let this hearing get away from the
responsibility in the first place.
Let me just ask you a couple of questions. How much acid
mine drainage was being released by this mine system into the
Animas River watershed before EPA started doing any work on the
Gold King Mine this year?
Secretary Jewell. The numbers that I have heard are 330
million gallons of toxic mine drainage every year out of this
region and into the Animas River watershed.
Mr. Grijalva. And on the August 5 release at Gold King
Mine, how much was released by EPA's activities at that point?
Secretary Jewell. The USGS has measured the flow at
approximately 3 million gallons on the day of August 5, and
that was when the surge came through. Since then, it has
returned to a more stable level. So, 3 million gallons.
Mr. Grijalva. Have there been other large releases of water
from these mines into the watershed in the past?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, there have. As I read the technical
report, it identifies several of them--the largest of which was
actually the inadvertent draining of a lake, which was
something like several hundred million gallons.
Mr. Grijalva. And, were there any Federal agencies
responsible for either that incident or other incidents that
have occurred in the past?
Secretary Jewell. Not to my knowledge. The incidents
occurred as a result of the mining industry's activities.
Mr. Grijalva. Do we have any estimates on the total amount
of acid mine drainage that is seeping into America's streams
and rivers from the estimated number of abandoned mines?
Secretary Jewell. We have not estimated the amount of
spillage. In this small area alone, there are about 400 mines
in the Animas River watershed, 330 million gallons. We estimate
on BLM lands alone there are 100,000 abandoned mines. The state
of Colorado has 23,000. I think that it is fair to say that it
is a significant multiple of that amount, but I do not have an
estimate.
Mr. Grijalva. And not even knowing the total number kind of
makes that numerical conclusion difficult.
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Mr. Grijalva. I just want to say that I asked the committee
staff to do an analysis of some of the proposals the Majority
will be bringing forth. The bills are being proposed. In one,
it would freeze the Bureau of Land Management's abandoned mine
program at $17 million a year, and provide up to $15 million in
matching funds from donors. I am not sure we will get $15
million in donations; but, for the sake of argument, let's
assume that we do. So, that bill would come up to $30 million.
At that rate, it would take over 560 years to clean up just
the abandoned mines that we know about on BLM and Forest
Service lands. Again, that is just what we know about. As you
pointed out, there are a lot we do not know about; so, the
timeline could actually be a lot longer.
If we implement the proposals in the legislation that our
side of the aisle have proposed, and the President's budget, as
well as make the polluters pay for that legacy, we shorten the
time by 500 years. I still think 53 years is an awful long
time, but a lot better than 560.
I think if we continue to focus on not dealing with the
overarching issue, which is abandoned mines, their consequence
to not only the environment but to public health, the danger
they pose, and not look at the funding mechanism that will
begin to pragmatically and programmatically deal with the
reclamation and remediation of those mines, we continue to
completely miss the point.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for holding
this hearing.
Secretary, what did you have, as far as assets and
technical assistance, in the Department to make available to
the Navajo Nation and the Southern Ute Indian Tribe immediately
after the blowout and in the intervening months? What did you
have, and how did you handle it?
Secretary Jewell. To just provide a quick summary, we were
in contact with the Navajo Nation on August 6, which was the
day after the spill. We mobilized to understand what the issues
were. The Fish and Wildlife Service started working on what
were the impacts to the wildlife, the U.S. Geological Survey
began immediate work on stream gauges and measuring the water
flow, the Bureau of Reclamation released additional water from
the Navajo Reservoir to dilute the flow; and we worked every
step of the way with the Navajo Nation.
We are concerned about water quality. We did water quality
testing in the area, including at schools that were about to
open. We set up an Incident Management Team and an Incident
Management Center; and throughout the spill response, we
basically made sure that they had sufficient resources for
their livestock and other animals.
Mr. Young. What I am leading up to, you know, the Navajo
Nation and the Southern Ute Tribes are really sophisticated.
Their tribes have gone a long ways. I am going to be
introducing legislation--I am sure with other people--that,
because of their expertise in environmental protection
themselves, I would like to have a bill that would allow them
to contract that work--not the EPA and not yourself. You would
be the auditors of what is going to be proposed.
If that were the case, what would be the position of your
Department?
Secretary Jewell. I would say, overall, we are very much in
support of contracting services to tribes when they are capable
of providing those services; and we certainly have some
sophistication in the tribes you referenced. So, yes----
Mr. Young. I will guarantee you that we will give you the
specifics of what will happen, because I have noticed the
agencies themselves have reluctance to let those people
directly affected, when they have the expertise, do the work. I
am terribly disappointed in your Department in a lot of areas
in my state and, of course, with the EPA overall.
This is going to come down the pike, so I want you to
consider it. If they cannot do the job, they do not get the
job. If they get the job, then you ought to be able to say,
``This is the law, they are going to have the job to do the
cleanup.'' And it goes back for all your mines. There is no
reason why you cannot have the areas that are directly
affected.
What was your immediate contact with EPA? Did they contact
you, or did you contact them?
Secretary Jewell. Let's see. My understanding is that our
first notification came from the Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment, through their spills tracking data
system. The same day, our Office of Environmental Compliance
and Policy in Denver was notified of the spill by EPA's
National Response Center, all on the day of the spill.
Mr. Young. Is there any of this, ``It is my job, it is not
my job, it is your job, it is your fault, it is not my fault,''
between the two agencies?
Secretary Jewell. I have not seen that at all. I have seen
nothing but cooperation in trying to deal with the issues on
the ground and be responsive to the circumstances on the
ground.
Mr. Young. Who do you have on the ground now from the
Department or EPA auditing this program?
Secretary Jewell. Well, we did not have anybody at the Gold
King Mine site, but we have----
Mr. Young. Now.
Secretary Jewell. Well, we did not at the time. We have
since visited the site, but we do not have anybody on the
ground at the site that I am aware of.
Mr. Young. Is there anybody on the ground from either one
of the agencies?
Secretary Jewell. EPA is responsible for the site, and they
are on the----
Mr. Young. Are they there?
Secretary Jewell. I don't know. I assume so.
Mr. Young. Well, my point is that you are in charge, as
Secretary of the BIA. The BIA is in charge of the reservation.
Is that correct?
Secretary Jewell. I am sorry, I thought you were talking
about the Gold King Mine site. Are you speaking about the
reservation itself?
Mr. Young. What is the effect upon the reservation land and
the water that those people are consuming? Are you bird-dogging
or is it just EPA?
Secretary Jewell. No, we are working with the tribe, and
the tribe's environmental protection organization on monitoring
of water quality. They have said, ``This has opened our eyes to
the risk; we would like assistance in monitoring the amount of
heavy metals in the soil.''
So we are, through BIA, continuing to work with the tribe,
and will continue to do that for as long as they like.
Mr. Young. We will check that with the tribe, to see what
results we are having from it.
Secretary Jewell. Great.
Mr. Young. It is your responsibility. My basic complaint
about the Department all this time--you have Bureau of Mines,
da da da da da, and right at the very bottom is BIA, the last
one to be heard from. They should be the lead agency of this,
because of the standard of the Navajo and the Utes; and you
ought to be aggressive about this, not them.
Secretary Jewell. Congressman Young----
Mr. Young. Yes?
Secretary Jewell [continuing]. With all due respect, I
think our actions have shown that we take our responsibilities
to tribes very seriously. My personal meetings with the Navajo
leadership, and our deputy, Mike Connor's, personal meetings,
have shown that they have been very appreciative of our
response. We will continue those very high levels.
Mr. Young. All due respects, I can tell you this is not a
new unit, not a new agency. And I think you have done a lousy
job, because they are at the bottom of the list.
The Chairman. OK, thank you.
Mr. Sablan, you are recognized. Oh. OK, let's yield to Ms.
Tsongas, then. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Sablan. Welcome, Secretary Jewell. It is so good to have you
here.
After the spill of the Gold King Mine, the entire Nation--I
think all of us--saw appalling images of the river running
yellow, as nearby counties and Native American tribes declared
states of emergency for local residents, and rightfully so.
As I mentioned at our previous hearing on this accident
with EPA Administrator McCarthy, I happen to come from a
district that is rooted in the Industrial Revolution, where
rivers used to run different colors, depending on the dye that
was cast into them at the end of the manufacturing day.
As a Nation, we have come a long way in deciding that this
is no longer acceptable, and have made bipartisan commitments
to protecting the health of our rivers, for they are directly
tied to the overall health of our communities. It was great to
have you come to my district to celebrate our Rivers Day and
the new role that they play, the very important role they play,
in our district.
The Gold King Mine spill into the Animas River, and the
possible negligence by EPA contractors, certainly merits--and
did merit--an investigation and attention from this committee.
But one of the most stunning aspects of this accident, and the
subsequent investigations by both the EPA and the Bureau of
Reclamation, is that it has exposed just how far behind we are
when it comes to environmental cleanups of old, hardrock mines,
abandoned by their private owners when they were no longer
profitable.
The Gold King Mine in Colorado has been closed for 90
years, yet this mine and others in the area have been polluting
the Animas River at the rate of approximately--as you
reaffirmed in your testimony--330 million gallons of polluted
wastewater a year. That is 100 times more pollution going into
the river than the August 5 spill, and the reason that the EPA
was working at the site in the first place.
BLM estimates that there are 93,000 abandoned mines in
California, Nevada, and Utah, and another 23,000 abandoned
mines in Colorado, where the most recent spill took place.
There are approximately 161,000 across the entire western
United States and Alaska, and some estimate a number as high as
500,000. Yet despite these numbers, there is no dedicated
funding source for environmental cleanups of hardrock mines.
I am a co-sponsor of Representative Grijalva's legislation.
It would bring the 1872 mining law into the modern age,
requiring companies to pay royalties to the American taxpayers
for metals extracted from our public lands and creating a much-
needed funding source for cleanups of old and abandoned
hardrock mines. This is an important reform, and it creates an
opportunity to address this long-neglected issue; but until
then, we have to deal with the world as it is.
As I have just mentioned, we have hundreds of thousands of
abandoned mines across our Nation. Many of them are on public
lands, which are depended on by Americans for recreation,
tourism, clean drinking water and, for many people, a source of
their economic livelihoods.
You referenced it in your testimony, but can you describe
the environmental threat that abandoned hardrock mines pose to
our public lands, and give us a little more detail on how they
affect our national parks?
Secretary Jewell. Thank you for the question, and for
recognizing the extent of this problem.
National Parks, in particular, did a very thorough study
that was published in 2014. They estimated that they had
something like 37,000 abandoned mine features, with about 3,800
that required remediation. Because of their smaller footprint,
we were able to do the assessment. They estimated that the
cleanup of those 3,800 sites alone would cost about $141
million over 12 years.
The BLM has not had the financial capacity to do a full
assessment or inventory. They estimate, just in the states of
California, Nevada, and Utah alone, it would cost about $212
million to inventory those sites. They have identified 50,000
sites. As I mentioned, they have another 5,400 that they are
identifying each year. There have been estimates of roughly
100,000 sites, but those are just estimates. We really don't
know, because we have not had the capacity or the funding to do
an inventory.
Ms. Tsongas. Can you talk about the number of park units
that have been impacted? And give some examples of particular
parks.
Secretary Jewell. Yes, there are, I think, in those 3,800
that need remediation, about 76 units.
An example--there is a large mine site--I cannot remember
the name of it--up in Alaska, in Wrangell-St. Elias. There are
lots of sites where our biggest issue is drownings.
Sorry, OK.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Jewell, for being here today.
Before I give my questions, I would like to play a quick
clip from our last hearing on the Animas spill.
[Video shown and submitted to be part of the hearing
record.]
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. Secretary Jewell, we have gotten
some emails and some information, and we have an EPA/BOR
Superfund program work authorization dated August 20, 2015. And
there is nowhere that the things EPA Administrator McCarthy
testified on here were going to be investigated.
So, I am curious. Before that last hearing we had on
September 17, did you or anyone in your Department advise EPA
Administrator McCarthy that the scope of the investigation
would not look into criminality, intentional gross negligence,
or anything of those matters?
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, what I do know is the facts
that are in the record, that we signed a work authorization
form. I will turn it over to David to explain what was in that.
It was specifically a technical review; that is what we agreed
to do.
I think it is fair to say that it is informing the ongoing
investigative work that EPA is conducting. Our reviewers, our
engineers are doing technical----
Mr. Gohmert. That is non-responsive to my question.
Secretary Jewell. They are not----
Mr. Gohmert. I asked you if you, or anyone in your
Department, advised her that the investigation did not include
looking for whether there was criminality, gross negligence, or
intentional violations. I do not need anyone here to tell me
what is in the authorization that I have a copy of. That is not
my question.
You had the power to gather this information that EPA
Administrator McCarthy testified was being gathered. It was not
being requested, it was not being gathered. You knew before the
September 17 hearing that we wanted you to testify. You knew
you had the power to get the information that Administrator
McCarthy said was going to be gathered.
So, did you instruct anyone at all in your Department to
investigate whether or not there was any criminal misconduct,
intentional or negligent disregard, or wanton negligence out
there at the Animas Mine?
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, my Department does not have
the authority to conduct those investigations. I did not have a
conversation with Administrator McCarthy about----
Mr. Gohmert. You are testifying----
Secretary Jewell. Let me finish----
Mr. Gohmert [continuing]. Before this committee that you do
not have the power to see if one of your employees acted
negligently? You do not have that power? That is your
testimony?
Secretary Jewell. Mr. Gohmert, I do not have the power
within Interior to investigate employees within EPA. The
Inspector General within EPA would have that authority; but the
Department of the Interior does not have the authority to look
at criminal or individual investigations. Our investigation was
strictly technical in nature, and consistent with the work
authorization that we did with EPA.
Mr. Gohmert. The bottom line, Secretary, is that, once
again, though your Department is good at holding individual
Americans accountable, no one is being held accountable for
this disaster.
Mr. Chairman, as a former judge, I know the doctrine of
spoliation is basically an exception to the hearsay rule. We
are very careful we do not let anything that is non-reliable
evidence before a fact-finder. That doctrine is sound. I would
advise the fact-finder in this matter that the Department of
the Interior has the information within their grasp, and they
have repeatedly refused to provide it. Therefore, you may take
that as evidence that this Department was either negligent,
grossly negligent, or intentionally violated the law.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Madam Secretary, the Chairman, in his opening statement,
said that the BOR should never have been assigned this task
because Mike Gobla, who worked for BOR, was going to be on a
consulting team scheduled for the week or two after, and that
compromised BOR. How do you respond to that?
Secretary Jewell. I think I will turn that over to David
Palumbo, because he is a technical expert and works with Mr.
Gobla.
Go ahead, David.
Mr. Palumbo. Thank you, Secretary.
Thank you, Congressman. I do not believe, in this case,
there was a conflict of interest. Mr. Gobla was contacted on
July 23 regarding a site visit scheduled for August 14. The
incident occurred on August 5. Mr. Gobla did make the trip on
August 14, and also subsequent to August 14, to conduct
activities related to: one, helping stabilize the mine portal,
and two, as part of the independent technical investigation.
Mike Gobla and other members of the Technical Service
Center, as well as the peer reviewers, have a high standard of
ethics. They have professional conduct requirements that they
adhere to. They are licensed professional engineers,
professional geologists, and PhDs. I believe they acted
independently, with integrity, and without compromise.
Mr. Beyer. And, really, there is no way that Mr. Gobla was
involved in the actual spill at all.
Mr. Palumbo. No, he was not involved with the spill.
Mr. Beyer. OK, great. Madam Secretary, the Chair also
characterized this as a disaster, which I very much respect.
One of the things I have seen--by August 9, 4 days later, the
levels of metal and sediment from the Silverton area had
returned to levels prior to the August 5 spill; the water
quality in the San Juan River and the Navajo Nation had
returned to pre-event levels by August 15; and the Animas and
San Juan Rivers had lifted restrictions on irrigation,
livestock, and recreation. EPA expects no adverse health
effects and the risk to livestock is low.
Were there any deaths to people or livestock? Were there
any illnesses that we know about?
Secretary Jewell. Not that I am aware of, no. None.
Mr. Beyer. Any sense of the economic loss, agriculture----
Secretary Jewell. I do know, from speaking with the Navajo
Nation, that they chose to not use the water for irrigating
crops, and they believe they have losses there that they are
pursuing a claims process with the EPA. But no livestock was
lost. The livestock water that we provided through the BIA, and
the subsequent use of their water, resulted in no losses that I
am aware of to livestock.
Mr. Beyer. Yes. I mean the pictures are horrible, and I do
not want to minimize the disaster effect. We also want to put
it in perspective.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer. We just looked at the EPA's internal report,
which we just got this morning. They talked about the two on-
site coordinators on pages 3 and 4, and how the one guy who was
responsible had gone on vacation, and had directed, ``The other
person''--name redacted--``the EPA contractors, DRMS staff, not
to proceed with any work on actually opening the adit until his
return after a planned vacation.''
On page 4, it then goes on to talk about how they were
scraping away all the loose soil near the face of the adit,
with the initial goal of locating the primary blockage. With
the consultation of DRMS, they were doing additional excavation
to identify the location of the bedrock. They were able to
locate the bedrock. Then they started to go home, and were
doing the final cleanup work, when the team noticed a water
spout a couple of feet high in the air.
So, they were not attempting to open the adit when the
thing happened at all. It looks like, from the internal review,
that they were respecting the advice of the leader, who was on
vacation.
Is there anything in there that suggests criminal activity?
Secretary Jewell. I do not believe there is anything in
there that suggests criminal activity. The spill was clearly
unintentional, from everything we have looked at, and from all
the information that has subsequently come out.
Mr. Beyer. Is there anything that suggests gross
negligence?
Secretary Jewell. I think that that is for others to
determine. The facts are on the table; I think they are very
clear. These are unknown circumstances. It certainly did not
look like there was any intent, other than to clean up an
abandoned mine land site, which had risks that were identified;
and the judgments taken resulted in a spill. Certainly, there
was no indication in anything that I have seen that would
suggest anything was intentional.
Mr. Beyer. One of the most interesting engineering
subtleties in here was that the assumptions were made that a
lot of this was clay, which has a much higher ceiling impact.
Actually, it was a lot of fallen metals and stone. Those are
much more porous, which resulted in water levels double what
they had anticipated. But, it is difficult to take that to
negligence.
So thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Beyer. I also appreciate the
first question you asked.
Mr. Palumbo, I am coming back for another round. That is
the crux of the question. You gave me a different answer than
you gave him, so you can be thinking of your third response to
it eventually.
Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Jewell, thanks for being here. There are two
things that the American people want from Federal agencies.
They want accountability and they want transparency. So let's
look at those two things.
On accountability, has anyone at any agency been fired for
this environmental disaster?
Secretary Jewell. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Has any Federal agency been fined for this
environmental disaster?
Secretary Jewell. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Lamborn. So much for accountability, let's talk about
transparency.
The water pressure at the nearby Red and Bonita Mine was
tested prior to work being conducted, but not at the Gold King
Mine. Why did your report fail to address EPA's decision to
proceed on work at the Gold King Mine without testing the
pressure like they did at the Red and Bonita Mine?
Secretary Jewell. David, I think I will go ahead and let
you answer that, because it is technical.
Mr. Palumbo. Sure. Thank you, Congressman. I believe our
report is clear that if EPA, DRMS, or its contractor would have
done vertical drilling as they did in the Red and Bonita Mine,
that direct verification of pressure or no pressure, this
incident would not have occurred.
Mr. Lamborn. Exactly. Why wasn't it done? That is my point,
why didn't the report go into that?
Mr. Palumbo. I think the report clearly identifies that it
should have been done. And if it were done, we would not have
had the situation that occurred on August 5.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. You say in the abstract it should have
been done. Why didn't it get to the bottom of why the EPA did
not do that.
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, if I can jump in here, the--
--
Mr. Lamborn. Who made the mistake? Who didn't call for it?
Secretary Jewell. EPA had requested a consultation by Mr.
Gobla, who provided the expertise and the suggestions in the
Red and Bonita Mine. That was scheduled for August 14. They
were doing preparation work on the site, clearly without an
intent to do a spill. That is when the spill occurred. Had he
done the consultation, he may have provided advice that would
have prevented the spill; but the prep work on the site
resulted in the release.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, OK. Let me talk about a related issue. One
of your peer reviewers, an expert employed by the Army Corps of
Engineers, protested that the DOI report, your report, failed
to explain the decisions that led to the disaster.
He further stated that, ``The report should describe what
happened internal within EPA that resulted in the path forward
and eventually caused the failure.'' Why didn't the report
state what went wrong with the EPA?
Secretary Jewell. David?
Mr. Palumbo. Sure. Again, as Secretary Jewell indicated
earlier, our scope of work was related to looking at a
technical root cause analysis based on our geotechnical
engineering expertise. We did not have the authority to compel
another agency to provide documents. We do not have the
investigative tools to perform that analysis. So we strictly
focused on the technical merits of the review.
With respect to the peer reviewers, I----
Mr. Lamborn. OK, let's go right there. So, you are letting
the EPA get off scot-free, it sounds like. They are not being
held accountable, and there is definitely not even a lot of
transparency. But, when you want to hold someone accountable,
you throw a state agency under the bus.
DOI claims that in the hours leading up to the blowout, two
DRMS--that is the Colorado agency--employees visited the site
to view conditions and were in agreement with the EPA on
continuing excavating. Two DRMS employees did go there, but
they said there was no such agreement; and they wrote the EPA,
saying that was the case. There was no such agreement. They
were only there to consult with the EPA about future
underground mine work at the Gold King Mine. It had nothing to
do with excavation taking place by EPA and/or its contractor
that morning. No one at DRMS directed any work at Gold King
Mine, nor did any DRMS personnel approve or disapprove any of
the work that EPA was conducting there.
So, you say that you are not finding blame, but you
certainly seem to be able to find a way to blame a state
agency, which was just kind of an innocent bystander. Isn't
that correct?
Mr. Palumbo. Our report captures the discussions that
occurred after the event, when we went out to speak with those
parties that were involved: DRMS, the contractor, EPA. We stand
by the report that we published, that there was consultation
amongst those three parties, there was discussion amongst those
three parties, there was agreement amongst those three parties;
that is why we captured the language we did in our report.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I don't see conspiracy, I see shifting
blame to other people. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mrs. Dingell.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I thank you for
holding this hearing. It is important, and I guess I am in a
mood to say, ``OK, it is the holiday time, so let's work
together so we make sure that this never happens again.'' I
thank my friend, Secretary Jewell, for coming today, knowing
that this was probably not going to be her most pleasant
morning of the holiday season.
But having said that, the Gold King Mine spill is extremely
concerning, and it is a real tragedy. Our thoughts and prayers
continue to go out to those who were impacted by the spill. But
I believe that, as a committee, we need to focus on what the
root causes of the problem are, and how we fix it moving
forward, and prevent it from happening again.
We need to make sure that the government agencies, whether
it is the EPA or an agency at the Interior Department, have the
resources that they need and the authority that they require to
make sure that we are properly cleaning up abandoned mines, so
that tragedies like this do not happen again. It is the right
thing to do for our economy and for the environment. So, I hope
that we are all going to work together on both sides of the
aisle to move forward on that.
Secretary Jewell, your testimony mentions that the
conditions and actions that led to this spill are not unique. I
would agree with that assessment, that even Michigan, which is
not traditionally thought of as a state with mines, has some.
So, let me ask you about something we have been working on in
our subcommittee, and I think is a real problem that we do
have.
One of the reasons that there are so many more abandoned
hardrock mines than there are coal mines is because there are
requirements for coal companies to post bonds to cover cleanup
costs in the event that they go bankrupt. But the biggest coal
companies are allowed to avoid posting bonds if they show that
they are effectively too big to fail. So how often do we keep
hearing that, ``too big to fail'' ?
As with most things that are labeled too big to fail, many
of these companies are now failing, and they are descending
into bankruptcy. That leaves the taxpayers on the hook for
billions of dollars. We raised this issue in May at our
subcommittee level as a textbook case of the taxpayer exposure
to polluter cleanup costs that the Majority was focused on in
that hearing. The coal self-bonding case could result in
leaving taxpayers on the hook for orders of magnitude of more
money than clean energy bonding that they were focused on. They
were invited to join in the investigation. Silence was their
answer, and I think that that answer is telling.
Secretary Jewell, a Reuters article yesterday said that
there was some concern in the Administration about the exposure
to taxpayers from coal self-bonding. Can you tell us about
those concerns and the Administration's plans?
Secretary Jewell. Sure. Just to be clear, the self-bonding
that you are referring to is in the coal mining industry. There
are concerns. There has been a large bankruptcy recently. In
many states, the states have primacy for the regulation on the
coal mining activities, particularly true in Congresswoman
Lummis' state of Wyoming. We work closely with the states, and
must continue to work closely with the states on the self-
bonding issues.
There is no question that, with the increased financial
fragility of many coal mining companies, if they are self-
bonded, that does potentially leave the states and the
taxpayers at risk; and it is something that we would welcome an
opportunity to work with this committee on, as my colleague,
Janna Schneider, has been doing with our Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement. It is a big issue.
Mrs. Dingell. I do not have a lot of time left, so let me
ask you. You agree that this is a problem not just impacting
the western states, but, rather, the entire Nation. Given that
the circumstances that led to the Animas River spill are not
unique, how many other sites are you worried about that a
similar incident could occur?
Secretary Jewell. The honest answer is we know we have
likely more than 100,000 sites on public lands alone, and we
don't know because we have not yet had an opportunity to
inventory the amount of risk that may be present. We do know,
just in this Animas River alone, there are 400 sites; and we do
know that there is consistent water buildup, and a consistent
leakage of that water into the watershed--330 million gallons a
year.
There are other watersheds the USGS has done work on that
have indicated similar problems. And actually, unlike the coal
industry, there is no similar mechanism to pay for cleanup in
the hardrock mining industry; so, it is even worse than what
you described with coal.
Mrs. Dingell. I have more questions, but I will yield back
those 4 seconds I have, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. If you want two more, I will give them to
you.
Mrs. Dingell. That is OK. There are a lot of issues here.
The Chairman. OK. Mr. Fleming, before you go to the dark
side.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, Madam Secretary,
the Administration has been widely criticized for failing to
respond to the incident in a prompt and responsible manner.
This includes having Administration officials visit the
impacted areas--and effectively work to rectify the situation
whenever possible.
Of course, we are well aware that the Department of the
Interior is very aggressive about going after the private
sector whenever the least little thing goes wrong. In fact, in
contrast to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, then-
Interior Secretary Salazar offered the full extent of DOI
assistance and personally visited the Gulf at least seven times
in the 5 weeks following the spill.
So, my question to you, Madam Secretary--how many times did
you visit the western states in the weeks following the
release?
Secretary Jewell. Well, let me begin, Congressman, by
saying that the Deepwater Horizon spill killed 11 people, it
was in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico.
Dr. Fleming. You are answering a question I didn't ask.
Secretary Jewell. So we----
Dr. Fleming. Just please answer my question, Madam
Secretary.
Secretary Jewell. We had primary responsibility, as a
regulator in the Gulf of Mexico. EPA had responsibility here.
Dr. Fleming. I only have 3 minutes and 50 seconds. Please
answer the question. How many times did you visit the western
states?
Secretary Jewell. I do not have a list of how many times I
visited the western states, but I certainly would----
Dr. Fleming. In response to this spill.
Secretary Jewell. May I answer any of this?
Dr. Fleming. Well, you are not giving me an answer.
Secretary Jewell. Mike Connor has been to the actual site
of the Gold King Mine----
Dr. Fleming. I did not ask about Mike, I asked about you,
Madam Secretary.
Secretary Jewell. My visit relevant to the Gold King Mine
spill was----
Dr. Fleming. You did not visit. All right, let me move on.
Secretary Jewell. I visited with the Vice President of the
Navajo Nation on November 18.
Dr. Fleming. You are not being responsive to the question,
Madam Secretary.
Secretary Jewell. Mr. Chairman, I am not being given a
chance to answer.
Dr. Fleming. Mr. Chairman, I will appeal to you. Will you
direct Madam Secretary to answer my question?
The Chairman. Look, it is your time. Answer as directly as
you can. Go for it.
Dr. Fleming. OK. How many times did you visit the impacted
areas of Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah in the weeks following
the blowout?
Secretary Jewell. My closest visit was in November to the
Navajo Nation in Arizona.
Dr. Fleming. In Arizona. That is not one of the states, as
I can determine.
Secretary Jewell. The Navajo Nation----
Dr. Fleming. Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah----
Secretary Jewell [continuing]. In Arizona was impacted.
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. You did not visit at all.
Secretary Jewell. Not in context of the Gold King Mine
spill----
Dr. Fleming. In the month following the spill you tweeted
60 times, but did not acknowledge the blowout or the impacted
communities in any of your social media posts. Why did you
refuse to publicly acknowledge it since then?
Secretary Jewell. This is an EPA issue. We were brought in
as a consultant. This was not our primary issue----
Dr. Fleming. So you are shifting the blame to EPA.
Secretary Jewell. EPA is the primary agency responsible, as
this committee is well aware.
Dr. Fleming. Your Deputy Secretary, Mike Connor, was at the
Grand Canyon on September 15. Why did he fail to visit the
impacted areas during the time of his visit?
Secretary Jewell. I am not aware of all the purposes of
Mike Connor's visit, but he has been to the Gold King Mine
site, and that was in November, to look at the treatment----
Dr. Fleming. Not September 15. OK. On September 17, this
committee held a joint hearing on the Gold King Mine disaster
and invited you and EPA Administrator McCarthy to attend.
Administrator McCarthy did attend, but you refused. Witnesses
from the Navajo Nation, the Southern Ute Tribe, and the states
of Colorado and New Mexico traveled all the way across the
country to discuss how this spill had impacted their
communities. Why couldn't you be bothered to cross the National
Mall to attend?
Secretary Jewell. It had nothing to do with being bothered.
As Congresswoman Lummis explained, we were conducting an
independent review of the Gold King Mine. I did not feel it was
appropriate to appear before the committee while that
investigation was ongoing. I did agree to appear before the
committee today, as the report is out. And, of course, a lot of
this conversation deals with that independent report.
Dr. Fleming. Well, I cannot accept that excuse. Your report
was purely technical, and it was basically restating the
conclusions that the EPA had already reached in its own
internal review.
So, what exactly in your report could possibly have
jeopardized the independence of your investigation?
Secretary Jewell. It would have been inappropriate for me
to come and visit with this committee while that independent
investigation was going on; and I needed the context of that
report to be able to provide information to this committee that
would be relevant.
Dr. Fleming. Again, I would just have to say it seems to me
that the response in this case--and I think we all acknowledge
this, certainly the media did--was lackluster. It just seems
that there is a double standard. When something is caused by an
agency within the Department of the Interior, in your
Department, there seems to be very little activity, very little
acknowledgment.
Then, on the other hand, we can cite many examples where
something goes wrong in the private sector, people are fined,
people are fired, and criminal claims are made against them.
So, I think that the chef should certainly eat her own cooking.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, both of
you, for being here. I appreciate having some time to talk
about this very tragic event that happened. While we can argue
about how this came about, I think it is also important to note
the persistent problems that we have of abandoned hardrock mine
lands, and the negative impact that they have, and will
continue to have, on our water resources.
The problem of abandoned hardrock mines is not going to go
away. As we consider ways to reform our outdated mining laws,
can you expand on existing programs that address other types of
abandoned mines, such as coal, and recent budget cuts?
Can you also speak to the impact that that has had on
further ongoing investigations?
Secretary Jewell. I do not have the specific numbers on our
budget, but I will say that we have significant problems in
coal and hardrock mining with regard particularly to water
quality. I have visited mines, particularly in Appalachia, with
a number of abandoned sites with acid mine drainage that is
impacting water quality.
We have a very thin team. I think the budget for the Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement is down something
like 25 percent over where it was a few years ago. So, the
ability of our team to assist the states in understanding and
working with mine operators to remediate these issues is
severely constrained.
In the case of hardrock mining, as was mentioned earlier,
the BLM has a relatively small budget; it is about $16 million
a year. I think that was mentioned by Mr. Grijalva in his
testimony. It is insufficient to even begin to measure the
scope of the problems, let alone address the real remediation
that needs to be done, both for personal safety of people
visiting these lands, as well as the environmental impacts from
these lands. We would welcome an opportunity to work with the
committee on a stable source of funding and a work plan to
address these things that are really impacting the public
health and safety of communities across the country,
particularly the West.
Mrs. Torres. Yes. As you continue to develop a work plan
and work with members of this committee to do that, I would
really like to piggyback on a comment that was made by Mr.
Young--and that is to help tribes be a part of the solution on
mines that are within their jurisdiction. I think having their
input and having their expertise, or helping them gain that
expertise, is equally important.
Is there something else that you want to add? I know that
several Members asked you questions that you have not been able
to answer, and I would like to give you 2 minutes to answer
that for the record.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you. I would say that I have not
had a chance to talk about the accountability and the
transparency that Congressman Fleming was suggesting earlier.
We have been very open. And I think, if you review the
technical report, it clearly identifies issues where there
turned out to be an error in judgment on the part of EPA. That
is hardly not holding them accountable. It is, in fact, holding
them accountable; and we have been very transparent in that. We
will continue to be transparent and hold ourselves accountable
for those things that are required of us.
We are fully supportive of working with tribes on
opportunities to clean up abandoned mines. In many cases,
tribes do have the sophistication and the interest. We would
welcome working together on having sufficient resources to
address this issue, and continuing to provide economic support
to tribes to be able to build that expertise to address these
issues.
I appreciate the opportunity to say a few things that I did
not get a chance to say before. I stand behind our efforts. I
stand behind our commitment to accountability and to continue
to bring the resources we have to bear to assist EPA; I believe
they do want to get to the bottom of what happened here. We
will hold people accountable to the extent that it is
appropriate, and we are conducting that investigation.
Mrs. Torres. With limited budget resources--these are not
folks that you can just get off the street and train, right? I
mean they require a great deal of education and expertise. I
would also say that it is somewhat criminal that we would
continue to diminish a budget of the EPA or other organizations
that we task with our water quality safety.
I ran out of time, so I will yield back the last 2 seconds.
The Chairman. Actually, you owe me four now.
Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
to a lot of us, I think the most galling element of this
scandal is the government's double standard in addressing
spills of this nature. The EPA and its contractors deliberately
breached a mine opening that caused a blowout of over 3 million
gallons of contaminated water. The EPA had not tested for
hydrostatic pressure within the mine, even though experience
with other similar mines suggested that they should.
At the last hearing, we heard about a company that
accidentally spilled 7,500 gallons. That is \1/4\ of 1 percent
of what the EPA spilled. You went after that company with a
vengeance. You got six criminal indictments; you sent people to
jail. Another poor guy in Alaska operating a backhoe
accidentally caused a 1,500-gallon spill. That is \5/100\ of 1
percent of what the EPA caused. You sent him to Federal prison.
Yet, as you just testified to Mr. Lamborn, you have sought no
criminal indictments against EPA officials for causing this 3
million gallon spill. You have not fired anybody over this
scandal.
Let me ask you this. Have you at least demoted anybody?
Secretary Jewell. Mr. McClintock, I think those would be
appropriate questions to ask EPA. In none of the situations----
Mr. McClintock. I did, and their answer was----
Secretary Jewell [continuing]. That you referenced is----
Mr. McClintock. I did ask that question of the EPA. The
answer was zero. I then asked, ``How many people at least have
you docked the pay of? '' Do you know what the answer was?
Zero. I then asked, ``Well, have you at least yelled at
anybody? '' Let me ask you that same question. Have you yelled
at anybody over this?
Secretary Jewell. No, I have not yelled at anybody over
this. Our job is to try and be responsive----
Mr. McClintock. Well, the EPA Administrator said that she
had, at least thought she may have, yelled at a few people.
Here is the double standard. If you are a private citizen
and you have an accident with a backhoe, you go to jail for
spilling 1,500 gallons. If you are an EPA official responsible
for negligently spilling 3 million gallons of contaminant, you
might get yelled at by the EPA Administrator; but don't worry,
the Secretary of the Interior won't say anything.
Secretary Jewell. May I just suggest that you----
Mr. McClintock. Do you understand how galling that is to
the American public?
Secretary Jewell. I do not agree with the facts that you
have suggested. There is nothing in our technical review that
suggested that there was any deliberate act to breach the mine.
Mr. McClintock. I will get to that in a second. It has been
6 months since this disaster. You testified that the EPA should
have tested for hydrostatic pressure before breaching the adit.
I would like to know the name of the EPA official who approved
the breaching of that mine adit without hydrostatic testing.
Secretary Jewell. I do not know the names of the EPA
officials, but my understanding is that there was no----
Mr. McClintock. Well, you have had 6 months; and the
Department that you head was directly responsible for what we
were assured in September would be a thorough, independent, and
complete investigation of this incident, including the
assignment of responsibility. Now you are telling me you were
just kidding?
Secretary Jewell. No. We did exactly what the agreement
with the EPA was, in terms of providing a technical review. We
did not see any deliberate intent to breach a mine. It was an
accident.
Mr. McClintock. The fact is this report failed to hold
anyone accountable for the disaster. It offered only a cursory
engineering analysis of the circumstances. The report states
that the evaluation team did not believe it was requested to
perform an investigation into a finding of fault.
One of the peer reviewers, the expert with the Army Corps
of Engineers, protested that the Department of the Interior
report failed to explain the decisions that led to the
disaster. He pointed out that the actual cause of failure was
some combination of issues related to EPA internal
communications. You are directly responsible for this report.
Your EPA Administrator had promised this committee a thorough
investigation. We have not gotten one. What we have gotten is a
complete, deliberate whitewash.
Secretary Jewell. We were doing a technical report. We
delivered that report. My understanding is the EPA is doing a
thorough investigation with people that are trained to do that.
The people that did our report are trained engineers, and they
delivered exactly what we agreed to do with the EPA, sir.
Mr. McClintock. Again, you have said that you do not have
the authority to prosecute for negligence; yet your EPA
vigorously prosecutes private citizens for negligence, causing
a fraction of the damage. May I ask if you at least asked for
her resignation?
The Chairman. You don't have to answer that one.
Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I am glad to
see you today, Ms. Jewell and Mr. Palumbo.
I think I want to associate myself with the remarks from
Representatives Grijalva and Torres and some of my other
colleagues in regards to some of the questions that have been
posed and some of the statements that have been made.
I have had somebody in that area through Thanksgiving, and
was able to visit and talk to some of the folks in that general
area, because he is from that general area. They tell me there
is still a lot of evidence on the orange sediments. It could be
possibly before the spill, because you have had the spill for a
long time in that area.
But the concern is, you talk about the Native Americans at
Navajo, but you do not mention the other tribe. At least one of
them, the Utes, they say all is well; but the toxins from that
spill are still finding their way downstream. And, they go all
the way down to Lake Powell, which is where California gets
some of its water.
The understanding is that the general public has a hard
time differentiating between EPA and Bureau of Reclamation, who
is down there, or what their role is. I do not think it is
clear to some of the folks in that area. The contention is that
they really just want somebody to have publicly-oriented
results, a scientifically credible and, of course, independent
review of those events made public to them. I am not just
talking about the tribes and the environmental folks, but the
folks that live in the area.
Of course, I am sure the other tribes, they do want a whole
picture, the big picture, and not just the newest words of how
the Bureau has decisionmaking process and only in engineering.
So, the impacts downstream have still not been divulged or
presented to the general public in a complete manner. That is
the report I am getting back, and this is as of last month.
Secretary Jewell. OK.
Mrs. Napolitano. Of course, there are still reports of
people being sick. Now, they cannot prove that it is as a
result of this spill. I am wondering whether there will be
long-term effects, and whether there are going to be any
studies on those long-term effects of the general population,
the tribes, the issues in that area--is CDC going to be
involved in this, the BIA, and being able to ensure that these
are being addressed? Because these are long-term effects, not
only for the current spill, but of what happened before that.
We are looking at what is right for the public. I mean that
is our bottom line. I am sure it is yours.
Secretary Jewell. Sure.
Mrs. Napolitano. The report that they would like to see--
the process, those reports made with due diligence and
scientific integrity; and, of course, the public needs to trust
us in being able to provide that for them.
Those are things that I wanted to bring up. The
subcontractors, is there any kind of insurance that they might
have? I know that it is a Federal contract, but is there any
coverage for any malfeasance or anything that might have
happened--the subcontractors might be able to be there?
I guess maybe my concern also, on the other side, is who is
footing this bill for the cleanup?
Secretary Jewell. OK. Let me tackle a few of those. First,
my understanding is that EPA is proposing some long-term
studies, and those are out for comment right now. So, it would
be their responsibility for long-term studies on water quality.
I will say that we have been providing assistance to the Fish
and Wildlife Service, the USGS, and the Bureau of Indian
Affairs.
The spill, while it itself was not that large relative to
how much is leaching out of that region, they are concerned,
because of all of the toxic mine drainage, about the long-term
impacts on their reservation land and on their agricultural
crops; so they have been talking to BIA about how to address
that.
I don't know about EPA's relationship with the
subcontractors, and what kind of coverage they might be
required to have for malfeasance, because we did not engage in
that contract.
Mrs. Napolitano. But we need to find out. We need to ensure
that maybe somebody addresses it somewhere along the line.
It really is a concern for me, because these millions of
dollars that have been spent and will continue to be spent, the
taxpayers are going to end up paying for. That is a reality
that we have not really faced; you do not have the budget to be
able to continue doing the remediation in other areas that are
going to be of even greater concern in the future.
So thank you, Madam Secretary.
The Chairman. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some of the proposals
with regard to the future of abandoned mine land programs have
been brought up this morning. So, since we are discussing the
cleanup of abandoned mine lands, I want to raise a little bit
about the history of AML payments to my home state of Wyoming.
Of course, in the original SMCRA that passed in about 1977,
states got half and the Federal Government got half of the AML
money. The vast majority of Wyoming's mining of coal occurred
since 1977. Wyoming has been number one in coal production in
this Nation consistently since 1986, and received half of its
AML payments.
But over time, administrations and Congress were raiding
our money and found different uses for it, whether it was to
pay the retirement benefits or health benefits of miners whose
mines had gone broke, or now this new proposal to do economic
or community development in communities where coal mining is
declining. It has been an effort to get their mitts on money
from AML and to use it for something other than cleaning up
abandoned mine lands.
Last week, the President signed into law a fix to prevent
the raiding of AML money, which requires some of these payments
to be restored to Wyoming. Now, that check needs to be cut and
delivered to Wyoming tomorrow--tomorrow--pursuant to the bill
the President signed last week.
Are you aware of this, and have you issued a warrant for
the Treasury to make these payments to Wyoming?
Secretary Jewell. No.
Mrs. Lummis. OK. I want to let you know that the
transportation bill that the President signed into law has a
December 10 deadline on making Wyoming whole for past raids on
its AML money.
Secretary Jewell. I have just been passed a note that says
Treasury has certified the warrant.
Mrs. Lummis. Perfect. Thank you very much. It illustrates
the problem--we create AML programs around here, such as is
proposed in this POWER + Program, that would take $1 billion to
give to communities for community development that have lost
coal mining jobs; but it is not being used for mine cleanup, it
is being raided for other purposes. In fact, it could be used
to build recreation centers so people have somewhere to go who
lost a job mining coal, or mining some other product such as
uranium, that is also depressed, partly because the
Administration is dumping product on the market that it holds.
And, the fact that the mining programs in this country were
so heavily regulated during World War II--their hours of
operation were regulated, the government controlled which mines
operated, which strategic minerals were produced, the
production levels, the pricing levels--all during the war
effort. Thousands of mines went out of business as a result of
that; they were abandoned.
This was all before we had an abandoned mines program. The
government, literally, forced the abandonment of these mines.
So, the Federal Government does have some liability. That has
been acknowledged. That is part of the reason that EPA is
helping to clean up some of these mines, because they were
abandoned during World War II because of the mining effort.
Now, here we are, where the government is forcing the
switching of fuels from coal to natural gas in the name of
climate change. Then these jobs are being lost. What they want
to do is create a new AML program, take $1 billion out for
community development to pay miners who have lost their jobs.
It brings to mind an old saying, and this is attributed to
Ronald Reagan, ``If it moves, tax it. If it keeps moving,
regulate it. If it stops moving, subsidize it.'' And what is
happening here is coal mining has stopped moving, so we are
going to subsidize it through this billion dollars from AML. My
gosh, will we never learn?
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Jewell, thank you for being here and working to
address the real issue of abandoned mines that are threatening
our environment and our communities. I want to focus on the
impact of these releases on our Native American communities,
and how the EPA is improving its communications to tribal
jurisdictions.
EPA Assistant Administrator Mathy Stanislaus previously
testified at the House Science Committee that one of the
initial lessons that we learned in the aftermath of the Gold
King Mine release is that the EPA can improve its
communications regarding releases and other environmental
events that may affect multiple jurisdictions.
Can you elaborate and, where possible, provide an update on
how the EPA is working to improve those communications,
specifically to our tribal communities?
Secretary Jewell. I don't know what EPA is working on
presently. I am aware that they said that there were
opportunities to improve, and we would certainly like to work
with them on that.
As I have gone through piecing together a timeline of
events, I think that the tribe could have been notified
directly by EPA, but we actually did pursue work the day of and
the day after the spill. So I think, in terms of the actual
impact, notifications were out there, but they maybe came
through a less direct method than would have been ideal. So, we
would support any effort that EPA would undertake to learn from
this and to put more robust and direct forms of communications
in place.
One thing I would point out in our technical report--it
said that there are very few guidelines or standards. There are
a lot of people involved in cleaning up these sites, some of my
own agencies--in this case, EPA and the states. I think this
may be a wake-up call to do a better job of our communications
and our response efforts.
Mr. Gallego. Certainly, in talking to some of my friends in
the Navajo Nation, I think that would have--the problem
existed, obviously. The spill is a problem, but also how it was
handled afterwards, and what seemed to be not a very coherent
messaging program added insult to injury. I really encourage
EPA and everyone else involved to work on that, especially
concerning how many mines we have in Arizona. As a Member from
Arizona, I am afraid this may be happening again. Thank you.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, thank you so much for being here. Let me get
right to my questions.
Something happened just recently--last evening, actually,
at the eleventh hour. EPA released an addendum to the internal
report it released in August. Secretary Jewell, do you know
that EPA was working on an addendum to the August internal
report?
Secretary Jewell. I knew that EPA was conducting ongoing
investigations, and that our report was helping advise that;
but I was not aware of specific actions that they were taking
at this time.
Mr. Thompson. OK. So you were not familiar with that report
being released, were not informed about it at that point?
Secretary Jewell. Right.
Mr. Thompson. Well, actually, I think the EPA may be
throwing you under the bus, at least in parts here. The
addendum indicates that EPA recently re-interviewed two on-
scene coordinators, presumably the two who were responsible for
the Gold King Mine spill; but their names, obviously, were
conveniently blacked out, so who knows who EPA spoke to.
In any case, they ask about DOI's report. So, now we have
the EPA investigating the Department of the Interior
investigating the EPA. Sounds a bit ludicrous, but certainly it
affirms the report did not answer the questions it should have
answered.
Now, Secretary Jewell, is the EPA wrong, or do you stand
behind your report?
Secretary Jewell. We stand fully behind our report, and
believe it met the terms that were identified when we signed
the scope of work with the EPA in August.
Mr. Thompson. Well, one thing it seems that you did get
wrong--and I am not sure how EPA and the Department of the
Interior both screwed up on this one--but, it basically is more
of a technical issue. It really just comes down to the height
of the mine opening.
On August 12, EPA's contractor said the mine had been
measured after the blowout, and the opening was 10 feet wide by
15 feet high. Your report, released on October 22, said that
the mine opening was thought to be 10 feet tall. But after a
blowout, the supporting timbers were measured and found to be 8
feet tall. Plus the crown of the mine opening at the portal
area was slightly higher than 8 feet. And now, on December 8,
the EPA says the entrance to the mine was actually 19 feet tall
in their addendum report.
Secretary Jewell, does the Department of the Interior even
know the measurements of the mine entrance? That seems like a
pretty fundamental fact, especially when EPA was digging into a
mine that they knew might be full of contaminated water.
Secretary Jewell. I am going to turn that over to David.
Mr. Palumbo. Thank you, Congressman. I believe we do have a
good understanding of the measurements of the mine opening,
which is called the portal, as well as the adit itself, the
tunnel, if you will, that is beyond the opening.
I am not sure how EPA made its measurements that were in
the addendum that was released last evening. We believe that
the mine opening and the tunnel itself was approximately 8 feet
high prior to the incident. And, due to erosion caused by the
mine water release, was eroded to about 10 feet. So that
opening, we have a good understanding--we went out on August
14, September 3, and one other time; we have a good physical
understanding of the characteristics of the mine opening.
Mr. Thompson. Certainly, you understand my concerns. I mean
what a variant--somewhere around 8 feet to 19 feet and varying
opinions at different times. If we cannot get those basic
critical facts straight, how can we make the argument that the
Federal Government is the appropriate party to clean up these
mines? It is abundantly clear that the EPA and Department of
the Interior should not be anywhere near abandoned mines.
And, Secretary Jewell, you should be ashamed of the
Department of the Interior for becoming complicit in what
appears to be the EPA's negligence in utterly failing to write
a report that told us anything of substance about what actually
happened at the Gold King Mine. If I were you, I would be
concerned that your colleagues in the EPA appear that they are
looking for a scapegoat at this point.
Secretary Jewell. Well, Congressman, I am proud of the work
that Reclamation did, and of the technical review. I think that
they did a thorough analysis of the facts in the time frame
that they had to generate a report--within a little over 60
days.
I do think that as more work is done on the mine, more is
understood, like the collapse of the roof, which they would not
have known before it occurred. These are all facts that are
beginning to come to light, as more work is done on the mine.
I do not think there is any intent to negligence, nor do I
think that there is necessary disagreement. I think more
information is continuing to come out over time, and that is
typically how these investigations unfold.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much. Thank you, Secretary
Jewell, for showing up today.
You were in private practice, right? The private sector,
right?
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Dr. Gosar. You were a CEO at REI, I believe.
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Dr. Gosar. So, would you make the analogy with me that you
are the CEO of Interior?
Secretary Jewell. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. OK. I am going to ask you a series of questions.
Is it true that the Animas and San Juan Rivers run through
parcels of land owned by the Department of the Interior's
Bureau of Land Management?
Secretary Jewell. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. Is it true that the Animas and San Juan Rivers
run through the reservation of the Navajo Nation and the
Southern Ute Tribe?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, and one other tribe that----
Dr. Gosar. OK.
Secretary Jewell. The Ute Mountain Ute, I believe.
Dr. Gosar. Is it correct that the Animas flows into the San
Juan River, which contains critical habitat for two species of
fish, the Colorado pikeminnow and the razorback sucker, that
are both listed as endangered under the Endangered Species Act?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, that is true.
Dr. Gosar. Is it true that the Bureau of Reclamation
increased its releases from the Navajo Dam to try to dilute the
spill?
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Dr. Gosar. Is it correct that all areas I just listed fall
under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior?
Secretary Jewell. Yes. Well, the tribes, we had a
relationship. Obviously, that is tribal land. We provide
support.
Dr. Gosar. The answer is yes. OK. So, as a CEO, you have a
responsibility here. I have heard it over and over again. The
gentleman from Virginia alluded to, ``Well, these weren't
intentional.'' Does it matter if it is intentional or
unintentional?
Secretary Jewell. Yes, it matters if it is intentional or
unintentional.
Dr. Gosar. Oh, liability-wise? No. Oh, no. You ought to
know that as CEO of REI; and you ought to know that as CEO of
Interior. It does not matter because, as the gentleman before
us cited about a backhoe and someone going to prison, the
matter of that issue is, yes, it is unintentional, but there is
still a consequence here. I hope you understand the frustration
we have here, because we are talking about water quality over
here, and I am talking about my veterans having it worse off
because of bureaucratic nightmares for their health care.
The bureaucracy does not take care of itself, because it
holds nobody accountable. So, as the CEO of Interior, you had a
claim here, because of these affected areas. Let me ask you the
question then--do you feel that you are an independent source
for review of what transpired in this case?
Secretary Jewell. I believe we were, in the work that we
did through the Bureau of Reclamation, yes.
Dr. Gosar. As an independent source that you looked at
this, why weren't you in immediate responses to these affected
areas? You, personally.
Secretary Jewell. My team was very responsive. I would say
that we provided the level of response appropriate to the
degree of this spill and the impact of the spill. The decisions
were made not in Washington, DC; they were made in the regional
offices that were closest to the action by the people most able
to address the cleanup.
Dr. Gosar. I am glad you said that, because we had Navajo
President Russell Begaye here, who contradicts you on that
application. In fact, he has testified before this committee
about the lack of meaningful response from the Federal agencies
following that disaster. I mean he noted it, specifically. So,
I disagree again, and once again go back to the CEO of
Interior.
You also make mention that you did not arrive at the site
until November, right? You came out personally to look at some
of the areas in November.
Secretary Jewell. Mike Connor, Deputy Secretary, went out.
I have not been to the Gold King Mine site, personally.
Dr. Gosar. You haven't been?
Secretary Jewell. I have not.
Dr. Gosar. OK. And what about the affected sites?
Secretary Jewell. I had a visit that was related to Bureau
of Indian Education close to the Navajo site. I met with the
Navajo Vice President. We spoke about this, but I have not been
specifically to look at the Gold King Mine incident.
Dr. Gosar. Got you. The other side has also talked about
abandoned mines. I know you, through your past CEO application,
have resources and you try to magnify those resources. In your
written testimony, you gave a very small blurb about the Good
Samaritan cleanup. I want to highlight that, because I do not
think we paid enough attention here. I think the gentlelady
from Wyoming highlighted some of the abuses of the funds, and
stuff like that.
But my question is--when a mining company actually uses the
Good Samaritan law, are they not under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Interior and EPA to do it as--fundamentally
reclaim property?
Secretary Jewell. You know, I am not familiar with the
details of the Good Samaritan law.
Dr. Gosar. And you know what? I am ashamed of that, because
this is a resource that the mining companies have wanted to
utilize; but bureaucrats have feigned that, because we are
going to go in and do everything according to the book when you
have stuff on site that they would actually do it.
I would look at Resolution Copper, in which they have
mitigated a claim. They have invested almost a billion dollars
to do that. I think you owe it, as a CEO of Interior, to look
at the Good Samaritan law and use that application to find and
magnify it.
I yield back, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Jewell, it
is good to see you again.
On page 48 of your report, there is an updated Figure 39,
which describes as showing EPA's assumptions about the entrance
to the mine adit. Although someone reading your report would
not know it, that figure was prepared after the blowout, and
the report author knew this when they authored the report.
Isn't that correct?
Secretary Jewell. I am going to turn to David to respond to
the technical report. Do you have a figure number? Is it 39,
you said?
Mr. Labrador. Yes, Figure 39 on page 48.
Secretary Jewell. And, I am sorry, the question again?
Mr. Labrador. Someone reading this report would not know
it, but that figure was prepared after the blowout. Isn't that
correct?
Mr. Palumbo. I am not absolutely certain, but I believe
Figure 39 was from EPA's files, and was prepared before the
blowout.
Mr. Labrador. That is not correct.
Mr. Palumbo. It is not?
Mr. Labrador. No. It was prepared after the blowout.
Mr. Palumbo. OK.
Mr. Labrador. Your report uses that figure throughout to
describe, through narrative illustrations, the EPA plan being
carried out last August. The steps included digging up the
tunnel opening from above; inserting a metal pipe, called a
stinger, through the collapsed material in the opening, or
through the plug; and then using a pump to drain the water
impounded in the tunnel or the adit.
Although your report makes no mention of it, on August 5,
2015, there was no stinger and no pump at the Gold King Mine
site. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Palumbo. I don't know if there was a stinger or pump at
the mine site. I will say that these figures in the report--
Figures 40 and on--were meant to depict what EPA's plan was, an
illustration of how they were going to proceed. That work
activity never made it that far because, when the backhoe in
Figure 41 breached the top of that rubble, the release began to
exacerbate and----
Mr. Labrador. Yes, but did----
Mr. Palumbo [continuing]. The whole thing fell.
Mr. Labrador. You are saying that this was the plan. But
when you were working on that date, you did not have what you
were supposed to have in there, correct?
Secretary Jewell. To be clear, we were not working on that
date.
Mr. Labrador. Oh, correct.
Secretary Jewell. The Bureau of Reclamation was not there.
Mr. Labrador. So by 10:51 a.m. on August 5, the time the
water began spurting from the Gold King Mine, a channel had
been prepared on the right side of the excavation so that water
from the mine could be directed to an existing drainage system.
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Palumbo. Correct.
Mr. Labrador. Dr. Olsen, the Army Corps of Engineers
reviewer of your report, stated that there was no explanation
in this report of the urgency to start digging out the plug,
rather than wait for BOR technical input, as prescribed by the
EPA project leader. Your report does not contradict or refute
this statement in any way, does it?
Mr. Palumbo. It does not contradict that statement. I will
note that our peer review process, which included a signature
by Dr. Olsen, attests to the technical merits of our report.
That was a non-technical matter beyond our scope of work. We
understood that work was being done by the OIG, which we
believe, in fact, it is being done by the OIG.
Mr. Labrador. Last night, on the eve of today's hearing,
your report that EPA paid you to do, EPA remarkably revealed an
addendum to its own investigative report unveiling new
revelations from EPA that are reportedly based, in part, on
more interviews with EPA's on-scene coordinators. Your report
makes no assertion whatsoever that the steps of inserting the
stinger through the plug, or any other steps involving actually
breaching the mine entrance, were going to be paused until
August 14 or later. Now you are claiming that they were going
to be paused, when other experts would be on the site. Isn't
that correct?
Mr. Palumbo. I am sorry, can you repeat that?
Mr. Labrador. Your report makes no assertion whatsoever
that the steps of inserting the stinger through the plug, or
any other steps involving actually breaching the mine entrance,
were going to be paused until August 14.
Mr. Palumbo. We do not identify that in our report, no.
That was, again, beyond the scope of that type of investigation
internal to EPA's decisionmaking process.
Mr. Labrador. OK. Secretary Jewell, in your response to Mr.
McClintock, you said there was no evidence that anybody did
anything intentional. In response to Mr. Gosar, you said again
that intentionality is an issue. But for private citizens, all
these environmental crimes are strict liability crimes. Why is
there a different standard for private citizens than for
workers of your administration?
The Chairman. We will pick that question up at some other
time.
Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you,
Madam Secretary, for being here today. The Minority has
illustrated that there are many Gold King Mine disasters out
there waiting to happen. Because of the hundreds of thousands
of abandoned mines, there is potential for this type of
environmental disaster caused by the EPA to be repeated.
For all practical purposes, the technical report is akin to
an autopsy report. We have a corpse--or, in this instance, a
toxic mine spill disaster; and, technically, the report
accurately outlines what happened. The EPA was incompetent.
They followed a bad plan, or a lack of a plan. Actually, I have
still not had my questions answered as to whether there was a
professional engineer in charge, as outlined by Colorado law on
this particular project.
But, they started work without understanding what they were
doing, they dug a hole where they should not have, and they
released 3 million gallons of toxic water into the environment.
What happened is straightforward, not surprising, and certainly
not rocket science. The sad part is that the disaster was very
much preventable.
There are two major problems I see with this report. Number
one: the lead examiner has a conflict of interest with the
perpetrators. He may be as honest as the day is long and 100
percent accurate in his findings, but it is like the coroner
being the suspect's cousin. The report fails miserably to
outline the root cause of the disaster, who specifically was at
fault, or how to prevent this in the future.
Madam Secretary, like me, you have worked in the private
sector, and you have dealt with Federal regulations and
regulators. The private sector is scared to death of Federal
regulators, because they know the heavy hand of the Federal
Government can shut them down. The private sector wears both
suspenders and belts when they deal with regulators. They spend
way more time and money to make sure they dot all the I's and
cross all the T's, and oftentimes that is still not enough.
My first question to you is--should Federal agencies be
held to the same measure that they measure by?
Secretary Jewell. I believe the work that is being done in
something like this--EPA is trying to do a job of cleaning up a
problem it did not create. I think it is a little bit different
to compare that to a private company that is, in fact, mining
or doing other work, in terms of what its responsibilities are.
I think that is very clear in our report. I disagree with
the premise that it was not independent; I believe it was
independent. I don't know the credentials of the EPA people on
site, and our report did not get into that, because it was not
the scope of the report. But I think that it clearly indicated
what happened, and while you can look, as we have, after the
fact, and say----
Mr. Westerman. Do you not think the qualifications of the
people on site are germane to----
Secretary Jewell. I think they are germane, but that was
not part of the scope of our investigation.
Mr. Westerman. Why was it not part of the scope?
Secretary Jewell. We did a technical review of what
happened. The investigation on those kinds of questions is
being conducted by the EPA through their Office of the
Inspector General.
Mr. Westerman. So, they are investigating themselves on
their technical competence to have done the work?
Secretary Jewell. Their IG is doing a thorough
investigation, and should additional investigations come from
that--that could happen.
Mr. Westerman. Do you not agree that the technical
expertise of the people planning the project was germane to the
whole project, or are you saying--I mean it is easy to say,
``Well, they dug a hole where they shouldn't, and we released
all this toxic water.'' Anybody could have probably walked out
and done that report.
Secretary Jewell. If I were in the same situation as
Administrator McCarthy, absolutely I would want to know about
those things. I believe those questions are being answered
through an appropriate body, which is the Office of the
Inspector General. It was not part of the scope of the work
that we were asked to do.
Mr. Westerman. So, at the very least, should Federal
agencies correct their policies so they do not repeat mistakes?
Secretary Jewell. One of the things that this pointed out
is that there are very few guidelines or standards,
particularly engineering standards regarding abandoned mine
lands. I think that that is a call to action for all of us, to
look at putting some of those standards in place, so that there
is a reduced risk of this happening again.
Mr. Westerman. To me, it seems like there is an obvious
major systemic flaw in the process of how these projects are
done, and the report seemed to turn a blind eye to that. It
analyzed what happened, but it did not really look at the root
cause of why it happened, why there was poor planning, why
there was not appropriate expertise on site, and what could be
done to fix that.
I know that professional engineers nationwide have called
for improved standardized best practices that must be adhered
to for all Federal engineering projects. Why doesn't the
Department of the Interior support this recommendation?
Secretary Jewell. I think we would support that
recommendation. I have not seen it, personally, but I think the
report clearly indicated we could have stronger standards
across the Federal family on the cleanup of abandoned mines.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, and Secretary. I apologize for not having been
here this morning. I had a conflict with another hearing.
The Department's role with the Environmental Protection
Agency on this particular spill, the Animas River--I think,
clearly, the facts indicate that this was the responsibility of
the Environmental Protection Agency. I am trying to understand
why the Secretary of the Interior here is giving her good time
in the committee with that clarification in mind.
Certainly, we are all concerned about abandoned mines and
the serious threats that they create as it relates to hazards.
I think that is something we all share, as well as its impacts
to how they are handled. Clearly, no one believes that the 3
million gallons of toxic waste that flowed from the Gold King
Mine wasn't a terrible accident. It is regrettable and,
clearly, mistakes were made. I think we are learning from the
mistakes, but it just seems to me that, in observing how we try
to work together as a committee, we should try to focus on
areas where we can do the most good.
I am trying to understand, Madam Secretary, after all the
questions that you have been asked today with regards to your
role and the Bureau of Land Management's role, where you have
some responsibility, what are your takeaways from this hearing
this morning? Because, frankly, if we are going to be
constructive and determine where we go forward, is this
something, in terms of the merits, which we can actually have
an ability to make corrective action; because of jurisdictional
issues, we were not able to have the Environmental Protection
Agency head here. We had you, instead.
Clearly, I do not think it makes good sense, whatever
differences you may have with the EPA on this effort, to figure
out that this is some sort of a fight or a difference that you
have between the agency and the Department. You care to
comment?
Secretary Jewell. I would say that between the EPA and
ourselves, we share a common disappointment that the spill
happened, a common desire to try to get to the bottom of
exactly what happened, and how do we prevent that from
happening in the future. I think if there is one thing that
this hearing does, it shines a spotlight on the challenge that
we have across this Nation of abandoned hardrock mines, and the
fact that there are very limited resources to clean them up.
I think the other thing that this hearing points out is, in
a situation like the Gold King Mine, which was closed in 1922,
that there is continuing buildup of toxic material that is
leaching out of mine tailings, the mines themselves, and some
natural deposits that are a problem that need to be addressed
that are impacting many of our states.
My sense is the EPA is doing what it can with limited
resources to address the cleanup. They wanted to know what they
did wrong here, so they could learn lessons from that. We are
learning lessons about the lack of clear standards and guidance
with regard, particularly, to the engineering aspects of these
mines; and I think those are all lessons that we take away from
this that will make us more effective land managers and more
involved in cleaning up these things that we did not cause, but
we now have responsibility for.
Mr. Costa. Yes. Let me just make one comment in closing.
When I chaired this subcommittee a few years back, we looked
into the whole hardrock mining law. While there have been some
minor changes over the years--and maybe this calls into
question the purpose of this hearing--there has been no
significant change to the law since it was enacted during the
Grant administration. That has been a few years ago.
So, it seems to me, if the takeaway from this meeting is to
be productive, that maybe the subcommittee or the full
committee ought to take a look at the legislation that was
created during the Grant administration and see how we might
improve it.
The Chairman. He was a good guy. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, a
pleasure to have you here this morning. Mr. Palumbo, thank you
for being with us. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing on this important issue.
You said yourself, Madam Secretary, that these conditions
are not unique; they are quite prevalent, especially in the
western United States, with thousands of potential issues
surrounding abandoned mines. I think it is proper that we, as a
committee, look into the `whys' and `wherefores' of not
ignoring the elephant in the room, as some people have referred
to, but wanting to shed light on what happened, what did not
happen, how we can best avoid this happening in the future. I
think that is prudent, and thank you for contributing to that
conversation.
I also wonder the value of minimizing this. It was
substantial, the number of gallons. Certainly there is an issue
with water contamination from all these mines, but this was an
extraordinary environmental incident, and something that we
should certainly see as something that we need to address.
I just put my questions somewhere where I cannot find them.
What did I do with those, Mr. Chairman? Someone stole my
questions. What I wanted to ask you--here we are--I will let
you expound on a couple of questions that you had been asked
previously. So--that is not it.
One of the peer reviewers in the independent study that you
released on this Gold King Mine incident protested that the DOI
report failed to explain the decisions that led to the
disaster. This comes after Administrator McCarthy frustrated
the committee's previous efforts to get to the bottom of this
issue.
So, Madam Secretary, could you tell me--why didn't the EPA
test the hydrostatic pressure within the mine before working,
even though it was well known that contaminated mine water was
gathering in the mine's tunnels? And if these conditions were
not possible to be ascertained, why would they proceed?
Secretary Jewell. Congressman, I am going to turn that over
to my technical expert, if you are OK with that. David?
Mr. Palumbo. Yes, thank you, Mr. Congressman. Thank you,
Secretary.
We don't know why EPA did not decide to test the
hydrostatic pressure. We do know that they tested the
hydrostatic pressure on the Red and Bonita Mine. We do know
that they contacted the Bureau of Reclamation and arranged for
a site visit on August 14--of course, after the incident, it
was no longer needed to go out for that particular reason.
We would have discussed with them the need to test that
hydrostatic pressure. We understand that EPA's Office of the
Inspector General is doing that investigation internal to EPA,
interviewing employees to get to the bottom of that question of
why the hydrostatic pressure was not tested. We just know that
it wasn't. We would have recommended that it was, just as it
was for the Red and Bonita Mine.
Mr. Newhouse. A key point, and lessons learned, as Mr.
Costa referred to.
The same peer reviewer from the Army Corps further states
that the report should have described what happened internally
within EPA that resulted in the path forward and eventually
caused the failure. So why wasn't this information provided,
and how will the responsible individuals be held accountable
for their actions if your Department will not reveal such
pertinent information?
Secretary Jewell. So, just to be clear, the scope of work
that was agreed upon by ourselves and EPA was a technical
review. The people that did that technical review were experts
in engineering, mine remediation, geology, and so on. We do not
have, in the Bureau of Reclamation, the authorities necessary
to conduct an investigation of individuals. Those kinds of
authorities would rest with the Inspector General and other
oversight bodies.
I am confident the EPA wants to get to the bottom of those
issues, that was just not what the Department of the Interior
signed up to do in the work plan that we agreed to with EPA,
nor would we have the authorities to do that work.
Mr. Newhouse. So, that was not information that you felt
necessary to bring forward?
Secretary Jewell. It was not part of the scope of work of
what we agreed to do with EPA.
Mr. Newhouse. OK. Again, I appreciate your adding to the
discussion on this issue, and for both of you being here this
morning. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Hice.
Dr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Secretary Jewell, who
was not able to join us previously in September. I am pleased
that you are finally here with us today. I appreciate that.
I want to go with the same line of thought here of why--if
we have determined that the testing of the water was important,
but it was not done; there was a change of personnel, and that
change of personnel created urgency that this needs to be done;
but we don't know who that change of personnel was--aren't
those important questions? How can we hold someone accountable
if we are not even going to look into these types of questions?
Secretary Jewell. Well, as I have said over and over again,
our work was a technical review. I do not want to make
assumptions on whether there was urgency or not urgency to do
the work. We have done the scope of the review, based on the
information that we were provided at the time.
The investigation of intent and so on is an ongoing work
that is being conducted by the EPA.
Dr. Hice. It does not seem like it is that much of an
investigation to find out there was an urgent decision made,
otherwise the BOR would have been waiting--a delay before
proceeding, and the water took off.
Let me go back to the September hearing. One of the
individuals we had giving testimony from the state of New
Mexico stated clearly that the involvement from the Department
of the Interior following the disaster was non-existent. That
is an extremely strong word, ``non-existent.'' He did clarify
that your Department had put out a press release stating that
you were preparing an investigation, but with no details on
what the scope of that investigation would be.
The scope is kind of important in this whole thing. It is
something, again, that we had planned to ask you, but you were
not here. What was your personal involvement in managing the
disaster, following the blowout?
Secretary Jewell. Let me just say that the facts
demonstrate that we were very active, from day one----
Dr. Hice. I am asking about you. Did you visit the site?
Secretary Jewell. I have not visited the site. Others with
much more technical knowledge have visited the site, including
my Deputy Secretary. I have not personally visited the site,
nor did I feel that it was important to do so, because of the
level of resources and expertise that we had engaged at
multiple levels.
Dr. Hice. Your predecessor visited the site in the Gulf of
Mexico of the Deepwater Horizon spill that was caused there by
a private-sector business. Again, I will follow up on the
questions from my colleague, Mr. Labrador. Why is there a
double standard? Why was there a visit in the Deepwater Horizon
case immediately from someone in your position? Now we have
something--a disaster from the EPA, and to this day you still
have not visited the site. Why is there a double standard?
Secretary Jewell. Well, I do not believe there is a double
standard. The Department of the Interior was a primary
regulator in the offshore oil incident in the Deepwater
Horizon. EPA was the primary regulator involved here. Deepwater
Horizon was a very different incident with very different
implications, including killing 11 people. This spill, while
significant and something we are all learning lessons from,
does not compare in magnitude at all to the Deepwater----
Dr. Hice. So if this was a private-sector business
involved, you would not have visited the site?
Secretary Jewell. Beg your pardon?
Dr. Hice. You would not have visited the site?
Secretary Jewell. I am not sure I understand your question.
Dr. Hice. If the EPA was not involved here, but a private
business was involved in this disaster, you are saying you
still would not have been interested in visiting the site?
Secretary Jewell. It is not a question of interest, sir. I
do not believe it would be appropriate for me to necessarily
visit the site. It would be the regulator that was most closely
involved. This is a private land site. The state was involved--
--
Dr. Hice. But it comes under your jurisdiction, and it was
a disaster; and for disasters much less disastrous, people have
gone to jail in the private sector. But you still have not
visited the site.
Let me go on, I have tons of questions here. The fee--the
Administration has proposed an AML fee on hardrock mines. This
is potentially going to create a very great hardship--I see my
time is running out. Mr. Chairman, this is precisely why I have
introduced H.R. 3844, the Energy and Minerals Reclamation
Foundation Establishment Act, to help get the private sector
involved into building a foundation to address the issues that
we are discussing here today. And with that, sir, I yield my
time back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Great bill. Mr. Hardy.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
Jewell, for being here today.
You stated earlier, that the Bureau of Reclamation doubled
its water volume down from the Navajo Dam to dilute the toxic
plume, is that correct?
Secretary Jewell. That is correct.
Mr. Hardy. Adversely modifying the critical habitat of an
endangered species is a violation of the ESA. Can you confirm
no contaminated sediments were deposited on the river bed, or
that the water quality in the area of the critical habitat for
the Navajo's San Juan River was adversely modified, or all the
plumes from that spill or that critical habitat of these
endangered species will not be adversely affected by the toxic
sediments deposited upstream?
Secretary Jewell. The judgment was that the release of
water from the dam would dilute an otherwise more toxic
situation, so a decision had to be made very quickly. The Fish
and Wildlife Service was doing testing upstream of that to
determine whether there had been an adverse impact on
threatened and endangered species, and had seen no impact, and
had done multiple testing.
Mr. Hardy. OK. I guess the question is--do you know what
the future is? Are there other contaminated materials left up
there? Have we done that study?
Secretary Jewell. We are continuing to do studies. Largely,
the EPA is doing ongoing work on sedimentation. We will
continue to look at impacts from this spill, but also toxic
contaminants in the area. That is something that we are doing
also with----
Mr. Hardy. OK, lots of questions, short amount of time.
Secretary Jewell, Administrator McCarthy testified at the
previous hearing that the EPA did not consult on the actions
that led to the Gold King Mine blowout. The FWS, after being
asked multiple times by the committee, confirmed that EPA had
never requested consultation on the actions that they planned
to take on the Gold King Mine. Clearly, those actions reached
the bar at its lowest level, I think, which triggers a
requirement of consultation with the ESA. In fact, these
effects of the EPA's actions were so significant that your
Department attempted to offset them by releasing hundreds of
millions of gallons from the Navajo Dam.
Are you going to go in and hold the EPA responsible for not
following the actions they are supposed to follow through with
engagement with others?
Secretary Jewell. It is the EPA's choice whether or not to
do a Section 7 consultation with the Fish and Wildlife Service.
I think it is abundantly clear that they had no intention of
the spill, that that was not part of the original plan; and,
therefore, they did not feel a Section 7 consultation with the
Fish and Wildlife Service was necessary.
Mr. Hardy. So how do you feel? Do you feel this is
acceptable, the way they handled that?
Secretary Jewell. I believe that the spill was an accident,
and that they should not have been required to conduct a
Section 7 consultation in advance.
Mr. Hardy. Really? With that question, then, it leads me to
ask--we asked the Director, how many mining engineers they have
on staff. With her answer, we found we have more on this
committee than we do with the EPA.
How many mining engineers, or geological engineers, soils
engineers, hydrological engineers, all the other types of
engineers, do you have on your staff?
Secretary Jewell. Well, I am an engineer, and David is an
engineer.
Mr. Hardy. OK, let's ask the question. A mining engineer--
we are dealing with mines.
Secretary Jewell. David, do you have--do you know?
Mr. Palumbo. Sure. So a mining engineer--and you also
mentioned geotechnical engineering, hydrologic engineering--we
have a whole suite of engineers in the number of hundreds of
engineers that have that broad expertise--Mike Gobla, in
particular, is a mining engineer, a very unique skill----
Mr. Hardy. OK. We are going to take another step here. So,
with the Bureau of Reclamation being involved in this, why was
there no consultation from the EPA with you folks, where you
have the expertise? Shouldn't it come down that avenue of
discussing?
Because, as a contractor myself in the past, this is one
thing you keep talking about--you hired somebody with
specialized knowledge of what to do. Where was their bond, and
where was their insurance that is required by all Federal
agencies? Why are we, the taxpayers, dealing with this, and why
isn't the person we hired to be an expert paying the price?
Secretary Jewell. We can speak quickly to the fact that
there was a request for support from our experts on the Red and
Bonita Mine, and they had initiated an inquiry for consultation
on the Gold King Mine for August 14. That ended up being 9 days
after the spill, but they do use us on occasion.
We are not in a position to answer the questions about what
kinds of bonding and requirements that the EPA has with their
contractors. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Hardy. Federal contracts, I think most of them are
dealt the same way. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Lujan, we appreciate you being
with us here today. Before we go into another round of
questions, do you have a statement you would like to make?
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I do, and a few questions, if that
would be OK.
Madam Secretary, thank you for being with us today.
Chairman Bishop and Ranking Member Grijalva, thank you for
indulging me the opportunity to be here today.
Madam Secretary, as you know, a big part of the
contaminated area and where the spill took place was in New
Mexico. I had the honor of attending some of the meetings that
took place in Durango in New Mexico with EPA Administrator
McCarthy, as well as community meetings that took place in
those areas.
Just real quick; as we look at this report, Madam
Secretary, your report made clear that responsibility for the
mine blowout rests with the Environmental Protection Agency.
Correct?
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Mr. Lujan. The report points out that the EPA mine
remediation crew attempting to reopen the mine failed to take
into consideration the engineering complexity, and
miscalculated the water level inside the mine, which led
directly to the failure. Correct?
Secretary Jewell. Correct.
Mr. Lujan. The report also stated that there are actual--I
quote--``little and actual written requirements that government
agencies are required to follow when reopening an abandoned
mine.'' Correct?
Secretary Jewell. Right.
Mr. Lujan. So, as we look at this, how are we going to
correct that? And, considering the likelihood of another
incident like this occurring, what is the Department of the
Interior doing to ensure that an accident like this one never
happens again?
Secretary Jewell. I would like to be able to guarantee it
would never happen. I think the reality is that these
circumstances are really unknown. What we need to do is have
more work up front on the engineering and the hydrology to
better understand.
As we digest not only the report that we have produced, but
also subsequent reports, we will welcome an opportunity to work
with EPA, other land management agencies, states, as well as
other stakeholders, on coming up with standards; and we would
also like to work with this committee to come up with some
solutions on the funding side and the process side, so that we
can address these issues, because, as Mr. Grijalva said, there
are a lot of ticking time bombs out there. But, there are
lessons learned here that we need to address, and I think
getting experts together to work on that is appropriate.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, one of the
other failures that took place was, after the spill, there was
no notification to impacted communities downstream. We have to
work to make sure that whatever rules are preventing us from
notifying individuals on their mobile phones or their home
phones, businesses--we need to be able to communicate to them
and make them aware.
This also needs to be rectified for every Federal agency
across the government in the United States; so that if there is
ever an incident like this, that everyone that needs to be
notified is notified, as opposed to depending on neighbors.
There have been a lot of conversations about the
independent investigations. Madam Secretary, I think it is
critically important that there truly be an independent look at
this with participation and leads from the states of New
Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, Utah, and the tribal leaders from
Southern Ute, Ute Mountain, and Navajo. It has to be done where
EPA is a part of that, but not necessarily the lead, where
everyone is collaborating to looking into what needs to be
done, and how we get that done, as well.
There is also a concern that some of the peer reviews of
DOI's investigative report have not been made public, including
those by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Is that something
that can be made public, so that way we get to the bottom of
all of these pieces?
Secretary Jewell. David, do you know the protocols on peer
reviews?
Mr. Palumbo. All of the peer review documents are currently
being reviewed to see if it is appropriate for them to be
turned over. We have produced those internally in the
Department of the Interior. Our solicitors are looking at
those, and are making the determination on the protocols for
what could be turned over and what should not be turned over.
Mr. Lujan. I certainly hope, as we get to the bottom of
what happened--all these families were impacted, and it seems
now that everyone is worried about covering their own behinds,
as opposed to making people whole and getting to the bottom of
this.
Secretary Jewell. We will release all appropriate
documents, and I know EPA is deepening the investigation with
regard to the individuals involved and their intent. Our report
really was just technical in nature, and that is all it
addressed.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that clarification, Madam
Secretary.
Then last, Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank Chairman
Grijalva for introducing H.R. 963, which includes the Good
Samaritan legislation that Mr. Gosar was mentioning. I have
also authored a piece of legislation, H.R. 3602, Gold King Mine
Spill Recovery Act; and I would encourage our colleagues to
look at that.
Thank you for looking into this. I look forward to working
with everyone on making everyone whole as soon as we possibly
can. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you for being here. You asked a couple
of questions I want to follow up on, too, that were
significant. You also called him ``Chairman Grijalva.'' Are you
getting ahead of yourself here a bit?
Mr. Lujan. Chairman Bishop, I apologize.
The Chairman. That is OK, just watch it.
Mr. Grijalva. He is mired in the good old days.
The Chairman. They weren't all that good.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Ms. Jewell, we promised you to be done at
12:30. Mr. LaMalfa has snuck in here without me seeing him. Can
we impose on you to stay 10 extra minutes?
Secretary Jewell. That is fine.
The Chairman. Thank you for that.
Mr. LaMalfa, you are recognized. I apologize for--we will
put a bell around your neck from here on in.
Secretary Jewell. He was here, earlier.
Mr. LaMalfa. I am hard to miss. I will try and do it in 3
minutes. Thank you, Secretary Jewell.
One of the concerns I have over the spill, and that is a
precedent, pertains to the possibility of a similar situation
which we could see in my district, near Redding, California,
about 150 miles north of Sacramento. There is an inactive mine
called the Iron Mountain Mine, which contains extremely acidic
drainage. The acid would be, as I am told, 6,300 times as
acidic as a battery, which is why Iron Mountain is considered
one of the most toxic sites in the country.
What we are concerned about is that it would have an
opportunity to drain to a small reservoir which then feeds into
California's--one of the largest water systems--the Sacramento
River system. Obviously, the concern that would go with that
was something possibly happening there, if we did not follow
the right protocols. That is a system that feeds into the
drinking water and Ag. water, and affects the water for
millions of people in the state.
There are several Interior agencies involved in Iron
Mountain Mine, including BLM, Bureau of Reclamation, Fish and
Wildlife, and the U.S. Geological Survey. Uncontrolled spills
in the past have resulted in acidic release from Iron Mountain
and have not been of big consequence yet--but California's
water supply in drought or not drought is a huge concern.
We are concerned that Federal agencies, by trying to block
a previous leak, the mine entrance failed because the waste is
so acidic that it ate through the steel and concrete plug
involved. We are going to have to think seriously about what is
going to be a better permanent solution, and monitoring of
that.
Can you describe any Federal efforts to address Iron
Mountain continuously, and whether there is any perceived
danger that you can see of that being a major problem in the
near term, or a need to step up the levels of monitoring in the
future.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you for bringing that to my
attention. I am not prepared here to discuss the Iron Mountain
Mine, but I am very happy to look into that for the record, and
will be happy to get back to you with----
Mr. LaMalfa. Please.
Secretary Jewell [continuing]. What the plans are on the
ground. So, we will look into it. Sounds like another one of
these risky situations that is out there that----
Mr. LaMalfa. And it has had problems in the past.
Thankfully, it has been contained, and has not been a really,
really bad problem, as with the example we have seen with
Animas and all that here. We certainly do not want that to
happen again; so, we would wish to work with you on that, and
see what the protocols are.
Secretary Jewell. Happy to do that.
Mr. LaMalfa. We want to ensure that the mine and that water
system stay safe. Thank you.
Secretary Jewell. Thank you.
Mr. LaMalfa. Three minutes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you for doing that. She is grateful for
you.
Mrs. Lummis, do you have a UC request?
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Chairman, I do have a request to submit a
couple things to the record. One is a U.S. Forest Service
publication, ``Abandoned Mine Lands: A Decade of Progress
Reclaiming Hardrock Mines.''
I also have an email that I would like to enter. We heard
Mr. Palumbo earlier assume that the figure that was drawn in
the report was--it is Figure 39 in the Bureau of Reclamation
report. It includes EPA's working assumptions. The EPA
contractor who drew the figure confirmed to this committee in
writing that he drew the figure on August 11, 2015, at EPA's
request, and not before the spill, as Mr. Palumbo had just
assumed. So, I would like to enter the contractor's email to
the committee staff into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, the report and email will
be part of the record.
I just have four quick questions to end here.
The first one is actually a request. When Mr. Lujan asked
for the Army Corps of Engineers peer review, I would hope you
would actually honor that, and just send that to us. If you
need a letter or a subpoena, we will go that route; but I would
prefer if you just honor his request.
Here is where the questions start. You told Mr. Hardy that
EPA, even though they knew a year in advance that there could
be a problem, did not need to go by the letter of the
Endangered Species Act, because they did not anticipate this
actually happening.
Does that mean that if some bulldozer actually runs over an
endangered tortoise or an oil rig actually spills oil on a
sage-grouse lek, that those are going to be acceptable excuses?
Secretary Jewell. The question was related to a Section 7
consultation.
The Chairman. I know, but----
Secretary Jewell. When you have something that happens
accidentally, and the examples you bring up would be
accidental, then I would not have expected an agency to have
done a Section 7 consultation in advance, unless they felt
there was a very high probability that that would happen. Then
they would believe that a consultation may be appropriate.
The Chairman. I think that is actually a fair answer. But
we need to change the Endangered Species Act so it could
reflect that. The Endangered Species Act does not give that
kind of flexibility, and ought to; you are right.
When you talked to Mr. Beyer, you said you did not think
there was any negligence in this effect. Since you have already
said that was outside of the scope of your report, and the
report did not actually go into that, is that your personal
opinion, that there was no negligence, or is that an official
opinion that is not actually in the report?
Secretary Jewell. That is my personal opinion, based on
what I have read.
The Chairman. All right. That is fair enough, as well.
Let me go to Mr. Palumbo, and give you a chance--hopefully
you mis-spoke a couple of hours ago. Mr. Gobla--if I pronounced
that correctly--when he was there on August 14, at that point
his role was that of a technical consultant for EPA at the Gold
King Mine. So, for 6 days before EPA signed the contract for
Reclamation to do this independent investigation, he was
working alongside the EPA, offering technical expertise,
helping them out with their responses.
When exactly did he stop doing that, and start
investigating the people with whom he was working?
Mr. Palumbo. Let me just go backwards, briefly. In 2011,
the Bureau of Reclamation was hired by EPA to do consultation
on the Red and Bonita Mine. From 2011 through July 23, 2015 we
did provide that service. Mike Gobla received the phone call on
July 23, asking if he can come out on August 14 to help review
the plans to remove the plug.
On August 5, because of the spill, that work dissipated.
Mike did honor the request to travel, and so he did go out
there on August 14 to help stabilize the mine opening under
that earlier Red and Bonita contract. It was 6 days later when
the work plan was executed with EPA, pursuant to the scope that
we spoke about here today, to conduct the technical
investigation.
The Chairman. All right, let me go through this, and this
is the point that we are trying to make. He was working with
them before and after he did the report on them, which violates
standards of ethics and conflicts of interest by both the
American Society of Civil Engineers, as well as the Reclamation
Department. In your manual, independent peer reviews, it states
that, ``persons who are not associated directly or indirectly
with the information under review should be involved.''
It presents a question of the independence of the
investigation because of that relationship. The contract was on
the board as you were mis-stating it earlier.
So, if BOR actually acknowledges that they were financially
supporting the Gold King Mine project, is that not a conflict
of interest, to investigate a project you are funding?
Mr. Palumbo. We do not believe that there was a conflict of
interest. We were not funding that project, we were being----

The Chairman. You were funding that project. By the
standards you have already had, that should be considered a
conflict of interest. There are questions and problems with the
manner and the scope in which this report was given. I am
sorry, that is the only way you can get around it.

Ms. Jewell, I have one last request to clear up a lot of
what the committee staff needs. If we could speak directly with
Mr. Gobla, the person who was in charge of the report, would
you agree to arrange for Mr. Gobla to come here and help us
better understand this issue?

Secretary Jewell. I believe we have provided all of the
relevant information to this committee that is appropriate. I
think, if you want to make that request, we would take it under
advisement; but I do not have an answer for you at this time.

The Chairman. Then we will send it to you in writing. I was
hoping to have to avoid that. I know you do not like getting
letters from me.

Secretary Jewell. I will take a Christmas card.

[Laughter.]

The Chairman. No, no, no. You will take a happy holiday
card.

Mr. Grijalva, do you have anything to add?

Mr. Grijalva. No, just to thank the Secretary; and Mr.
Palumbo, thank you very much. And, what I think Mr. Lujan
alluded to or directly talked about, that there are lessons to
be learned.
There are two areas that I--the whole conflict of interest
issue I think is not part of this hearing, in the long term.
There is no smoking gun there. The other issue I think is in
comparing Deepwater Horizon with the Gold King Mine. There is
no correlation. The cause is a mistake, an error, the lack of
preparation. But to make a negligence in one case, in both
cases--whoever did that mine left it that way.

So, I think lessons to be learned, how to coordinate better
between agencies, how to communicate better with our
constituents and the public, and how to have a uniform protocol
that goes across agencies, that is what is to be learned. I
look forward to any help and information that you can provide
this committee on that.

With that, thank you very much for being here.

The Chairman. Thank you. I thank you for being here, as
well. Since you just one-upped me with that comment, damn it,
now I have to give you a Christmas card.

[Laughter.]

Secretary Jewell. I will give you one, too.

The Chairman. It will be in the mail. And, there will not
be any fruitcake involved in this, OK? Just the card.

There may be some additional questions for the Secretary.
We would like you to respond in writing. Committee Rule 4(g)
says the hearing record will be open for 10 business days. If
you get those questions, I would appreciate a timely response
to them, as well.

If there is no further business, then once again, with
gratitude for your being here and taking the time out of your
busy schedule to join us, we are adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Slide used by Chairman Bishop showing a copy of the EPA/BOR
Superfund Work Authorization Form signed between two
departments

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Slides used by Representative Newhouse with pages from the
Technical Evaluation of the Gold King Mine Incident from the
U.S. Geological Survey, U.S Army Corp of Engineers, and the
Bureau of Reclamation showing discrepancy in reviewers listed

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

E-mail from Elliot Petri to Subcommittee Staff regarding
the Gold King Mine Incident [sensitive info redacted].
Submitted by Representative Lummis

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[LIST OF DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD RETAINED IN THE
COMMITTEE'S OFFICIAL FILES]

--  Bureau of Reclamation report, ``Technical Evaluation of
the Gold King Mine Incident,'' October 2015.
Submitted by Chairman Bishop

--  U.S. Forest Service publication, ``Abandoned Mine Lands:
A Decade of Progress Reclaiming Hardrock Mines.''
Submitted by Representative Lummis

--  A video clip used by Representative Gohmert involving EPA
Administrator Gina McCarthy's response to a
question on the scope of DOI's review of the Gold
King Mine Incident

[all]
