- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON DISCUSSION DRAFT, H.R., TO PREPARE THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE FOR ITS CENTENNIAL IN 2016 AND FOR A SECOND CENTURY OF PROMOTING AND PROTECTING THE NATURAL, HISTORIC, AND CULTURAL RESOURCES OF OUR NATIONAL PARKS FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF PRESENT AND FUTURE GENERATIONS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "NATIONAL PARK SERVICE CENTENNIAL ACT"

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISCUSSION DRAFT, H.R. ____,
``NATIONAL PARK SERVICE CENTENNIAL ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, December 2, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-736PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
John Fleming, LA                         CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Raul Ruiz, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Norma J. Torres, CA
Jeff Denham, CA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Paul Cook, CA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Jared Polis, CO
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Wm. Lacy Clay, MO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT
Jody B. Hice, GA
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Thomas MacArthur, NJ
Alexander X. Mooney, WV
Cresent Hardy, NV
Darin LaHood, IL

Jason Knox, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
David Watkins, Democratic Staff Director
Sarah Parker, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM McCLINTOCK, CA, Chairman
NIKI TSONGAS, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Matt Cartwright, PA
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Donald S. Beyer, Jr., VA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Jared Huffman, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Debbie Dingell, MI
Bruce Westerman, AR                  Lois Capps, CA
Dan Newhouse, WA                     Jared Polis, CO
Ryan K. Zinke, MT                    Vacancy
Jody B. Hice, GA                     Vacancy
Thomas MacArthur, NJ                 Vacancy
Cresent Hardy, NV                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Darin LaHood, IL
Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

-----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, December 2, 2015......................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     9
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8
McClintock, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Jarvis, Jonathan B., Director, National Park Service,
Washington, DC.............................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13
MacDonald, David, President, Friends of Acadia, Bar Harbor,
Maine......................................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Nau, John L., III, Vice Chairman (2012-2013), National Park
Foundation, Houston, Texas.................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    24

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Association of Partners for Public Lands, December 1, 2015,
Letter submitted for the record............................    57
Crandall, Derrick, Counselor, National Park Hospitality
Association, prepared statement of.........................    53
National Parks Second Century Action Coalition, December 3,
2015, Letter submitted for the record......................    62
The Corps Network, December 1, 2015, Letter submitted for the
record.....................................................    61

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON DISCUSSION DRAFT, H.R. ____, TO PREPARE THE
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE FOR ITS CENTENNIAL IN 2016 AND FOR A SECOND
CENTURY OF PROMOTING AND PROTECTING THE NATURAL, HISTORIC, AND CULTURAL
RESOURCES OF OUR NATIONAL PARKS FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF PRESENT AND FUTURE
GENERATIONS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``NATIONAL PARK SERVICE CENTENNIAL
ACT''

----------

Wednesday, December 2, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom McClintock
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McClintock, Gohmert, Lummis,
Westerman, Hice, Hardy, LaHood, Bishop; Tsongas, Beyer,
Huffman, Lowenthal, Dingell, Capps, and Grijalva.
Mr. McClintock. The hour of 10:00 having arrived, the
Federal Lands Subcommittee will come to order. The subcommittee
meets today to hear testimony on a discussion draft of the
``National Park Service Centennial Act.'' We will begin with 5-
minute opening statements by the Chairman of the Subcommittee,
the Ranking Member, the Chairman of the Full Committee, and the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, if he would like to join
us.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM McCLINTOCK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McClintock. Next year marks the 100th anniversary of
the National Park Service. This year-long celebration of the
national parks affords us a unique opportunity to reflect on
the past, assess the present, and make adjustments for the
future.
The Centennial pays tribute to the uniquely American notion
that our most beautiful and historic lands should be set aside
for the use and enjoyment of the people of the United States.
In the words of the Organic Act of 1916, ``to conserve the
scenery and the natural and historic objects and the wild life
therein and to provide for the enjoyment of the same. . .''
Yet, as we approach the Centennial, the Park Service faces
considerable challenges to achieving the goals set forth in the
Organic Act, chief among them being a massive $11.5 billion
deferred maintenance backlog. As the Park Service has gradually
taken on new responsibilities, and Congress has voted to add
new units to the system, the Park Service has fallen behind on
necessary projects. With 409 units now included in the system,
the Park Service is spread thin.
In addition to deferred maintenance projects, the Park
Service also faces challenges with fee collection,
technological upgrades, management of concessions contracts for
visitor services, and, most disturbingly, a decrease in
overnight stays at our parks. We have been told that visitation
is at an all-time high, but this is an illusion created by new
memorials in Washington, DC. In fact, per capita visitation to
our parks has steadily declined since the peaks of the late
1980s and early 1990s.
From their all-time highs, in-park concessioner lodging is
down by 722,000 persons annually, or about 17 percent. Tent
campers are down by about 1.37 million overnights, about 26
percent. The decline in visitation has been particularly high
among young people. In fact, most ominously, recent reports
indicate that visits to parks by those 15 and younger fell by
50 percent in the last decade.
Meanwhile, RV camper overnight stays are down by 2.6
million camper nights, about 56 percent, despite the fact that
RV ownership and RV stays at private campgrounds has grown
dramatically.
This subcommittee is especially concerned over policies
that are actively removing traditional tourist amenities from
our national parks.
Two years ago, the National Park Service proposed removing
long-standing tourist facilities from Yosemite Valley,
including bicycle and raft rentals, snack facilities, gift
shops, horseback riding rentals, the iconic ice skating rink at
Curry Village, the art center, the grocery store, swimming
pools, and even the Valley's landmark and historic stone
bridges.
Their current plan locks in a 30 percent reduction in
campsites and lodging, compared to historic highs, including
loss of prime sites close to the river. Funds appropriated by
Congress to restore campsite levels after the 1997 flood were
not spent as Congress instructed.
I cannot think of a better way to approach the next century
of our National Park Service than to restore the vision of its
founders. Our national parks should be open to the public for
all recreational pursuits: hiking, biking, fishing,
snowmobiling, horseback riding, skiing, rafting, skating,
RVing, camping, or staying in a historic lodge. These are the
priceless memories our parks are there to create for succeeding
generations of Americans.
The discussion draft before the subcommittee today helps
the Park Service to prepare for its nationwide celebration in
2016, as well as better equipping the Service for the next
century of promoting and protecting our parks. Provisions in
the bill help reduce the Service's deferred maintenance backlog
by creating new sources of revenue to pay for needed
improvements. Other provisions will help the Service expand its
Volunteers-In-Parks and Public Land Corps programs, as well as
making needed changes to the National Park Foundation Board of
Directors.
Our witnesses today have come to share their views on how
to best prepare the Park Service for its Centennial, and how we
can improve park management and visitation. I thank each of
them for their willingness to testify before this subcommittee
today, and for their dedication to ensuring that our national
parks are on a path toward greater sustainability.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClintock follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Tom McClintock, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Federal Lands
Today, the Federal Lands Subcommittee meets to hear testimony on a
discussion draft of the National Park Service Centennial Act.
Next year marks the 100th anniversary of the National Park Service.
This year-long celebration of our National Parks affords us a unique
opportunity to reflect on the past, assess the present, and make
adjustments for the future.
The Centennial pays tribute to the uniquely American notion that
our most beautiful and historic lands should be set aside for the use
and enjoyment of the people of the United States. In the words of the
Organic Act of 1916, ``to conserve the scenery and the natural and
historic objects and the wild life therein and to provide for the
enjoyment of the same.''
Yet, as we approach the Centennial, the Park Service faces
considerable challenges to achieving the goals sets forth in the
Organic Act, chief among them being the massive 11.5 billion dollar
deferred maintenance backlog. As the Park Service has gradually taken
on new responsibilities and Congress has voted to add new units to the
system, the Park Service has fallen behind on necessary projects. With
409 units now included in the system, the Park Service is spread thin.
In addition to deferred maintenance projects, the Park Service also
faces challenges with fee collection, technological upgrades,
management of concessions contracts for visitor services, and most
disturbingly, a decrease in overnight stays at our parks. We have been
told that visitation is at an all-time high, but this is an illusion
created by new memorials in Washington, DC. In fact, per capita
visitation to our parks has steadily declined since the peaks of the
late 1980s and early 1990s.
From their all-time highs, in-park concessioner lodging is down by
722,000 persons annually, or about 17 percent. Tent campers are down by
1.37 million overnights, about 26 percent. The decline in visitation
has been particularly high among young people.
RV camper overnight stays are down by 2.6 million camper nights--
about 56 percent, despite the fact that RV ownership and RV stays at
private campgrounds has grown dramatically.
Most ominously, recent reports indicate that visits to parks by
those 15 and younger fell by 50 percent in the last decade.
This subcommittee is especially concerned over policies that are
actively removing traditional tourist amenities from our national
parks.
Two years ago, the National Park Service proposed removing long-
standing tourist facilities from Yosemite Valley, including bicycle and
raft rentals, snack facilities, gift shops, horseback riding rentals,
the iconic ice-skating rink at Curry Village, the art center, the
grocery store, swimming pools, and even the Valley's landmark and
historic stone bridges.
Their current plan locks in a 30 percent reduction in campsites and
lodging compared to historic highs, including loss of prime sites close
to the river. Funds appropriated by Congress to restore campsite levels
after the 1997 flood were not spent as Congress instructed.
I can't think of a better way to approach the next century of our
National Park Service than to restore the vision of its founders. Our
national parks should be open to the public for all recreational
pursuits--hiking, biking, fishing, snowmobiling, horseback riding,
skiing, rafting, skating, RVing, camping, staying in a historic lodge--
these are the priceless memories our parks are there to create for
succeeding generations of Americans.
The discussion draft before the subcommittee today helps the Park
Service to prepare for its nationwide celebration in 2016, as well as
better equips the Service for the next century of promoting and
protecting our parks. Provisions in the bill help reduce the Service's
deferred maintenance backlog by creating new sources of revenue to pay
for needed improvements. Other provisions will help the Service expand
its Volunteers-in-Parks and Public Lands Corps programs, as well as
making needed changes to the National Park Foundation Board of
Directors.
Our witnesses today have come to share their views on how to best
prepare the Park Service for its Centennial, and how we can improve
park management and visitation. I thank each of them for their
willingness to testify before this subcommittee today and for their
dedication to ensuring that our national parks are on a path toward
greater sustainability.

______

Mr. McClintock. And, with that, I recognize the Ranking
Member for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we prepare for
next year's centennial anniversary of the National Park
Service, I am reminded of something Stephen Mather, that
agency's very first director, once said. Reflecting on the new
agency, he remarked that, ``The parks do not belong to one
state or to one section. . . . The Yosemite, the Yellowstone,
the Grand Canyon are national properties in which every citizen
has a vested interest; they belong as much to the man''--and I
would add, woman--``of Massachusetts, of Michigan, of Florida,
as they do to the people of California, of Wyoming, and of
Arizona.''
These words are a powerful reminder in this era of
political division and disagreement: national parks cut across
party lines and geographic boundaries; they enjoy bipartisan
support; and they bring people together, something we seem to
need now, more than ever, to celebrate in our Nation's great
traditions, history, and natural legacy.
For almost 100 years, generation after generation of
Americans have made the commitment that our most significant
historical, cultural, and natural sites should be preserved in
perpetuity for future generations. Our national parks have been
famously called ``America's best idea,'' and have become
ingrained in our national identity--places like the Grand
Canyon, Yellowstone, Ellis Island, and, in my own district,
Minute Man National Historical Park, which commemorates the
``shot heard 'round the world,'' and the very beginnings of our
country. These parks protect, celebrate, and give access to the
many places that have shaped and defined who we are, as a
people and a country; and it is important to remember that
these places would not have been protected, absent support from
the Federal Government.
And investments in our parks make economic sense.
Nationally, the parks generate nearly $30 billion in economic
activity, and support 250,000 private sector jobs. When people
visit our national parks, they also support nearby restaurants,
hotels, and local outfitters and guides, and bring attention to
the unique attributes of a hosting community. According to a
recent economic study conducted by the National Park Service,
every Federal dollar invested in our parks contributes $10 in
economic activity.
Despite its significant and multi-faceted contributions,
however, the Park Service budget has been shrinking. In just
the past 10 years, the Park Service has had its budget
decreased by 22 percent, compromising its ability to ensure the
long-term protection of our treasured national heritage. This
dramatic reduction in funding has occurred, despite widespread
support for Federal investment in the National Park Service. In
fact, a recent poll commissioned by the National Parks
Conservation Association found that 9 in 10 Americans--
Republicans, Democrats, and Independents--support sustained
funding for national parks.
The discussion draft we are considering today could be an
important first step to commemorate the 2016 Centennial. Many
of the provisions in the bill before us today have bipartisan
support, and were also included in H.R. 3556, also called the
``National Park Service Centennial Act,'' which was introduced
by Ranking Member Grijalva.
For example, the draft legislation makes a commitment to
the Centennial Challenge, a matching grant program that
leverages Federal dollars to encourage private investments to
support signature centennial projects identified by the
National Park Service. The draft legislation also establishes
an endowment at the National Park Foundation to support the
missions and goals of the Park Service, and makes improvements
to the Volunteers-In-Parks program.
While I am thankful to be discussing this draft
legislation, I fear that it is an exercise in wishful thinking.
I agree with the Majority that we must address the maintenance
backlog in order to enhance visitor experiences and preserve
our parks for the next generation. But making a dent in the
maintenance backlog is going to require significant investment,
and this legislation does not authorize any new Federal dollars
for our national parks in their centennial year. New revenue
generated by fees will not solve this problem.
H.R. 3556, introduced by Ranking Member Grijalva, provides
$300 million for a new Second Century Infrastructure Investment
Fund to address critical maintenance backlog needs. It also
provides $100 million to establish the Public Land Centennial
Investment Program, a competitive fund open to our four land
management agencies for top-priority visitor services, outdoor
recreation, land and water restoration, and energy efficiency
projects.
Mr. Grijalva's legislation also fully funds the Centennial
Challenge at $100 million, maximizing our opportunity to
generate private matching funds. And it authorizes these new
programs only through 2018, demonstrating a clear commitment to
projects that can have an immediate impact on our parks, and
quickly address some of the deferred maintenance backlog.
Next year, all eyes will be on our national parks and the
expected influx of visitors. I look forward to working with my
colleagues to reach a bipartisan compromise on the two
proposals for the ``National Park Service Centennial Act.''
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tsongas follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Niki Tsongas, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
As we prepare for next year's Centennial Anniversary of the
National Park Service, I'm reminded of something Stephen Mather, that
agency's very first director, once said. Reflecting on the new agency,
he remarked that ``the parks do not belong to one state or to one
section . . . The Yosemite, the Yellowstone, the Grand Canyon are
national properties in which every citizen has a vested interest; they
belong as much to the man (and I would add, women) of Massachusetts, of
Michigan, of Florida, as they do to the people of California, of
Wyoming, and of Arizona.''
Those words are a powerful reminder in this era of political
division and disagreement: national parks cut across party lines and
geographic boundaries; they enjoy bipartisan support, and they bring
people together, something we seem to need now more than ever.
For almost 100 years, generation after generation of Americans have
made the commitment that our most significant historical, cultural, and
natural sites should be preserved in perpetuity for future generations.
Our national parks have been famously called ``American's best idea''
and have become ingrained in our national identity--places like the
Grand Canyon, Yellowstone, Ellis Island, and in my own District, Minute
Man National Historical Park, which commemorates the shot heard `round
the world' and the very beginnings of our country. These parks protect,
celebrate, and give access to the many places that have shaped and
defined who we are, as a people and a country, and it is important to
remember that these places would not have been protected, absent
support from the Federal Government.
And investments in our parks make economic sense. Nationally, the
parks generate nearly $30 billion in economic activity and support
250,000 private sector jobs. When people visit our national parks, they
also support nearby restaurants, hotels, and local outfitters and
guides. According to a recent economic study conducted by the National
Park Service, every Federal dollar invested in our parks contributes
$10 in economic activity.
Despite its significant and multi-faceted contributions, however,
the Park Service budget has been shrinking. In just the past 10 years,
the Park Service has had its budget decreased by 22 percent,
compromising its ability to ensure the long-term protection of our
treasured national heritage. This dramatic reduction in funding has
occurred, despite widespread support for Federal investment in the
National Park Service. In fact, a recent poll commissioned by the
National Parks Conservation Association found that 9 in 10 Americans--
Republicans and Democrats--support sustained funding for national
parks.
The discussion draft we are considering today could be an important
first step to commemorate the 2016 Centennial. Many of the provisions
in the bill before us today have bipartisan support, and were also
included in H.R. 3556, also called the National Park Service Centennial
Act, which was introduced by Ranking Member Grijalva.
For example, the draft legislation makes a commitment to the
Centennial Challenge, a matching grant program that leverages Federal
dollars to encourage private investments to support signature
Centennial projects identified by the National Park Service. The draft
legislation also establishes an endowment at the National Park
Foundation to support the missions and goals of the Park Service, and
makes improvements to the Volunteers-in-Parks program.
While I am thankful to be discussing this draft legislation, I fear
that it is an exercise in wishful thinking. I agree with the Majority
that we must address the maintenance backlog in order to enhance
visitor experiences and preserve our parks for the next generation. But
making a dent in the maintenance backlog is going to require
significant investment and this legislation doesn't authorize any new
Federal dollars for our national parks in their Centennial year. New
revenue generated by fees will not solve this problem.
H.R. 3556, introduced by Ranking Member Grijalva, provides $300
million for a new Second Century Infrastructure Investment Fund to
address critical maintenance backlog needs. It also provides $100
million to establish the Public Land Centennial Investment Program, a
competitive fund open to our four land management agencies for top
priority visitor services, outdoor recreation, land and water
restoration, and energy efficiency projects.
Mr. Grijalva's legislation also fully funds the Centennial
Challenge at $100 million, maximizing our opportunity to generate
private matching funds. And it authorizes these new programs only
through 2018, demonstrating a clear commitment to projects that can
have an immediate impact on our parks and quickly address some of the
deferred maintenance backlog.
Next year, all eyes will be on our national parks and the expected
influx of visitors. I look forward to working with my colleagues to
reach a bipartisan compromise on the two proposals for the National
Park Service Centennial Act.

With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

______

Mr. McClintock. Great, thank you. I am now pleased to
recognize the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee----
Mr. Bishop. The Ranking Member first?
Mr. McClintock. You want to go? OK. At the Chairman's
request, we will go to the Ranking Member, Mr. Grijalva, for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Chairman
Bishop.
Let me associate myself with the Ranking Member's comments,
essentially the comments that I intended to make and will not
repeat. In Chairman Bishop's proposed draft that we are going
to be discussing today, there are two glaring issues. One of
the glaring omissions is the fact that we are not dealing with
the issue of funding and resources.
Given the fact that the Park Service has lost 16 percent of
its funding over the last 10 years, which is a self-fulfilling
prophecy, it has added to the backlog of deferred maintenance
in the Park System. It has added to the reduction of staff, and
has hurt our outreach efforts and our ability to enhance the
experience by having qualified staff at our parks to be able to
work with the public and lead them through the experience, as
we know it.
So, there are all these contributing factors--the backlog,
visitorship drop, and rewriting the concessionaire relationship
between the Park Service, essentially taking the Park Service
out of the equation in terms of what is appropriate in any
given unit. I think these factors are all part of a draft
discussion that merits much more work, and also an opportunity,
as Ms. Tsongas said, to work on something bipartisan.
It has to be an investment. The legislation that the
Administration and the agency sent over became H.R. 3556, and
essentially talks about a $900 million investment. Ms. Tsongas
outlined some of the critical areas there. But, the glaring
omission of no funding, no resources, and the self-fulfilling
prophecy that we continue to cut at the agency and then blame
the agency for backlogs, for not being able to respond to
changing times and needs, and for not having the ability to
attract more visitorship. This is not the way to walk into
celebrating 100 years of our National Park System.
I would suggest that, as we go forward, the omission of
funding and looking closely at what those cuts have done to the
Park Service is a good use of our time; and I look forward to
working with the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Full Committee, on
possible areas in which there can be some agreement and some
compromise.
But, essential to celebrating the Centennial is also
America's investment in its parks, a legacy that is 100 years
old. Many of us, although we will not be around, would like to
see that celebrated another 100 years from now, with the proper
direction and the proper investment on the part of Congress.
With that, I yield back, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Arizona
Next year marks the 100th anniversary of the National Park Service
and Congress has the responsibility to invest in our national parks,
ensuring that they will endure another century and continue to
represent the diverse voices and communities that make up our great
country. That's why I decided to introduce the Administration's version
of the National Park Service Centennial Act when they sent it to
Congress. After 100 years of safeguarding our most treasured places--
from Grand Canyon and Saguaro National Parks in my home state of
Arizona to Lowell and Minute Man National Historical Parks in Ranking
Member Tsongas' district--it seemed only appropriate to work with and
introduce the agency's proposal.
My bill, H.R. 3556, is very similar to the discussion draft shared
by Chairman Bishop, except for one main difference: my bill invests
$900 million over the next 3 years. The Chairman's bill does not
include any new Federal spending.
Over the past 10 years, the budget for the National Park Service
has decreased by nearly 16 percent. This has led to a growing
maintenance backlog of over $11 billion. If we don't begin to rectify
this funding shortfall, the backlog will only continue to grow. House
Republicans like to complain that the Park Service and other Federal
land management agencies are unable to take care of the assets under
their management and use this as an excuse to rake agency
decisionmaking procedures and personnel over the coals. The reality is
that starving agencies like the National Park Service of the resources
they need to manage our shared public heritage is a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Of course there is an ever-expanding backlog of maintenance
and infrastructure needs: Congress refuses to appropriate enough money.
Forced austerity is not the answer. The investments we make in our
public lands are multiplied many times over. In the case of national
parks, every dollar invested generates $10 dollars in economic
activity. Gateway communities around the country and the $600 billion
outdoor recreation economy rely on Federal investments to enhance
national economic output.
Next year's National Park Service Centennial Celebration provides
us with an excellent opportunity to right the ship and inject much
needed investment into our national parks. The National Park Service
Centennial Act could be the perfect vehicle. Unfortunately, the
discussion draft falls short. Despite all of the rhetoric about the
need to address the maintenance backlog, funding for infrastructure and
construction needs is neglected by the discussion draft. It's my
understanding that Park Service requires upwards of $800 million per
year just to maintain the status quo and prevent the backlog from
growing. This bill does not provide anything.
My bill authorizes $300 million over the next 3 years for the
Second Century Infrastructure Fund to address maintenance needs. If we
are going to do something for the Centennial, we should do something
that affirms our long-term commitment to national parks. My bill also
provides the Centennial Challenge with $100 million per year for the
next 3 years.
The Centennial Challenge, a program first established under
President George W. Bush, leverages Federal dollars with matching
private donations to fund signature projects across the National Park
System. Last year, Congress provided $10 million for the Centennial
Challenge which was matched by $15 million in private donations. As
we'll hear from today's witnesses, this successful program is essential
to the support provided by Friends groups all over the county.
While I recognize that this program is included in the discussion
draft, it's important that we provide it with consistent, sustained
funding. Private donors are more willing to participate if they know
Congress is willing to offer matching funds. Like with all funding for
the national parks, there needs to be a long-term commitment.
I thank the Chairman for putting forward this proposal and I look
forward to working together to find a compromise.
Let's not wait until some future anniversary to make sure our
national parks have the funding they need. We owe it to the next
generation of Americans to get it right now.

______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the Natural
Resources Committee, Congressman Rob Bishop, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity, I appreciate our witnesses being here, and look
forward to your testimony very significantly.
I must disagree with the Ranking Member on just one point:
the parks are not America's greatest idea--baseball is. The
parks are just nice.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. Parks are nice. But 100 years ago, we created
the Park Service. There were only 35 units then. Today, there
are 409, about 84 million acres are covered; and you do have a
maintenance backlog of about $12 billion.
So, we obviously have to look forward to what is going on,
and how we move forward into the next 100 years. The Park
Service, I admit, is spread thin. Congress is somewhat to blame
for that. Not necessarily in what we are doing, but we keep
adding units to the Park Service without new funding
mechanisms. It is fun and sexy to add a new unit to the Park
Service. It is not fun or sexy to talk about fixing a sewer
system. Yet that is exactly what we need to do with this
centennial.
So, we can authorize anything we want to, that does not
mean it is going to be appropriated. In this era of offsets
that must be found for anything which we develop, an era where
there are cut-go and pay-go programs identified by both
parties, which may be an accounting technique, but it is still
necessary and what we have to go through, it is time for us to
be realistic about where we can go to move forward, and to
realize that what we have to do is do something differently
than what we have done in the past.
That is why I am looking forward to coming up with new
tools and new sources of revenue that can be used by the Park
Service going into the next 100 years. I am looking forward to
working with Mr. Grijalva to come up with what will, hopefully,
be a bipartisan approach, which is why this is a discussion
draft, which means, quite frankly, we are open to suggestions.
But, I think what we need to do is make sure that the
status quo is not acceptable, and we need to come up with new
mechanisms, new approaches, and emphasis on that in a realistic
pattern of what can be accomplished and where we can actually
accomplish something, as we move forward for the next 100
years.
With that, I look forward to the testimony and the
questions that may be given, and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Now we will hear from our witnesses. I
think you are all veterans of this committee--5 minutes for
your oral statements, the complete statement will be printed in
the record. We have some helpful colored lights to keep you on
track, with the yellow light indicating you have 1 minute
remaining, and the red light--it means, for heaven's sakes,
stop.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. With that, I am very pleased to welcome
back to the committee the Director of the National Park
Service, Jonathan Jarvis, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN B. JARVIS, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL PARK
SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Jarvis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
discuss the ``National Park Service Centennial Act'' with you
today.
In 2016, the National Park Service will celebrate 100 years
as the steward of the Nation's most cherished natural and
cultural resources. We are actively preparing for our second
century, and working hard to connect with, create, and enhance
the experience for the next generation of park visitors,
supporters, and advocates.
Earlier this year, in partnership with the National Park
Foundation, we launched a campaign to encourage the next
generation to experience the national parks; and we are already
seeing those results. In 2014, we experienced record visitation
with over 292 million visitors, and we are on track to exceed
that number this year. These visits do more than provide
inspirational, educational, and recreational opportunities. In
2014, they drove $29.75 billion in economic impact, and
supported hundreds of thousands of jobs around the country.
Another component of our Centennial effort is legislation
to establish, clarify, or expand a number of key existing
authorities to allow us to better serve the American people.
Today, the subcommittee is considering a discussion draft bill,
the ``National Park Service Centennial Act.'' This draft is
comprised of elements of the Administration's legislative
proposal of the same title, which was transmitted by Secretary
Jewell on August 31, and was subsequently introduced by
Representative Grijalva as H.R. 3556.
We appreciate the committee's interest in acting on the
Centennial legislation, and we look forward to working with
you. The Department will provide views specifically on the
draft legislation of today's hearing after the bill's
introduction.
The Administration's proposed Centennial Act will provide
new sources of funding and strengthen our ability to manage and
operate the national parks and programs into the future. The
proposal has 10 titles.
Title I, the Centennial Declaration, would recognize that
we have responsibilities not only for administering the units
of the National Park System, but also for programs to provide
financial and technical assistance to states, communities, and
individuals to protect our Nation's heritage.
Title II would establish the National Park Centennial Fund,
consisting of a mandatory appropriation of $100 million for 3
years to be able to use as a match for signature partnership
projects.
Title III would provide a mandatory appropriation of $300
million for 3 years to correct maintenance backlog
deficiencies.
Title IV would establish a Centennial Land Management
Investment Fund consisting of a mandatory appropriation of $100
million for 3 years to provide funding for a multi-agency
competitive program.
Title V would direct the National Park Foundation to
establish a Second Century Endowment for projects and
activities that further the mission of the Service. And, of
course, the discussion draft bill includes the similar
provision.
Title VI would establish a National Park Service Centennial
Second Century Fund in the Treasury funded through lodging
fees, and from purchases of senior passes for citizens 62 years
or older. The discussion draft also has a similar provision.
Title VII would provide clear authority for the
interpretation and education work by consolidating authorities.
It would raise the age limit for the Public Land Corps, extend
the period for hiring members of the PLC, and would remove the
$3.5 million authorization ceiling for the Volunteers-In-Parks
program. And, of course, the discussion draft has similar
provisions.
Title VIII would establish a new Visitor Services
Management Authority to award and manage contracts for the
operation of commercial services.
Title IX would authorize agreements for the creation of
reproductions of museum objects.
And Title X would redesignate the Secretary of the Interior
and the Director of the Park Service as ex officio members of
the National Park Foundation Board, and authorize an
appropriation of $25 million for 10 years. The discussion draft
also has these provisions.
We greatly appreciate the committee's leadership on this
issue, and your work on the discussion draft. We look forward
to working with you on this effort, as it will assist the
National Park Service in achieving its mission as we enter our
second century of service.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I will be
pleased to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jarvis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jonathan B. Jarvis, Director, National Park
Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the National Park
Service Centennial Act.
In 2016, the NPS will celebrate 100 years as the steward of the
Nation's most cherished natural and cultural resources. As outlined in
our Centennial Plan, A Call to Action, the NPS is actively preparing
for its second century of operations, and working hard to connect with
and create the next generation of park visitors, supporters, and
advocates. Earlier this year, the NPS, in partnership with the National
Park Foundation, launched a campaign to engage the next generation and
new audiences in the life-enhancing and sometimes life-changing
experiences at national parks. Our efforts will draw new visitors,
especially Millennials and young families, to experience the national
parks. We experienced a record year in 2014 with over 292 million
visitors and are on track to exceed that number in 2015. These visits
do more than provide inspirational, educational and recreational
opportunities; in 2014, they drove $29.75 billion \1\ in economic
impact, supporting hundreds of thousands of jobs in communities around
the country. We are also working with the National Park Foundation to
leverage the interest of major corporate partners in engaging with this
once in a lifetime anniversary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``2014 National Park Visitor Spending Effects Report,''
National Park Service, accessed November 30, 2015, http://
www.nature.nps.gov/socialscience/docs/VSE2014_Final.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we look ahead to the next century, another component of our
Centennial effort is legislation to establish, clarify or expand a
number of key existing NPS authorities to allow us to better serve the
American people. Today the subcommittee is considering a discussion
draft bill, The National Park Service Centennial Act. This draft
legislation is comprised of elements of the Administration's
legislative proposal of the same title, which was transmitted by
Secretary Jewell on behalf of the Administration on August 31, 2015,
and was subsequently introduced by Rep. Grijalva as H.R. 3556. We
appreciate the subcommittee's interest in acting on Centennial
legislation and we look forward to continued discussions with you. The
Department will provide specific views on the legislation after the
bill is introduced.
The Administration's proposed National Park Service Centennial Act
would provide new sources of funding and strengthen the ability of the
National Park Service to manage and operate the national parks and
programs that provide so many important natural, cultural, and
recreational benefits to the Nation. There are 10 titles included in
the legislation.
Title I, the Centennial Declaration, would recognize that the NPS
has responsibility not only for administering the units of the National
Park System, but for programs that provide financial and technical
assistance to states, communities, and individuals to protect our
national heritage. Title I would also direct the Secretary of the
Interior to utilize these financial and technical assistance programs
to further the conservation and enjoyment of the natural and cultural
heritage of the Nation for the benefit and inspiration of the public.
Titles II-IV would implement part of the President's Fiscal Year
(FY) 2016 Budget request to Congress. Title II would establish a
National Park Centennial Challenge Fund, consisting of a mandatory
appropriation of up to $100 million for FY 2016, FY 2017, and FY 2018
to be used as the Federal match for signature partnership projects that
will help prepare the national parks for another century of
conservation, preservation, and enjoyment.
Title III would provide a mandatory appropriation of $300 million
to the NPS Construction Account for FY 2016, FY 2017, and FY 2018, to
correct deficiencies in NPS infrastructure and facilities. In addition
to requested discretionary appropriations, funding from Titles II and
III would be directed toward NPS' deferred maintenance backlog and
would restore and maintain all high-priority non-transportation assets
into good condition over 10 years, consistent with the FY 2016 Budget
proposal.
Title IV would establish the Centennial Land Management Investment
Fund, consisting of a mandatory appropriation equal to $100 million for
FY 2016, FY 2017, and FY 2018 to provide funding for the Secretaries of
the Interior and Agriculture to jointly establish a competitive program
available to the four Federal land management agencies for projects
that enhance visitor services and outdoor recreational opportunities,
restore lands and waters, repair facilities or trails, or increase
energy and water efficiency.
Title V would direct the National Park Foundation to establish a
special account known as the Second Century Endowment for the NPS,
consisting of gifts or bequests provided for this purpose, for projects
and activities that further the mission of the NPS.
Title VI would establish the NPS Second Century Fund in the
Treasury, which would be funded through additional lodging and camping
fees and additional funds collected from purchases of the lifetime pass
for citizens 62 years of age or older.
Title VII would clarify or expand authorities for activities that
the NPS are already conducting to allow us to better serve the American
people. This includes providing clear authority for the interpretation
and education work of the NPS by consolidating a number of disparate
authorities currently used, and directing the Secretary to ensure that
management of National Park System units and related areas is enhanced
by the availability and utilization of a broad program of the highest
quality interpretation and education. Title VII would also raise the
age limit for participation in the Public Lands Corp from 25 to 30 and
extend the direct-hire authority from 120 days to 2 years, consistent
with Department of the Interior resource assistant direct-hire
authority. And, this title would remove the $3.5 million authorization
ceiling for the Volunteers-In-Parks to accommodate the funding needed
to support this growing program.
Title VIII would establish the NPS Visitor Services Management
Authority (VMSA), and authorize the Secretary to establish a pilot
program to allow the VMSA to award and manage contracts for the
operation of commercial visitor services programs and activities.
Title IX would authorize the Secretary to enter into agreements for
the creation of reproductions of a museum object in which the object
and its intellectual property rights are under the control of the
Secretary.
Title X would redesignate the Secretary of the Interior and the
Director of the NPS as ex officio members of the NPF Board. It also
would authorize appropriations of $25 million for each of FY 2016
through FY 2026 to NPF that would be used to leverage additional non-
Federal funds to support our national parks.
The provisions I have just outlined are the key components we
believe are necessary to move the National Park Service into its second
century.
We appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you. We
look forward to working with the Chairman and members of the
subcommittee on this important legislative effort.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you or the other members of the subcommittee may
have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Jonathan B. Jarvis, Director,
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC
Questions Submitted by Chairman Tom McClintock

Question 1. Could you please provide the committee with the
National Park Service's justification for banning bottled water in
certain national parks?

Answer. The National Park Service has not banned bottled water in
national parks. NPS Policy Memorandum (PM) 11-03, Disposable Plastic
Water Bottle Recycling and Reduction was published in December 2011.
The policy has a four-pronged approach of encouraging water bottle
recycling, reduction of disposable water bottle use, education
regarding disposable waste bottles, and elimination of disposable water
bottles sales within parks where appropriate.
The policy includes an option for individual parks to eliminate
sales, on a park-by-park basis, following extensive review and approval
by the regional director. As part of this review, parks are required to
evaluate the economic impacts of eliminating disposable water bottle
sales on park concessioners as well as potential public health impacts
on park visitors. Parks must show that they can avoid or mitigate any
negative impacts prior to the regional director approving the
elimination of sales. The policy is intended to reduce the
environmental and cost impacts of disposable water bottles on parks.
National parks spend significant amounts of money on the management
of solid waste, including disposable plastic water bottles. Reduction
of waste is a highly successful approach for the National Park Service,
as it contributes to reducing the overall costs for parks to provide
sanitary trash collection and disposal services, reducing our
environmental footprint, and reducing the greenhouse gas emissions
associated with trash collection and disposal.
Visitors to all national parks continue to have access to unlimited
drinking water and carry bottled water in the containers of their
choice, either refillable or disposable. Parks have also added water
bottle refilling stations to make use of refillable water bottles more
convenient, and will have available for purchase affordable, refillable
water bottles that can be refilled at no cost.

Question 2. Please provide the committee information about how the
$900 million in 2010 was used. Why was this 35 percent increase in a
single year's budget not reflected in the construction fund? Where did
this money go?

Answer. The National Park Service (NPS) received $750 million in
supplemental, one-time American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
funding in FY 2009, as well as increases to its annual budget in FY
2009 and 2010.
With the funding received under ARRA, projects were selected, using
merit-based criteria. The NPS selected projects that addressed high-
priority restoration and preservation needs, addressed deferred
maintenance, and enhanced critical facilities. This included a
quantifiable improvement to the condition of NPS facilities and a
reduction of over $500 million in deferred maintenance. NPS ARRA
projects also improved the energy efficiency of facilities and
equipment, expanded the use of renewable energy in parks, and
encouraged the participation of young adults in their national parks.
The NPS completed over 780 projects at 260 park units in 48 states and
the District of Columbia with ARRA funds. ARRA grants were also awarded
to 20 historically black colleges and universities for 21 historic
preservation projects within the parameters of the Historic
Preservation Fund.
The increases to its annual budget in FY 2009 and 2010 supported a
wide variety of NPS programs, including over $14 million for LWCF State
Conservation Grants, nearly $9 million for grants from the Historic
Preservation Fund to states and tribes, and $3 million for grants to
Japanese American Confinement Sites. The additional funding also
included more than $100 million in targeted park base increases to
address high-priority needs at units across the National Park System,
including $3.3 million to support drug eradication efforts on park
lands, $11.9 million to enhance law enforcement and icon security
provided by the United States Park Police, and over $44 million to
support maintenance and repair of facilities.
Between FY 2010 and FY 2015, the discretionary appropriations for
NPS fell by $138.6 million. Additionally, the NPS has either fully or
partially absorbed its fixed costs in each fiscal year, reducing the
operational flexibility and capacity of its parks and programs.

Questions Submitted by Representative Cynthia M. Lummis

Question 1. Could you please provide the committee with a complete
list of projects that the NPS was able to fund using the $10 million
from the Centennial Challenge Fund? How were each of those projects
matched with outside funding?

Answer. See the following chart.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Questions Submitted by Representative Dan Newhouse

Question 1. Whenever the cost of access to publicly-owned lands or
facilities is increased, I believe it is essential that it comes with
commensurate increases in the quality of the user's experience. How
will the additional revenues raised by this proposal improve the
visitor's experience at national parks?

Answer. The additional revenues from lodging fees and the increase
to the price of the senior pass will fund the NPS Second Century Fund.
The Second Century Fund is a challenge program designed to match non-
Federal donations to Federal funds on at least a 1-to-1 basis for
projects and programs that improve the visitor experience and preserve
our natural and cultural resources. The fund will include projects
similar in nature to the types of projects that have been funded under
the smaller Centennial Challenge program, which have included youth
education programs, trail rehabilitation, overlook restoration,
campground enhancements, exhibit replacement, accessibility
improvements, and other projects that enhance the experience of park
visitors.

Question 2. As you know, visitation at National Parks has declined
by about 50 percent among youth over the past decade. How do you see
this bill's provisions being used to reverse that troubling trend and
help younger Americans appreciate our rich natural heritage?

Answer. The goal of the National Park Service Centennial is to
connect with and create the next generation of park visitors,
supporters, and advocates. Outreach efforts are therefore aimed at
reaching younger audiences. We are accomplishing this through several
Centennial programs including the ``Find Your Park'' campaign, the
``Every Kid in a Park'' initiative, and a multitude of other efforts
that the NPS and our partners are engaged in.
The proposed legislation will add to our Centennial effort by
establishing, clarifying, and expanding a number of key existing NPS
authorities to allow us to better serve the American people. Among the
10 titles are many that would support youth engagement and education of
our cultural and natural heritage.
The Centennial Declaration would recognize that the NPS has
responsibility not only for administering the units of the National
Park System, but for programs that provide financial and technical
assistance to states, communities, and individuals to protect our
national heritage. Many of these programs aid youth in local
communities by building trails and playgrounds or supporting outdoor
educational programs.
The National Park Centennial Challenge Fund would provide a Federal
match for signature partnership projects that will help prepare the
national parks for another century of conservation, preservation, and
enjoyment. Many of the challenge projects funded in FY 2015 directly
engaged youth through environmental or historic preservation project
rehabilitation. Programs developed to engage youth are one of the
priority considerations for future selections.
Finally, the proposed legislation would clarify that interpretation
and education are key functions of the National Park Service and it
would encourage the use of current technologies and the development of
educational programs that reach diverse groups. As the keeper of our
Nation's historic places and critical ecosystems, the NPS is an
important educational resource, promoting historical and scientific
literacy and civic engagement skills. Through interpretation and
education the NPS will continue to invite youth to connect with
National Parks and their local communities.

Question 3. Americans can already make donations if they wish to
the National Park Service and the individual parks it operates. How
does the proposed National Park Foundation Endowment improve the Park
Service's ability to develop and utilize private support?

Answer. Although Americans currently have the ability to make
direct donations to the National Park Service and individual parks, it
is our experience that donors are often reluctant to make a gift
directly to a government agency, whether at the national or park level.
However, they are drawn to supporting our nonprofit partners, such as
the National Park Foundation, whose primary mission is to enrich our
national parks and its programs through private support. The
congressionally chartered Foundation has the staff, expertise, and time
to work with them to structure and steward their gift and explore the
tax implications. The nonprofit partner is also able to combine their
donation with other gifts for greater impact.
We believe in the coming years that the majority of private
philanthropic support will come from individual bequests and planned
gifts. Baby boomers--the richest generation in American history--are
currently working on their wills and planned giving. The proposed
endowment would allow the National Park Foundation to create incentives
for donors to have their gift matched or leveraged for maximum benefit
to the parks. The Foundation could also seed new and more ambitious
projects to benefit groupings of parks or parks with similar meanings
and introduce new audiences to park philanthropy.

______

Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you very much.
We will next hear from Mr. David MacDonald, who is the
President of the Friends of Acadia from Bar Harbor, Maine.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MacDONALD, PRESIDENT, FRIENDS OF ACADIA, BAR
HARBOR, MAINE

Mr. MacDonald. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tsongas, and
members of the committee, thank you for including me in today's
discussion. My organization, and many others like it around the
country, considers this proposed legislation an important step
forward in funding our national parks.
I have been lucky enough to grow up and live most of my
life on Mount Desert Island on the coast of Maine, home to
Acadia National Park. I currently serve as President and CEO of
Friends of Acadia. We are a private, nonprofit organization
with about 4,500 members. We work in close partnership with
Acadia National Park, and have since our founding in 1986.
Our members love their park and are very proud to give back
to the park through our organization, either through charitable
donations or through volunteer service. Thousands of hours each
year are donated to the park through our organization.
I hope that my testimony today, and the written testimony
that I submitted, will give some specific examples of on-the-
ground projects in a park like Acadia that have benefited from
this kind of model of a challenge fund that the Centennial Act
proposes.
I also hope that the examples will illustrate a handful of
broader themes, which I will outline quickly here.
Number one, parks do inspire philanthropy. At Acadia, we
are finding that the Centennial in particular is resonating for
people as an opportunity to be part of this historic legacy.
Number two, challenge grants work, particularly when they
are provided by the Federal Government. Our donors, from the
largest, most sophisticated donors, to the smaller donors
writing their first check for $25, respond to these challenge
opportunities. They give more, and they decide to give more
quickly when presented with this kind of opportunity.
Third and finally, our donors have consistently stressed to
us that they do not want their philanthropy to substitute for
the fundamental obligation of Congress to fund its national
parks, the operations in particular. So, as we consider
worthwhile mechanisms in legislation like this to establish new
funding, please do not forget about the importance of the
annual appropriations that are essential to our park's
operation.
At Acadia, frankly, I feel like we are losing ground. Folks
mentioned earlier some of the statistics. We basically have the
same operating appropriation today that we did 7 years ago in
2009. What that means is we are losing ground, because
visitation is increasing, public expectation for what the park
will provide is increasing, and the cost of doing business is
increasing--so we are losing ground.
Acadia is a small park by Western standards; it is about
35,000 acres. But we have more than 2\1/2\ million visitors at
our park. Visitation was up last year by 13 percent. This year
it is up another 7 percent to date. As I said, people's
expectations for what the park provides are also growing. The
park is a huge economic driver in our communities on the Maine
coast: more than 3,000 jobs and more than $200 million of
economic activity is annually generated by Acadia.
As you know, $10 million was appropriated by Congress last
year for a version of a Centennial Challenge. At Acadia, we had
three projects that were funded by that, a total of about
$165,000. We were able to restore historic trails, and we were
able to reclaim scenic vistas from carriage roads and motor
roads that had grown in and been lost over time. In each case,
Friends of Acadia provided the private match to match the
Federal funding in that regard; and in each case the challenge
component was essential to our ability to raise that money.
In one case, one family had a strong feeling about a
certain trail; they wrote the whole check. In another case, we
did a campaign, had dozens of donors give very quickly in order
to be part of the Centennial Challenge. So, it worked.
A couple of things to keep in mind, going forward, for how
to make sure this legislation accomplishes what you are hoping.
It is very important to have a sustainable source of funding,
so I commend you for including the funding sources that are not
appropriations. It is very hard to respond to this kind of
challenge if you do not know that it is coming. And that is
some feedback I have heard from other partners around the
country.
Second, I would encourage you to consider building in more
flexibility for groups like Friends of Acadia to actually
implement some of the signature projects. I think that our
groups have shown, as has the National Park Foundation, that
private partners like ours can really provide nimbleness,
creativity, and flexibility. So having all of the signature
projects implemented by the Park Service may be something you
reconsider and have partners have more of a role in that.
In closing, I just want to add a footnote that Acadia
National Park also celebrates its centennial in 2016, so we
have a dual centennial. There is no substitute for getting out
in the parks and seeing the work we are doing. I invite any of
you to come up to Acadia to see what we are doing for the
centennial in 2016.
Thank you again for your work on this important Act. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. MacDonald follows:]
Prepared Statement of David MacDonald, President, Friends of Acadia,
Bar Harbor, Maine
Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Tsongas, and other honorable
members of this committee, thank you for the opportunity to be part of
today's discussion regarding the proposed legislation, which I believe
is an exciting development and a very positive step toward sustainable
funding for our national parks in the coming centennial year and well
into the future.
My name is David MacDonald and I have lived most of my life on
Mount Desert Island, Maine, home to Acadia National Park. I currently
serve as President and CEO of Friends of Acadia (FOA), a private, not-
for-profit organization with more than 4,000 members that has worked in
close partnership with the National Park Service since our founding in
1986. Our members love Acadia and are proud to give back to the park
through our organization with philanthropic donations and thousands of
hours of volunteer work.
One recent example from just last month is our annual Take Pride in
Acadia community work-day, when more than 400 volunteers turned out to
help rake leaves from the drainage ditches of Acadia's carriage roads,
and help park staff put these historically significant roads to bed for
the winter. This one morning of volunteer labor saves the park tens of
thousands of dollars in labor and many times that if preventative
maintenance did not help avoid the very costly storm damage and winter
washouts that have taken a heavy toll on these gravel roads in the
past.
So although Acadia is relatively quiet this time of year compared
to summer or fall, the work of protecting this park continues round the
clock and throughout the year, and FOA is very honored to be part of
the partnership that accomplishes this work which has helped inspire
some amazing accolades of late for our park, including readers of USA
Today voting Acadia America's Best National Park last year, as well as
viewers of Good Morning America voting Acadia America's Favorite Place.
While I hope that my role here today will be to help provide some
tangible and specific recent examples from the ``front lines'' of a
park like Acadia of how a centennial matching program like the proposed
Centennial Challenge Fund would inspire additional philanthropy and
accomplish priority projects, I would also like to stress three broader
messages that I hope Acadia's on-the-ground projects convey:

1.  First, national parks are incredibly powerful settings that truly
represent our country at its best and have the ability to
inspire those who experience them to donate toward their
maintenance and improvement. And at Acadia we are finding
that the Centennial, in particular, is resonating as an
opportunity for residents and visitors to be part of this
historic parks legacy.

2.  Second, it has been my experience that donors absolutely respond
to the opportunity of a challenge grant and matching
funding. FOA supporters ranging from the very large,
sophisticated donors to those sending a $35 check as an
annual membership donation like to see their dollars
stretched and leveraged.

3.  Third, throughout our 30-year history of doing this kind of work
at Acadia, donors have consistently stressed that they do
not want their contribution to become a substitute for the
Federal Government itself continuing to invest in national
parks. So as you pursue worthwhile legislation like this to
create new revenue, please do not forget the critical
importance of the fundamental congressional appropriations
that are essential to maintaining these national treasures
unimpaired for future generations to enjoy.

Acadia National Park is a conservation gem and economic powerhouse
that I am honored to serve. Relatively small in size, at only 35,000
acres, Acadia is within a day's drive of major cities of the Northeast
and therefore is one of the most heavily used parks in the Nation, with
more than 2.6 million visitors each year. Visitation has been growing
steadily in recent years, up 13 percent last year and another 7 percent
so far this year.
At the same time that the number of visits is growing, so is the
range of services and experiences sought at a park like Acadia. Whether
it is Internet connectivity, or search and rescue operations, or
accommodation of activities like paddle-boarding or mountain-biking
that Acadia's founders could not have even dreamed of, the public is
asking more of a park like Acadia than ever before. Local businesses in
the surrounding communities also see their livelihoods closely tied to
the park's successful operations; during the government shutdown two
Octobers ago, our communities lost more than $1 million per day in
economic activity. Many of my friends and peers are among the
restaurant owners, guides, and shopkeepers who make up some of the
3,000 jobs and $200 million of annual economic benefit driven by Acadia
National Park.
Acadia was also the first national park created entirely through
private donations of land from neighboring landowners, when visionaries
such as George B. Dorr and John D. Rockefeller Jr. and dozens of others
assembled strategic tracts of land with bold Atlantic coastline,
mountain-tops, remote ponds, and pristine woodlands and granted them to
the Federal Government nearly 100 years ago. Indeed, there is a very
long history of private initiative, philanthropy, community pride and
investment, and volunteerism in our park--as these very principles will
be essential to our ability to prepare the park for its second century.
As you know, an initial phase of a centennial challenge program was
approved and funded by Congress last year. $10 million was made
available, and despite the very short notice and call for proposals for
FY 2015, FOA and our partners at Acadia National Park submitted six
projects. Three of them were ultimately selected to be among the 106
proposals funded nationwide that together involved 90 different partner
organizations contributing nearly $16 million in private matching
funds. These significant investments in our parks were stitched
together with barely more than a couple of weeks' notice. In looking at
your proposed NPS Centennial Act, I believe that the number of
projects, the amount of match, and the impact of the projects could all
be enhanced with the benefit of a reliable, established program with
lead time and dependable funding. Thank you for considering ongoing
funding sources that will help keep this model from being a one-shot
deal in the centennial year only.
At Acadia, we were able to tackle a variety of projects that were
part of the park's maintenance backlog, but also provided tremendous
opportunity for visitor engagement and public benefit. The largest
project involved the restoration of historic scenic vistas from the
park carriage roads and motor roads that had grown in with vegetation
over time. Careful planning and documentation was done to understand
the original scope and purpose of the vistas as planned by noted
landscape architects Beatrix Farrand and Frederick Law Olmsted nearly a
century ago. Skilled park sawyers were complemented by citizen
volunteers willing to drag brush up to the chipping operation at the
roadside. Certain plots were selected for small experimental burns
thought to be more effective for some vegetation, and interpretive
panels engaged the public in the purpose and methods of the project.
To come up with our $85,000 share of the match for this project,
given the short notice of the opportunity in the spring, FOA quickly
decided to draw on existing reserve funds, with the hope of
replenishing them with new donations raised over the course of the
summer. This strategy paid off when by August we had raised more than
50 gifts toward the project ranging in size from $35 to $75,000 and
shattering our $85,000 goal. I am confident that the fact that we were
able to tell donors that the Federal Government was matching us dollar
for dollar made all the difference in motivating the number and scale
of donations we received in such a short time.
Another centennial project at Acadia involved the rehabilitation of
the Deer Brook Trail, an extremely popular hiking trail that runs west
from Jordan Pond up toward the summits of Sargent Mountain and
Penobscot Mountain. The trail had become severely eroded, diminishing
both the hiking experience and the environmental health of Deer Brook
as it cascades down the mountains toward Jordan Pond, one of the
clearest ponds in the state of Maine and which serves as the public
drinking water supply for the village of Seal Harbor. In this case, we
had been in discussions for quite some time with a family that had
expressed interest in seeing this trail repaired. After making an
initial donation 2 years ago, the family was reluctant to fund further
work unless the Park Service itself had ``skin in the game.'' When we
let this family know of our ability to propose the trail work as a
Centennial project earlier this year, this spurred them to pledge a
second gift of $70,000 to cover the private portion of the project. The
work that was done this summer involved park trail crews, volunteers,
as well as local teens hired on to the Acadia Youth Conservation Corps,
a joint program of FOA and the Park Service that allows us to hire 15
high school students each summer to tackle ambitious work projects,
while also providing the kids with opportunities to learn about and
connect with their park.
These recent Centennial Challenge projects build on a long history
at Acadia of blending private philanthropy with Federal dollars to
benefit the park and its visitors. In the early 1990s we undertook a
public-private partnership to restore Acadia's 45-mile network of
gravel carriage roads following decades of government neglect. We
worked with Congress to commit $6 million of Federal appropriations
while agreeing to raise $4 million in private contributions that would
serve as a permanent endowment held at Friends of Acadia to ensure
continued maintenance of the roads over the long term. Friends of
Acadia annually grants funds to Acadia under the terms of a Memorandum
of Understanding regarding the endowment, which has helped spin off a
total of more than $5 million since its establishment. So I endorse the
concept in your bill of an endowment at the National Park Foundation,
as this is a tool that has helped greatly at Acadia in smoothing out
the inevitable peaks and valleys of annual funding cycles.
A decade later, Friends of Acadia undertook another campaign that
similarly matched private donations with public funds to help restore
and endow the maintenance of Acadia's historic hiking trail system.
This time, the government's share came largely from revenue collected
at Acadia through visitor entrance fees (and I know that your committee
has recently taken up important work to reauthorize the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act). This campaign went on to be a model for
other parks and Friends groups around the country. Yet I don't believe
that it would have been possible if we had not been able to tell our
private donors that the Federal Government was coming to the table with
a significant investment in the project.
All of us at Friends of Acadia are proud of our long history and
strong partnership with the Park Service, however we are also firm in
our conviction that we, the people of the United States, through our
Federal Government, have a perpetual responsibility to assure the
conservation of Acadia unimpaired for the enjoyment of future
generations. Private philanthropy has a critical role to play in the
future of our parks, but there are limits to that role. Friends of
Acadia works hard to add value to our national parks rather than fund
core operations, which are ultimately the responsibility of Congress.
At Acadia, it is alarming to realize that despite the park's
growing visitation, popularity, and expectations from the public, the
congressional appropriation for park operations last year was basically
the same as it was in 2009. Given the rising cost of doing business,
this flat funding has meant that park staffing has inevitably taken the
hit, and Acadia has fewer FTEs than it did 7 years ago. On top of that,
a growing percentage of these FTEs now consist of seasonal hires, who
while very important to visitor services, cannot be expected to tackle
the longer-term planning and prioritizing needed to prepare the park
for its second century. Viewed at the national level, there has been a
12 percent decrease or $370 million reduction in the total budget for
the National Park Service over the last 5 years in today's dollars.
The concept of a centennial challenge fund has been discussed since
at least 2007. Now is the time to build upon lessons learned from the
past efforts and to create an opportunity for Congress and private
partners to design a fund that will inspire private donors to look
invest in the Park Service's second century. In particular, we
encourage a program that would be inclusive of a wide array of possible
ways to give, and as you look to finalize this discussion draft, I am
interested in working with other partners and colleagues to discuss how
the Centennial Challenge Fund might be strengthened and further
leveraged by enabling Friends groups like FOA to directly implement
signature projects and programs. Friends of Acadia and other groups
like us around the country have shown that partners to the Park Service
can provide critical flexibility, innovation, cost effectiveness, and a
trusted broker for donors wanting to add to our national parks legacy.
Of course, we see this at the national level with an organization like
the National Park Foundation's great work. And in light of my previous
comments about the importance of congressional appropriations to
support park operations, I would urge each of you to remember that
legislation such as that proposed today should be providing
sustainable, supplemental funding for parks, not funds that would be
considered a substitution for funds lost as part of sequestration or
shrinking park appropriations.
With 2016 just a few weeks off, it is important to note that Acadia
National Park shares that same centennial year with the broader
National Park Service (NPS). In fact, President Woodrow Wilson signed
the legislation authorizing Federal protection of the initial lands
within Acadia on July 8 just a few weeks before he signed the Organic
Act establishing the NPS at the end of August, 1916. We are certainly
prepared and motivated to bring our best thinking and resources to bear
to ensure that Acadia's second century is launched with the same level
of inspiration and leadership exhibited by the park's founders 100
years ago. We are working together with more than 220 centennial
partners from throughout the community--businesses, schools, libraries,
art galleries, museums, gardens and more--each of whom will embody our
centennial slogan which is ``celebrate our past and inspire our
future.''
I greatly appreciate the opportunity to share testimony with your
committee today, and hope that you will not hesitate to let me know if
I can assist with follow up questions or suggestions. And in
conclusion, I invite each of you to pay us a visit at Acadia during the
coming centennial year, when you will find a community-driven, world-
welcoming celebration of our park unfolding all year long. I know that
members of Maine's congressional delegation including Congresswoman
Pingree and Congressman Poliquin would be glad to join me in helping to
host you or your staff in experiencing Acadia first-hand. In the
meantime, thank you for your work on the National Park Service
Centennial Act.

______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much.
Finally, we welcome back Mr. John Nau with the National
Park Foundation from Houston, Texas to testify.

STATEMENT OF JOHN L. NAU, III, VICE CHAIRMAN (2012-2013),
NATIONAL PARK FOUNDATION, HOUSTON, TEXAS

Mr. Nau. Thank you, Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member
Grijalva, Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Tsongas, and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify before you today regarding Chairman
Bishop's draft, the ``National Park Service Centennial Act.'' I
believe that my background as a businessman who has had the
opportunity to experience how parks can serve as economic
drivers is what best positions me to assist the subcommittee as
you consider legislative proposals to enhance the National Park
System for another century of service.
The National Park Foundation is the congressionally-
authorized charitable nonprofit charged with securing
philanthropic and corporate support for national parks projects
and programs, and I am proud to be a member of that board. In
that capacity, the Foundation has a great deal invested in
ensuring that the Centennial of the Service will be a catalyst
for many steps necessary to prepare our parks for another
century of success.
The Centennial represents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity
for Americans of all ages, races, location, genders, including
Members of Congress, to unite behind a shared vision for
building upon the success of the National Park System during
its second century. Realizing this goal will require us to
generate innovative new approaches to improve visitor
experience and create a much better funding model to support
our parks.
We believe that the draft legislation the subcommittee is
considering today has the potential to serve as that
galvanizing mechanism needed to achieve that goal, and I am
pleased to appear before you not only to offer the Foundation's
strong support for this discussion draft, but to share
recommendations we have for improvements.
The Foundation strongly supports the proposed authorization
of a Centennial Challenge Fund, which would be paired with
dedicated funding and require a non-Federal match. The
Centennial Challenge would create a strong incentive for
increased philanthropic contributions to park programs and
projects leading up to, during, and beyond the year of the
centennial.
In addition, the Foundation supports the proposed long-
overdue increase in the purchase price of the senior citizen
lifetime pass as a way to help pay for this important program.
We would welcome an opportunity to work with the members of
this subcommittee and your staff to identify additional offsets
that can be utilized to increase the funding for the Centennial
Challenge.
The Foundation strongly supports the proposed authorization
of an endowment housed in the Foundation. Establishing this
long-term funding source would allow the Foundation to raise
significantly more private funding for park projects and
programs as part of donors' estate and philanthropic
contribution planning.
The Foundation also supports the establishment of overnight
fees as a mechanism to provide funding for the endowment, and
we would welcome an opportunity to work with you, your staff,
and other interested parties to refine this proposal in a
manner that can garner universal support within the final
legislation.
As with the Centennial Challenge, we would welcome the
opportunity to work with the members of this subcommittee and
the staff to identify any additional offsets that can be
utilized to increase funding availability.
We also strongly support the draft legislation's inclusion
of amendments to the NPF charter that would transition the
Secretary of the Interior and the Director of the National Park
Service to ex officio, non-voting members.
The Foundation also supports the discussion draft's
authorization of $25 million to be appropriated each year over
the course of 10 years to the Foundation to be used for
important projects.
In conclusion, the National Park Service Centennial is not
official until 2016. But our Find Your Park program of public
engagement has already begun. Visitation is up, particularly in
the big parks, and the program has only begun to be effective.
We thank the committee, the Chairmen, and the Ranking
Members for their work. The Foundation stands behind the effort
to improve the National Park Service over the next 100 years.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nau follows:]
Prepared Statement of John L. Nau, III, President & CEO, Silver Eagle
Distributors, Board Member, National Park Foundation, Houston, Texas
Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Tsongas and members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today
regarding Chairman Bishop's draft National Parks Centennial Anniversary
legislation. I have been a member of the National Park Foundation's
Board of Directors for more than 7 years and I served as Vice-Chairman
of the Board, the highest ranking private citizen position, from 2012-
2013. Additionally, I am the Chairman Emeritus of the Civil War Trust
and I also had the honor of serving as the Chairman of the President's
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation from 2002-2009. I believe
that my background as a businessman, who has had the opportunity to
experience how parks can serve as economic drivers beyond their
borders, is what best positions me to assist the subcommittee as you
legislate vital enhancements to the National Park System for another
century of service.
Chartered by Congress in 1967, the National Park Foundation is
founded on a legacy that began more than a century ago, when private
citizens from all walks of life took action to establish and protect
our national parks. Today, the National Park Foundation carries on that
tradition as the national charitable nonprofit whose sole mission is to
directly support the National Park Service.
2016 will mark the 100th anniversary of the National Park Service.
The Centennial represents a `once in a lifetime' opportunity for
Americans to come together to celebrate the achievements that have been
realized as the result of ``America's Best Idea.'' Most importantly,
the anniversary presents an opportunity for Americans of all ages,
races, genders, ethnicities and political affiliations to unite behind
a shared vision for building upon the success of the National Park
System during its second century. This is our opportunity to both
celebrate the past and look to the future.
In addition to celebrating past accomplishments and reconnecting
Americans to their parks, the Centennial Anniversary presents an
opportunity to generate innovative new approaches to improve the
visitor experience and create a better funding model to support our
parks. We believe that the draft legislation you are considering today
has the potential to serve as the galvanizing mechanism needed to
achieve that goal.
That is why I am pleased to appear before you to testify on behalf
of the National Park Foundation to offer our strong support for this
draft legislation. I will also share recommendations we have for
improvements to it.
centennial challenge
The Foundation strongly supports the discussion draft's
authorization of a Centennial Challenge fund paired with `dedicated'
funding. Enactment of these provisions, which would require a non-
Federal match, would undoubtedly create a strong incentive for
increased philanthropic contributions to park programs and projects
leading up to, during and beyond the year of the Centennial Anniversary
in 2016.
In addition, the Foundation supports the proposed overdue increase
in the purchase price of the ``senior citizen lifetime pass'' as a way
to help pay for this important program. The Foundation and its staff
would welcome the opportunity to work with members of the subcommittee
and your staff to identify additional offsets that can be utilized to
increase the funding available for the Centennial Challenge.
npf endowment
We strongly support the proposed authorization of an endowment
housed at the Foundation, which will establish a long-term funding
source for important park projects and programs. The endowment will
allow the Foundation to raise significantly more private funding for
the parks as part of donors' estate planning and gift giving. Endowment
growth serves to build a stable long-term source of private resources
for Parks.
The Foundation supports the establishment of `bed fees' as a
mechanism to provide funding for the endowment. Currently, at many
Parks, guests at hotels located within the boundaries of national parks
do not pay the hotel occupancy taxes paid by park visitors staying
outside the boundaries. This represents a lost opportunity to capture
fees hotel guests are already accustomed to paying for the benefit of
the parks. That said, we look forward to working with members of the
committee and your staff and other interested parties to include in the
legislation some accommodation to address the collection and
administration of these fees.
Finally, we would welcome the opportunity to work with members of
the subcommittee and your staff to identify additional offsets that can
be utilized to increase the funding available for this important
endowment.
park foundation structure
The Foundation strongly supports the draft legislation's inclusion
of amendments to the NPF charter that would transition the Secretary of
the Interior and the Director of the National Park Service to ex
officio, non-voting members of the National Board of Directors. The
Foundation's authorizing legislation names the Secretary of the
Interior as the Chair of the NPF Board and the Director of the National
Park Service as the Secretary of the NPF Board. As with any cabinet
position, the Secretary of the Interior is a job that has turnover due
to national elections and other factors. History has shown that a
change in administration occasionally leads to a change in NPF
leadership. The resulting uncertainty can be avoided by allowing the
board to select its own leadership.
The Foundation also supports the discussion draft's authorization
of $25 million to be appropriated each year, over the course of 10
years, to the NPF to be utilized to match non-Federal contributions for
park projects and programs. This would result in a significant increase
in the leveraging of private funds to benefit parks and visitors
similar to the successful model set forth in the charter of the
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation.
education and interpretation
The Foundation also supports efforts that would diversify,
strengthen and enhance interpretive programs in our national parks
while also expanding the role of volunteers in these programs. In
particular, it is our hope that these provisions will help generate
meaningful new ways to engage Americans that historically have low park
visitation rates, such as Hispanics, urban dwellers and Millennials.
This will require modernizing the technology used to recruit new
visitors so that we can reach them through social media and wherever
else we need to go to engage them. In addition, we need to work harder
to engage urban populations by better highlighting the many wonderful
urban parks already in existence.
conclusion
As the National Parks Centennial Anniversary approaches, it is
truly inspiring to see a diverse and bipartisan coalition of lawmakers,
nonprofit organizations, businesses and individuals uniting behind a
shared commitment to seizing the historic opportunity presented by the
Centennial Anniversary to develop and execute innovative new approaches
that will ensure that our national parks achieve another century of
success.
While Federal appropriations should remain the largest funding
source for the National Park Service, it is unlikely that current
Federal budget constraints will be reversed or even alleviated in the
near future. Therefore, it is imperative that we utilize the 2016
Centennial to explore new funding models that can be utilized to
supplement the taxpayer investments needed to prepare and sustainably
fund our parks for another 100 years of service. Without enhancements
and improvements we risk a first-time visit to a national park becoming
a one-time visit instead of a life-long love for these amazing places.
This new paradigm must include finding new ways to incentivize even
greater philanthropic and corporate investments in our parks going
forward. That said, it is vital that our emerging coalition works
together over the next 15 months to seek the appropriate balance
between the need to avoid overcommercialization and the need to enhance
and expand attribution for desperately needed corporate investments in
our parks.
We must see supporting our parks not as just the role of taxpayers
and Congress or just private citizens or foundations. We must see it as
working together in concert to support our parks with Federal funds,
private philanthropy, corporate partnerships, fees and volunteerism.
The Centennial of the National Park Service comes around only once
and the focus of millions of Americans will be on our national parks
between now and the end of 2016. We have a tremendous opportunity to
capitalize on this momentum and excitement to help prepare the National
Park Service for a second century of success. This will require that we
place our political and philosophical differences aside to work jointly
on behalf of future generations so that they too can experience and
realize the many benefits of ``America's Best Idea'' as we have.
In closing, the National Park Foundation believes that the
Chairman's discussion draft National Park Service Centennial Act is an
outstanding step toward achieving the goals I have outlined today. We
look forward to working with the entire committee and the rest of our
emerging coalition to continue refining and ultimately enacting this
vitally important legislation. Thank you for the opportunity to provide
this testimony.

______

Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you for your testimony. We
will now go to questions by the Members, and we will begin with
myself.
I first want to get the record straight on National Park
Service funding, because that has been mentioned on a number of
occasions at a number of hearings. Over the past 10 years, the
nominal appropriation for NPS has grown from $2.256 billion in
Fiscal Year 2006 to $2.615 billion in Fiscal Year 2015. That is
a $359 million increase.
Inflation adjusted, though, the Park Service budget has
been relatively flat, actually down about two-tenths of 1
percent over that decade. But this followed the prior decade,
where nominal funding increased by 65 percent. There was also
one year--in 2009, in a single year, the Park Service's budget
increased by 37 percent.
Funding is an issue which this bill seeks to address, but
is not in and of itself explanatory for the enormous deferred
maintenance backlog that has developed, and the decline in
overnight stays at our parks.
Mr. Jarvis, my first question involves the deferred
maintenance backlog. Last year's National Defense Authorization
Act included several new park units for the National Park
Service to manage. It seems every year this committee receives
requests to designate new national parks or national monuments
to be managed by your agency. Do these new units add to your
maintenance backlog? And how do you allocate resources to these
areas when you are, at least inflation-adjusted, at a
relatively flat budget?
Mr. Jarvis. Thank you for that question, Chairman. I think
it is a very important area to explore.
Yes, they do add to our maintenance backlog, though we try
our best when working with Congress in the establishment of any
new units to minimize our additional responsibilities through
partnerships. For instance, the designation of the Manhattan
Project National Historic Park is in partnership with the
Department of Energy; and even though there are specific assets
identified within that park that were established by Congress,
we are working very closely with the Department of Energy to
ensure that very few of those assets become a liability for our
maintenance backlog.
But, they are not free. Each one of these new parks that
come into the system do have some responsibilities, both from
an operational standpoint and a maintenance backlog standpoint.
But, I can assure you we are working very, very hard to
minimize the amount of new responsibilities that come with
these new areas.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. We have heard a number of
retailers would like to sell national park passes, just as, for
example, grocery stores provide postal services now at their
facilities. Why are annual and daily passes for the national
parks so difficult to purchase, except at the park itself? And
why won't the Park Service consider these types of cooperative
arrangements with retailers?
Mr. Jarvis. We are exploring some new ways--technically and
legally, you can do third-party sales. The problem is that
whoever the third party is has to buy the passes, because they
are essentially valued property, rather than us just
authorizing their sale. But we are looking at new models, and
we have a couple of experiments--Acadia being one of those--
about mobile passes and other ways that we can use technology.
Mr. McClintock. Well, my experience is a lot of the
retailers at the gateway communities know as much or more about
the parks than the park rangers themselves. A park ranger from
Hawaii assigned to Yosemite does not know nearly as much about
Yosemite as someone who grew up there going to the park every
weekend for years. Those are the folks that are employed in the
local shops. It seems to me that that is an enormous resource
that we are simply squandering.
Mr. Jarvis. I think the gateway communities are
extraordinarily important to these parks. One of the areas that
we have really expanded on that is a huge opportunity is the
concept of step-on interpretation, where locals basically can
provide that kind of interpretation locally within the park.
Our battlefield guides are a great example of that, at
Gettysburg, Antietam, and Manassas, where local community
members that live in that community are Civil War buffs.
Mr. McClintock. I am going to have to cut you off, because
I want to get one more question in. It is about a complaint we
are receiving a lot of, and that is the policy of individual
parks to ban bottled water. As you can imagine, there are a lot
of complaints on that.
What is the justification for that, particularly when you
can buy soda in a can, you just cannot buy bottled water?
Mr. Jarvis. The justification is sort of threefold. One is,
first of all, it is not just an open ban. There are about 20
parks out of the 409 that currently have water bottle bans in
place. So it is not broad across the system.
Mr. McClintock. My time is up. But just so you know, it is
a growing source of complaints, and I would strongly advise you
to do something about that.
Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you all for
being here. I think, from all of your testimonies, especially
Mr. MacDonald and Mr. Nau--and I think Director Jarvis knows
this well--that the impact of our national parks is really
clear. And this was perhaps never more clear than when the
government shutdown occurred. Mr. MacDonald, I think you
referenced the cost to the gateway communities as a result of
it in your written testimony.
Our national parks are a great investment. Each Federal
dollar invested in these parks generates $10 in economic
activity. It is a tremendous return on investment to our local
economies. But despite this economic impact, we have been
chronically underfunding our parks, leading to a growing
backlog of maintenance and infrastructure needs, as we all
know.
I know all the members of the committee are very concerned
about this. It amounts to $11.5 billion in deferred maintenance
costs. So today, as we consider the Centennial, I think we have
to take into account the impact of those billions of dollars in
deferred maintenance, and how best to address it.
I would like to share a slide that demonstrates the serious
decline in funding for the National Park Service construction
account.
[Slide]
Ms. Tsongas. As the slide demonstrates, the construction
account, which is the primary account to address the non-roads
half of the maintenance backlog, has gone from over $350
million in Fiscal Year 2005 to less than $150 million in Fiscal
Year 2015. This is roughly a 62 percent decrease over the last
10 years--fairly dramatic, I would say.
I think it shows us what the smoking gun is, what the real
impact has been on our national parks as a struggle to deal
with this maintenance backlog.
Director Jarvis, can you talk about why the backlog has
grown so large? And do you feel that the discussion draft
before us today can provide enough funding to make a
significant dent in the backlog?
Mr. Jarvis. Thank you, Congresswoman. So the maintenance
backlog has grown because the National Park Service has, in
terms of assets--we have road assets and non-road assets. In
terms of physical facilities that we manage and maintain, we
are second only to the Department of Defense in total
facilities. And those facilities provide access and public
enjoyment across the 409 national park units.
The infrastructure is quite old. Most of it was built turn-
of-the-century, particularly in the 1960s, when there was a
major investment in the National Park System with Mission 66.
Those systems--wastewater, water treatment, sewer systems,
buildings, infrastructure--are all now pushing 50, 60 years
old.
We have a very good inventory of our system. We know every
asset, its current condition, and what it is going to take. We
need, basically, twice as much money as we currently have in
our construction program to just keep even with the current
backlog.
The construction budget--you are spot on there--has several
other sources. Our recreation fee program, what we call the
repair/rehab program, goes into the non-road assets. And then,
of course, Congress is working on a transportation bill that
has some road money for us, as well.
But, in the Administration's bill, which requests $300
million in Title III for 3 years in a row, if we were to
receive that funding for 10 years in a row, we could bring the
non-road high-priority assets across the entire system, about
6,000 assets, to good condition.
Ms. Tsongas. I actually have a follow-on graph that I
wanted to show.
[Slide]
Ms. Tsongas. The top piece of it shows the discussion draft
before us. And, thankfully, it is important that we begin this
discussion and the kind of investment that would be made in the
maintenance backlog.
Then, the second piece of it shows what would be the
investment that would be made under H.R. 3556, Mr. Grijalva's
bill.
The next piece shows the annual minimum required to
maintain the current levels.
Then the bottom piece just shows the total maintenance
backlog that has accumulated over time.
So, Director Jarvis, again, how better could we help you
address this?
Mr. Jarvis. Well, I think it is----
Ms. Tsongas. A leading question, I know.
Mr. Jarvis. That is OK. I think the maintenance backlog has
to be addressed in a number of ways.
One, there are projects that you can raise private dollars
to support. We have a subset of those, and we work with our
Friends organization and the National Park Foundation to
leverage some Federal skin in the game against philanthropy.
Then, there are projects that are purely a Federal
responsibility. No one is going to give me philanthropy to fix
a wastewater treatment plant. That is a Federal responsibility.
So, these cycle through in need and investment. Unless we put
up the money now, it is pay-me-later, as well, this backlog
will grow faster than we are investing in it.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Director Jarvis.
Mr. McClintock. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Jarvis, you mentioned in your last statement it
would take two times the money to just keep even with the
backlog. Can you explain that a little more?
Mr. Jarvis. Roughly, to keep even with our current backlog,
we would need about $800 million annually to address the non-
road maintenance backlog. We currently, through Fiscal Year
2015, receive just a little bit over $400 million annually for
non-road assets. So we would need about twice that, or $800
million.
So, we parse that into the non-road, high-priority assets.
High-priority assets are the ones that directly serve the
public; they are the historic homes that are the principal
reason the park exists, or a road or trail that provides access
to an asset. We would need to get annual appropriations in
addition to what our current is, at least what has been
requested in the Administration's bill, which is $300 million
per year.
Mrs. Lummis. Can you provide some examples of how the
Centennial Challenge Fund would enable the National Park
Service to tackle portions of that maintenance backlog through
the partnership entities?
Mr. Jarvis. Absolutely, Congresswoman. David MacDonald
mentioned a few projects in Acadia. I can absolutely provide
the committee a full list of the kinds of projects that we have
leveraged through the recent $10 million Centennial program.
But, for instance, on the Blue Ridge Parkway, we have done
trails for accessibility. We have done preservation of
projects: Cape Cod National Seashore, we did some of the
historic buildings; we have done rehab at Cemetery Ridge at
Gettysburg; the Grand Canyon rehab; and a variety of trails.
Some of the larger projects: Grand Teton, in your home
state; working on historic CCC projects that were built 75
years ago; and Great Smokey Mountains, increasing trail access.
A big project here in the Chairman's district and Yosemite
National Park is rehabilitating the Mariposa Grove. It is a
project where the Federal share was about $1.1 million; and the
partner, Yosemite Conservancy, has put up $1.8 million. So, we
are getting a major restoration at the Mariposa Grove.
We literally have hundreds of projects where a one-to-one
match has actually been leveraged more than one-to-one by our
partners across the system.
Mrs. Lummis. Most of us are aware that, when the national
parks began, it was the railroads who frequently built the
beautiful facilities in these parks. So, the parks were founded
with a long-standing history of public-private partnerships.
And working with concessionaires, clearly, the railroads had
skin in the game when it came to getting visitors out to the
national parks.
Do you have the authority you need to work with
concessionaires to address the deferred maintenance backlog,
and to help underwrite rehabilitation and replacement, or even
expansion of some of the visitors infrastructure?
Mr. Jarvis. Not really. Let me, if you don't mind, take a
minute to talk about the current relationship with our
concessioners.
First of all, we have great concessioners. The companies
that we work with provide extraordinarily great service to the
American public. Congress reformed the concessions law in 1995.
We went to a new concessions law, and it did several positive
things. One, is it increased competition; it resulted in an
increase of the franchise fees back to the National Park
Service, to the Federal Government, that we could reinvest in
facilities.
But, there are a couple of issues that I think continue to
be a problem. We have proposed, in the Administration's bill, a
new authority called the Visitor Services Management Authority,
that would allow us to at least experiment with being more
consistent with private sector practices for lodging and food
services than we currently have under the concessions law.
The real issue is this thing called leaseholder surrender
interest that, under current concessions law, when a
concessioner invests in a facility that is owned by the
National Park Service to significantly improve it, to meet
expectations of current visitors, that investment grows over
the life of the contract. So, at the end of the contract, we
owe the concessioner that value that it has grown.
In the example of the Grand Canyon contract most recently
re-competed, we owed the concessioner $150 million, in spite of
the fact that they were making a profit throughout that period.
Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady's----
Mrs. Lummis. Yes, my time has expired.
Mr. Jarvis. OK.
Mrs. Lummis. But I would mention that he volunteered to
give us a list of those items, and I would like to ask for
that.
Mr. Jarvis. Absolutely.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Director.
Mr. McClintock. Ms. Dingell.
Mrs. Dingell. I want to continue to follow on your line of
questioning, because I share that concern. I thank you for your
recognition, Mr. Chairman.
Next year, we are approaching an important anniversary, the
100th anniversary of the National Park Service, which we have
been talking about. For me, and for all of us, it is a time to
celebrate the successful track record the NPS has had managing
some of the most beautiful, iconic places in our Nation,
including Sleeping Bear Dunes, the Pictured Rocks National
Lakeshore, the River Raisin National Battlefield, et cetera.
But, I think it is also an opportunity to give the Park
Service the resources and authorities that they need to do
their job in the 21st century. I do not think we should let
this opportunity pass by. So, I want to talk about some of the
differences in the discussion draft we are considering today
and the Ranking Member's legislation.
Mr. Nau, why is it important to legislatively establish an
endowment and provide a source of funding beyond those
individual contributions?
And, to continue along the lines of Mrs. Lummis, the
Ranking Member's bill included a section that establishes the
National Park Service's Visitor Service Management Program. It
would provide the National Park Service with the authority to
offer new types of concession contracts to run facilities like
hotels and restaurants. I think it sounds like an idea worth
looking into, and it is not included in the discussion draft.
Could you talk more about that, as well, building on what you
were talking about?
Mr. Nau. I can only address the issue of the endowment. If
the endowment had been formed back on the 50th anniversary, we
would probably be dealing with close to $1 billion, given the
track record of many institutions, including major and small
universities.
We are about ready to have the Baby Boomer generation
engage in long-standing estate planning. If we have a mechanism
to engage that level of giving and philanthropy, it needs to
come through an endowment. If I am going to provide that kind
of substantial gift, I am going to want to know that it is
going to perpetuate itself. Over a 20-year period, that is an 8
percent return a year, with a spending rate of probably 4\1/2\-
5, 5\1/2\ percent. If that money were here, the Park Service,
working with the Foundation, could probably have $250-$500
million a year in additional funding for programs and other
areas of addressing the visitor experience.
We have talked a lot here about the backlog. I think we
also need to focus on the visitor experience of the target
generations and demographics that are not currently visiting
the parks: Millennials, Hispanic immigrants, and urban
dwellers. That is what the Find Your Park program is all about,
and that is what it targets.
Now, I cannot speak to the concessions question, ma'am.
Mrs. Dingell. OK.
Mr. Nau. I would have to defer to John.
Mrs. Dingell. I think that these public-private
partnerships really are the wave of the future. We are not
going to have enough time, we only have a minute and 17
seconds. So, if you could continue to build on that; and, like
my colleague, Mrs. Lummis, I would like to follow up on these
after today with more questions.
Mr. Jarvis. I do think that public-private partnerships are
the key. We really need and support the private sector to
provide these kinds of services in the national parks. And the
Visitor Services Management Authority, which is in the
Administration's bill, would give us a broad range of
flexibility to try new tools that could result in significant
improvement in investment in these facilities, to upgrade them,
as well as the potential for bundling projects, commercial
facilities, together to make them more attractive to the
private sector, as well.
I think that what we are asking for is essentially a new
set of authorities to work more closely with the private
sector.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I guess I will yield back my 23
seconds.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. MacDonald, I was reading your testimony, where you
mentioned the recent community work day that attracted over 400
volunteers to help restore roads in Acadia. I think they were
cleaning out ditches and doing other activities. It reminded me
of work that volunteers in my district have done on both the
Buffalo National River and Hot Springs National Park.
What more can be done by the National Park Service to
galvanize this type of volunteerism and community engagement?
Mr. MacDonald. Thank you for the question. It has been an
important part of our organization since its founding. We were
founded by volunteers who wanted to give back more time.
I think what is most meaningful to a lot of our volunteers
is to work side by side with park staff. They take great pride
in being alongside someone with a uniform, or someone who is
working for these parks. They really want to see the parks well
taken care of, well funded.
I think that there should be greater authorities to partner
with organizations that can provide more flexibility and
nimbleness. Sometimes it is unbelievable the number of forms
you have to sign to volunteer in your park. So, partnering with
the nonprofits makes it easier for folks to give back.
But I think most of our volunteers at Acadia just want to
see the park well taken care of, well staffed, and feel good
about their investment of volunteer time.
Mr. Westerman. You mentioned that projects were undertaken
to reduce the maintenance backlog, but they also created a
``tremendous opportunity for visitor engagement and public
benefit.'' What impact do you believe the maintenance backlog
has had on the visitor experience and recreation opportunities
in Acadia National Park? I know maintenance backlogs are an
issue with all of our parks.
Mr. MacDonald. In terms of the visitor experience, I would
say the biggest impact is, as John mentioned, outdated
facilities. Our visitor center at Acadia does come from that
Mission 66 era. It is drastically undersized. It is hard to
heat, it is hard to cool. It is inadequate for the 2.5 million
visitors we get a year.
We have worked over the years to structure some of these
public-private partnerships. Through endowments formed at
Friends of Acadia, we have been able to address some of the
backlog on iconic things, like trails and carriage roads, as
you were mentioning. Some maintenance is sexy, and donors are
proud to give to it; others are not. In terms of the visitor
experience now, I would say it is the visitor center that is
the primary hole; and the Park Service just does not even have
that on the near horizon, to be able to repair that and keep it
up.
Mr. Westerman. Following up on that, what do you think
about trails maintenance and maybe vegetation management? What
would you be able to complete with new money from the
Centennial Challenge Fund?
Mr. MacDonald. Well, it would be wonderful to be able to
plan for this kind of funding. I mean, again, this year we had
to respond within a matter of a couple of weeks to the
opportunity to compete for this $10 million. We landed $165,000
in Acadia. That was very helpful. We matched it and doubled it.
That repaired less than a mile of a historic trail. It helped
us restore a handful of scenic vistas. I mean this work is
resource-intensive.
So, if this were a reliable source of funding, year in and
year out, we would be able to work with the Park Service to
program this out and plan for it, and begin to bring down that
backlog. Certainly, the Centennial Challenge Fund is not going
to solve it, but it is an important supplementary tool to help
add to philanthropy and help add to the kind of funding that I
hope would come from the construction fund.
Mr. Westerman. Director Jarvis, I was on a flight one time
and I sat by a lady from Coca-Cola that ran an active trails
grants program. I did not know about it before then. I know
there has been a question about public and private
partnerships, but what are you doing specifically with the
National Park Foundation to engage corporate partners in the
Centennial celebrations?
Mr. Jarvis. Thank you for that question. I think we are in
a totally new place than we have been, probably for decades, in
working directly with corporate sponsorships, with the National
Park Foundation, with the leadership of Mr. Nau, and Will
Shafroth, the CEO at the Foundation.
We have partnerships with Subaru, Disney, Budweiser, and
American Express. We have new partnerships on the horizon,
folks from major corporations like Red Bull and AirBNB coming
in the door now to partner with the National Park Service, to
help spread the word of Find Your Park, and support specific
projects, like volunteerism.
Mr. McClintock. Great, thank you.
Mr. Lowenthal.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair; and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. I also was very encouraged to
see this, the National Park Service Centennial bill, the draft
proposal that was put forth by Chairman Bishop, really begin to
help the NPS address the challenges of the next 100 years. I
really hope that the Majority works with the Minority on this
bill to make what is now a good bill an even better bill, as
they have begun to do already, as we have worked on other
issues.
I also want to compliment, a little bit off the topic, the
Majority for working with me and my staff on the BLM
Foundation, which has a special mission we put in to clean up
abandoned mines, as Mr. Hice has advocated for, and we are very
pleased with them picking that up and wanting to work with us
on it.
I want to continue on the discussion that has been raised
by a number of people on our side of the aisle, which really
talks about the stark differences in the funding levels. We
have this tremendous range of potential in the draft versus the
proposal that was put forth by Ranking Member Grijalva, in what
the Park Service says it needs, and the levels that are
actually provided in Chairman Bishop's bill. I know it is a
draft proposal, and we are having that discussion. For me, it
is really important to understand what that means, in terms of
the actual backlog.
I know we have touched on this, Director Jarvis, but I
would like to know if we end up with the low end, in terms of
the funding, what are you going to prioritize? What would be
included in specific projects if we had more robust funding?
And, could you explain to us a little bit about how you arrive
at those priorities?
Mr. Jarvis. The priorities are driven by life, health, and
safety, at the very top of our priority list. We are in a
triage situation, essentially, about what our priorities are
with the current level of instruction and repair/rehab funding.
We go for the facilities that are high-priority assets. Those
are the ones that are either of high historical significance,
and/or directly related to the visitor experience. Those get
the funding. Everything else goes into, essentially, almost a
benign neglect status.
Then, we go in and Band-Aid for a facility. In the roads
category, a perfect example is Memorial Bridge, right here in
Washington, DC. We are Band-Aiding the Memorial Bridge, knowing
that we will have a $250 million bill at some point to repair
the Memorial Bridge. So, that is the kind of triage that we are
going through right now.
Dr. Lowenthal. In this discussion, it is really important
for us to understand, and that is why I am glad you testified,
just exactly what are the implications.
I think all of us agree to the overall concept. Now, the
question is how do we fund it, and how to identify what is the
appropriate level. I think that is the discussion, and it is
very, very important for us to have that discussion. Thank you,
and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Great, thank you.
Mr. Hice.
Dr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate the opportunity for this hearing on the ``National
Park Service Centennial Act,'' proposed by Chairman Bishop, and
I want to thank each of our witnesses for being here.
Mr. Nau, I would like to direct my questions to you. Can
you tell me specifically what the role is of the National Park
Foundation in the Centennial?
Mr. Nau. The Foundation was enacted back in 1966, and we
function as the 501(c)(3) to raise funding. Over the first 45
years, it has been pretty much philanthropy-driven. Through
Director Jarvis' leadership, and the leadership of the Board of
the Foundation, we have been able to expand into corporate
partnerships and have increased the philanthropy. We work with
the Park Service to address programmatic needs, and begin to
deal with enhancing the visitor experience.
Corporate funding, right now, is at about $45 million in
2015 and projected into 2016 is $45 million, plus what comes in
the door in the future that did not exist just 12 months ago.
Dr. Hice. So there is a good relationship between you and
the Park Service? You are working well together?
Mr. Nau. Absolutely.
Dr. Hice. And I appreciate Mr. Westerman mentioning, and
Director Jarvis, as well, the various corporations that are
coming on board in an attempt to put together a public and
private partnership. I understand that Coca-Cola Corporation is
a major leader in that. And, of course, we are exceedingly
honored to have Coca-Cola in my home state of Georgia; their
leadership in so many ways has just been spectacular, and
donating over $1 million a year to the Foundation, as well, is
tremendous.
But I want to jump on Director Jarvis' comments, and to
you, Mr. Nau, are there incentives to attract more corporations
to come on board?
Mr. Nau. The incentives are the visitors. If you go back
and look at what I would consider to be the traditional funding
model, Federal funding, a little bit of philanthropy, what we
are all addressing here today is what is the new funding model,
going forward? The government has to be in--there has to be
some philanthropy, there needs to be increased volunteerism,
and the last one is corporate engagement. With the hundreds of
thousands and millions of visitors that flow through these
iconic parks, corporate America, particularly those that deal
with consumer goods, are logical partners. And, as we have gone
out to talk to them, they have responded tremendously.
I want to address one issue that has always come up.
Corporate America wants recognition, but they do not want to
overstate it within a park--be subtle. They do not want to be
the ones to have pushback for too much recognition within a
park. Again, I will say to Director Jarvis and the Service that
the recognition that they have authorized in the parks right
now with our sponsors helps us go out to other sponsors.
Corporate America is going to be there, now that they know the
Service would be a good partner for them.
Dr. Hice. You mentioned in your testimony that some people
are concerned with the over-commercialization within some of
the parks. Is there a way, as you just brought up, to
tastefully recognize the corporations without overstepping the
line of being overly commercialized? And, does this bill hit
the balance?
Mr. Nau. Yes. On the balance issue, the answer is yes.
Dr. Hice. OK.
Mr. Nau. The governor there is not just the Park Service,
it is the corporations. We do not want to overstate. If you go
into many of the parks today, you will see signage on Find Your
Park. Along the bottom are corporate logos, recognizing those
partners that are engaged. That is all we want. That is all the
recognition that corporations have asked for. So, there is a
really good partnership dynamic going on.
Dr. Hice. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I will yield
back with the comment that, with Coca-Cola's leadership, I
encourage everyone to go drink a Coke today.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Hice. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this important
hearing. And thanks to our witnesses for the great work that
you do for one of the great American institutions.
Mr. Jarvis, as we think about the Centennial Challenge, I
know that Congress appropriated $10 million in Fiscal Year 2015
for the Challenge. I wonder if you could tell us at what level
the private sector responded and matched that investment.
Mr. Jarvis. Way more than one-to-one. I think it turned out
to be about almost one-to-two, in terms of the private sector
match with these projects.
Mr. Huffman. All right. If we were to go big, let's say if
that amount were raised to $100 million a year, do you think
there is enough interest from the private sector to match that
level of investment by the Federal Government?
Mr. Jarvis. Absolutely. If you remember in 2008, Secretary
Kempthorne asked Congress for funding for a similar centennial
challenge, and we were able to receive pledges of over $200
million from the private sector and partners across the system
to match a Federal match.
Mr. Huffman. I would like to ask the same question to Mr.
Nau.
In your opinion, do you think there is enough private
interest in matching at the $100 million level?
Mr. Nau. Short answer, absolutely. And, it is not just from
corporations. It is going to come from individual and corporate
philanthropy. As soon as that world knows that the Federal
Government has skin in the game, it is going to open up doors,
philanthropic and corporate giving, that we have not touched
before.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Thank you.
Director Jarvis, I want to ask you about high-speed
broadband access as part of this important milestone for the
Park Service. I know that you intend to install public Wi-Fi in
visitor centers over the next year. That is a great step. Are
there other goals that the Park Service has established for
connectivity? And, I am wondering if there is a national or a
park-specific planning process underway for that.
I am also, more specifically, curious about how our parks
support the President's and Congress' vision of broadband
deployment and access. And I mean not just getting our parks
connected, I mean possibly using parks as anchors in remote
rural areas to connect entire communities, or neighboring
Federal agencies, or Federal health centers--lots of folks who,
under the current system, are sort of siloed, sometimes each of
them entering into their own contracts with telecoms for T1
lines at exorbitant rates, when right next door to them is
another Federal facility or other facility that could be part
of a regional consortium.
So, I am wondering if the Park Service is thinking
creatively about breaking down those silos. I learned in a
meeting a couple of weeks ago that there may be government
contracting rules that prohibit the Park Service from bidding
fiber contracts as part of a broader consortium, even with
other Federal agencies, which makes no sense whatsoever to me.
I am curious about your thoughts on how we can not only get
our parks connected, but really get our rural areas and other
facilities, including Federal ones, connected as part of a
cooperative effort.
Mr. Jarvis. I thank you for that question. Absolutely, we
have both a goal and a plan to go forward to get connectivity
into the primary visitor use areas of our national parks, with
the target market being the Millennials. If they do not have
connectivity, they are not going to come. I mean that is kind
of our assessment.
We view that connectivity as an enhancement to the
experience, not a substitute. So, at visitor centers, hotels,
primary visitor use areas, we hope to build this kind of
connectivity; and we are going to need to do it in partnership
with communities, with the telecom industry, to drive these in.
Often, we are at the tail end of miles of a single copper line.
Recently we did a project, worked with some of our
concessioners to look at satellite uplink in partnership with
them to provide broadband access within concession facilities,
as well.
I am unfamiliar with where there may be conflicts here, but
that is definitely something I will be glad to look into to
make sure that we can work collaboratively with the other
agencies and the private sector in some of these more remote
locations.
Mr. Huffman. Great, I would love to work with you on that.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Hardy.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
Chairman Bishop for putting this draft bill forward. I think it
helps us usher in the next century of national parks.
My district is home to some of the most distinctive units
of the National Park System, including the Great Basin National
Park, Death Valley National Park, as well as Lake Mead National
Recreation Area, and the Tule Springs Fossil Beds National
Monument. Together, those all generated about 5 million
tourists last year.
First, a quick question that I came up with after listening
for a minute, 5 million folks go to those parks, when Las Vegas
itself had over 41 million visitors last year. We have dozens
of other parks within a 100-mile radius of the Las Vegas area.
Mr. Nau, I would ask you, are 5 million folks a reasonable
amount of people that should be using the parks, when you have
41 million visitors that close? You have Zion's National Park,
the Grand Canyon National Park, and Bryce Canyon National Park,
along with others. Is there an avenue there that we can
continue to work on this?
Mr. Nau. Well, the numbers you are telling me, we have
about a 12 percent penetration of visitors. I do not know what
the specific standard ought to be. But the Find Your Park
program is targeting the numbers that you just laid out. We
want to be able to communicate with people and invite them to
go to the parks.
Now, in this particular case, partnering with the hotel/
motel association, the casino association in Vegas, and have
them become that local partner to help communicate Find Your
Park and address the idea of people going out to the dam, to
the parks, on day trips, that is what the next generation of
visitors are going to experience. These 3- and 4-hour day trips
are what is going to drive Director Jarvis' numbers up.
So, the Foundation could go to Las Vegas, work with the
hotel/motel association, and invite them to become a local
partner. That is the way you are going to communicate with
those visitors.
Mr. Hardy. Yes. The Las Vegas Valley, in the past, it used
to be about $.70 on every dollar was for gaming. Las Vegas has
had to completely reinvent itself over the last 15 years. It is
now less than $.40 on the dollar for gaming; they are trying to
bring people for shows and other activities. So, I think there
is a real opportunity here, especially with as many parks as we
have within that area.
Mr. Nau. Afterwards could I get the name of that convention
and visitor's director? And we will approach them.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you. In my district, the Great Basin
National Park has made efforts to reach out and expose new
generations of Nevadans to our national treasures by bringing
children from Title I schools from Clark County into the park
and spending several days of experiencing the vast expanses of
these one-of-a-kind landscapes. These students participate in
the junior ranger program, and film short videos to be included
in the capsule commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Great
Basin National Park and the Park Service for their Centennial.
Great Basin is also partnering with Death Valley and the
Joshua Tree National Park to feature videos amongst our
Nation's darkest areas, and you can see the Milky Way and other
things out in that area.
With that being said, there is this collaboration with the
fourth grade students and trying to give them free access.
There are over 25,000 fourth graders in the Las Vegas Valley,
and the Las Vegas Review Journal just reported only a couple
hundred people have signed up for that program in the first
quarter. Could you tell me, Director Jarvis, how this program
is working over the rest of the country?
Mr. Jarvis. It is the first year of the program. I do not
have the hard statistics off the top of my head now. At one
point, we felt that we had about 900,000 downloads. There are
roughly 4 million fourth graders in the Nation today. Our goal
is to reach them all with the Every Kid in a Park voucher,
which gives them free access to all parks and public lands for
them and their family.
So, if you think of them as sort of a target market, we
want to connect these kids to the outdoors through this pass.
The National Park Foundation is key to this, in that they are
raising the funding for transportation grants to the schools,
so the kids can have a bus driver, a docent, and a substitute
teacher to get out there, as well. It is a partnership program,
and I think we are just sort of beginning to penetrate the
broader school community around this.
We are not going to get them all this year, but our goal is
to do this many years in a row.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
Mr. Hardy. I know my time is up, but just one comment.
These urban areas, and you cannot get more urban than Las
Vegas, are the diverse areas that we need to bring people back
to the parks. This is an important step that we have to take to
get those young people out there. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you all very
much for being with us today.
Director Jarvis, we have heard a lot this year on this
committee about the $11 billion infrastructure backlog for the
National Park Service. It has come up again and again,
especially in light of the context of, do we spend more money
for land acquisition when we have this $11 billion backlog?
And, when you drill down, we find that roughly half of it
is related to highways and other specific transportation
infrastructure. The good news is that it looks like we are
going to have a 5-year highway bill before we leave, the
longest since 2005, with new funds. How much will this new
highway bill affect your transportation backlog?
Mr. Jarvis. The transportation bill, as I understand it,
that came out of conference has a National Park Service
allocation of $268 million for Fiscal Year 2016. That is going
to grow to $300 million in Fiscal Year 2020, which is a little
bit more than we sort of currently have in our transportation
program.
The good news, though, is it did create a major
infrastructure competitive program of which the National Park
Service will be able to compete for large infrastructure
projects. The Memorial Bridge is an example of a project that
could cost $250 million. That would take our entire annual
allocation for one project.
So, this is a good thing. We could certainly use more, but
we feel wonderfully happy that the Congress has moved on a
transportation bill, and we can plan out for 5 years on our
road projects.
Mr. Beyer. Since you brought it up, Mr. Director, Arlington
Memorial Bridge has two of the six lanes closed right now, the
number-one access into Washington, DC. How are we making
progress on those specific two-lane closures?
Mr. Jarvis. We have a project underway right now. It is a
temporary fix. I commute across that bridge, too, so I know the
backup of the traffic there every day. And I cannot give you a
timeline; I will be glad to get back to you on when we expect
to have those two lanes back open. But keep in mind this is
only a temporary fix to the bridge.
Mr. Beyer. Great. Thank you very much. This bill increases
the age applicable for the Public Land Corps from 25 to 30. Can
you explain why that is? And should we have an exception for
the under-30-year-old veterans coming back?
Mr. Jarvis. There are two aspects to the Public Land Corps:
there is the age increase, and also the longer timeline. So, it
goes from 120 days to 2 years that would make them
noncompetitively eligible for Federal jobs.
A significant number of veterans are also in this program,
and we have a number of initiatives that we work with Defense,
Wounded Warriors, and others, to be able to reach vets as
employees of the National Park Service, as well. So, they would
be eligible under this.
The key is to give them a little bit longer time to achieve
a Federal job, and we love hiring out of this program. The
combination of increasing the age and going from 120 days to 2
years will allow us to really tap veterans, and the next
generation, as new employees in the Service.
Mr. Beyer. I agree, thank you. One last question--in
looking at the differences between Ranking Member Grijalva's
bill and our Chairman's bill, one of the differences is in
Title I, where the Grijalva bill talked about the Centennial
Declaration giving the Park Service responsibility not just for
the system, but for financial and technical assistance to
states, communities, and individuals to protect our national
heritage.
Do you see that as an important part of the mission, going
forward, or is it OK to omit that?
Mr. Jarvis. I think it is a really important component.
Over the 100-year life of the National Park Service, Congress
has given the Park Service a variety of new responsibilities
that really have nothing to do with the 409 units of the
National Park System.
For instance, we manage the National Historic Landmarks
Program, and the National Register of Historic Places Program.
We do not manage those facilities, we do not provide them any
funding, but we do the recognition. By recognizing that they
are also part of the American story, this is what this
Centennial Declaration does. It says all the things that you do
combine to help America celebrate who we are, as a Nation.
Mr. Beyer. Great. Thank you, Director Jarvis.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. LaHood.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I thank the
witnesses for being here.
Director Jarvis, I have three sons that are 13, 11, and 9.
We have been to Disney World and done that experience in the
last 5 years, enjoyed that, and kind of saw how that process
worked. But we have also done a number of trips to national
parks. We have been to the north rim of the Grand Canyon and
did a backpacking trip there, we did a fishing trip at Isle
Royale, and we have also been to the Alaska Basin in the Teton
National Park.
In comparing those experiences over the last 5 or 6 years
with my sons, and looking at the technology and the apps that
were used at Disney World, that technology increased the
experience and the efficiency of that visit in everything from
entering the park, tracking your location, charging food and
water, and getting information in an effective and efficient
way.
Looking at the statistics--Walt Disney World, in 1987, had
26 million visitors; this year they are going to have 50.1
million. They have doubled in size. I think there is a direct
correlation between technology and apps and the efficiency of
information. I compare that to our national parks and my own
experience there, and how we can improve that.
I know you talked about connectivity, and I think that is
part of it. But technology has to be a part of that, whether
that is waiting in line for your entrance fee, getting
supplies, campsite rentals, and lots of other issues that you
can use to make that experience better with technology.
I know you have talked a little bit about that, but what
specifically can we do to improve that? Because I think that
issue has to be addressed if we want to improve our visitation.
Mr. Jarvis. I could not agree more. And I think your kids
are a perfect example of this new generation that expects to be
able to have that kind of access, to pay with their phones, to
go a little deeper in.
The Park Service has a lot of content. We have a lot of
stuff. We have a lot of stories. We have fantastic experiences.
And probably, for our first 100 years, we have provided that as
an authentic kind of experience. I think, with this next
generation, we have to provide a technological aspect to that,
as well. But to be very blunt about it, we are in a triage
situation, as we have indicated here, from an operational
budget standpoint and from an infrastructure standpoint. These
kinds of things take money to invest in.
Now, we do have, in some cases, partnerships with the
private sector, particularly corporate, who are interested in
developing apps for us. One of them most recently was American
Express, who is developing an app about volunteerism, where an
individual can download the app and then basically participate
as a volunteer, and then become incentivized, shall we say, to
volunteer in their own services, as well.
What we have been trying to do is to build the content, and
then ask the private sector to step up in developing the
software, the applications, the user interfaces with our
content, because, frankly, it is not our expertise to do that.
Mr. LaHood. Is there currently an application process out
there? Are you entertaining from different technology companies
somebody that can take over this process and get it going?
Mr. Jarvis. It is more on the individual, park by park,
basis. For instance, here on the National Mall there was
private sector development of Mall applications for tourism.
There were applications during the civil rights marches. It is
not centralized.
Mr. LaHood. Is it your thought that it is more efficient to
do it that way, with each individual park doing it? Or is it
better to do it in a more centralized approach throughout the
Park Service?
Mr. Jarvis. I have never found anything centralized back
here to be very efficient, to be blunt about it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LaHood. I guess what I am saying is if you gave it to a
private company to outsource that and run that for the entire
Park Service, they could give you a good idea on that. Correct?
Mr. Jarvis. We have been, through the National Park
Foundation, talking to Google, Facebook, and some of the other
big social media organizations around these kinds of ideas.
But, so far, we have not found sort of the right fit for this,
Service-wide.
Mr. LaHood. Last question, just switching subjects on the
transportation bill. In terms of money, if and when this bill
passes and gets signed by the President, has that been
prioritized within the Park Service on where that is going to
be spent?
Mr. Jarvis. Yes, sir, we----
Mr. McClintock. That is going to need to be a yes-or-no
answer.
Mr. Jarvis. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
Mrs. Capps.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. Such a good topic. And thank you to each of our
witnesses for your testimony.
My district, in the central coast of California, is home to
some very beautiful landscapes. We all claim the fame of our
areas that we represent. These landscapes that I represent
stretch from the coastal mountains and the Carrizo Plain
National Monument onshore to some very spectacular beaches
along the coast.
We have the Channel Islands as the jewel, and Channel
Islands National Park, which has been designated now for 35
years as a national park. It continues to attract visitors from
all around the world. It is known as the Galapagos Islands of
North America. It has preserved both the unique natural and
cultural resources found within its borders, and ensured access
for over 11 million visitors since its establishment. Each
year, these visitors contribute tens of millions of dollars to
our local economy, and support hundreds of jobs.
And, while visitors come to the Channel Islands for all
sorts of reasons, there is a dedicated group that chooses to
give back to the islands by volunteering. These volunteers
staff the visitor center, provide interpretation in the park,
and conduct trail maintenance and preservation activities. I
want to talk with a couple of you about our volunteers.
I know my experience in my district is not unique. National
parks across the country are so invaluable to their local
communities, and dedicated volunteers provide similar services
that I have described in probably each of our national parks.
Director Jarvis, can you explain the importance of
volunteers to the National Park Service? About how many did you
have in 2015, if you have an idea? And why does the
authorization cap of $3.5 million need to be removed?
Mr. Jarvis. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question. We
could not provide the services and the quality of work to the
American public through our national parks without our
volunteers. It would absolutely be impossible. We have an
extraordinary army of volunteers out there. This year we have
set a new record. We had 440,000 volunteers.
Mrs. Capps. Wow.
Mr. Jarvis. We had set the goal to raise it significantly
from what the previous year was, at 300,000. So we have gone
140,000 over our 300,000.
In the discussion draft, and in the Administration's bill,
we are requesting the cap, which is currently under the
appropriations bill, of $5 million. Under authorization, it is
$3.5 million, but it was increased in the appropriations bill
to $5 million. We would like to have that cap removed, because
that puts a ceiling on the amount of dollars that we can spend
on supporting our volunteers.
The volunteers, depending on where you work, roughly cost
the Park Service about $10 to $20 a piece to really support.
They are not free, but they are quite inexpensive to support.
And, the return we get is in the hundreds and hundreds of
millions of dollars of support, of direct work in our parks.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you very much.
Mr. MacDonald, you are the Executive Director of Friends of
Acadia, a specific national park on the East Coast, or in
Maine. I would imagine you know a thing or two about the
importance of volunteers in your park. How do they assist in
Acadia National Park?
Mr. MacDonald. Thank you for recognizing this important
role that they play. They assist in a number of ways. We have a
program that is fairly unique; we call it our Drop-In Program.
It is on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. If you are
visiting Acadia with your family, you can drop in to volunteer.
A lot of them are one-time volunteers, but that is over 3,000
hours a year, from the drop-ins.
We also have a dedicated corps of folks that this is just
what they do. This is their job, almost. It is where they live,
and it is their love. After all, the parks belong to them. They
do not belong to the Service, the Service is managing them. The
volunteers represent that ethic of ownership, investment, and
pride in the parks. It is how we were founded. It is still a
very important program. Friends of Acadia provides some funding
to match what the Park Service can do with a volunteer
coordinator. So, it is another version of a public-private
partnership up in Acadia.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. Just a real brief point, because my
colleague asked about the Public Lands Corps Act, and he
mentioned veterans and the role that they play.
Director Jarvis, can you say just a word about its ability
to diversify your future work force?
Mr. Jarvis. Absolutely.
Mr. McClintock. The operative term being ``a word.''
Mrs. Capps. A word.
Mr. Jarvis. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Jarvis. We are growing a new generation of supporters
that represent the diversity of the Nation.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
Chairman Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Nau, I appreciate your input and being
here. You have mentioned in your testimony the support of the
discussion draft that would establish overnight fees at lodging
within the park boundaries.
In your mind, does that level the playing field between
lodgings inside and outside, or does it skew it?
Mr. Nau. I do not know if it would ``level the field'' on
individual parks, but it is going to get it a lot closer.
Whether it is the town, the county, or the state, they all have
overnight fees called hot taxes.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Mr. Nau. And I believe, from a businessman's perspective,
those private sector investments are at a disadvantage,
compared to the concessionaires that are not required to charge
any kind of fee. They are exempted.
Mr. Bishop. So, the Foundation would not see this as
punitive to the lodging concessionaires?
Mr. Nau. Not at all. No, sir. I do not believe the
businesses and communities would, either.
Mr. Bishop. Let me hit you up on the Second Century
Endowment concept. Is this important, that it is seeded with
new fees? I mean why shouldn't we just fund it with
philanthropic donations?
Mr. Nau. The donor community, in this case, people that I
interact with and my own family, when we are going to invest
philanthropically, I want to know that the owner or the manager
has skin in the game. It is critical, I believe, to the donor
community, as they estate plan over the next 20 years, that
there be skin in the game from the Federal Government. This is
one way to get it done.
Mr. Bishop. That also hits up to the point of the idea that
the Board of Directors of the Foundation would be in charge of
investments with these funds. As the Board is presently
constituted, is it chosen for its financial management
expertise? And how do you ensure that these funds are going to
be managed properly on behalf of the American people, going
forward?
Mr. Nau. Great question. I have had the honor of serving on
boards, in universities and the private sector. And those that
have endowments do, in fact, have an investment committee, and
you look to recruit people with that expertise. Since we have
not had it yet, there has not been a focus on recruitment of
investment managers.
The irony of it is that, of the board right now, we have
three of them. So, we could get into investment oversight. But,
I would also say that no foundation board is going to manage
its own investments. You are going to go out and hire an
investment manager, and your board members, or the oversight
committee, is going to work with that investment manager.
Mr. Bishop. So, there would need to be changes to the
charter of the Foundation. And, can only Congress do that?
Mr. Nau. Mr. Chairman, I do not know that it would require
a change. A good board would see to it, itself. I do not know
of any board on which I have been involved where it is
required. I mean it is just good management, that you would
have an investment oversight committee.
Mr. Bishop. Can I just ask you--for battlefields, in which
you have a passion and a concern, what apps have you been using
on the battlefield?
Mr. Nau. Well, I really appreciate the issue. I believe the
private sector, over development, is important. But right now
is a bridge. 501(c)(3)'s can do it. I do not know if David's
group has done one in Acadia, but the Civil War Trust has done
one for almost all of the Civil War battlefields for the
National Park Service. Local Friends groups have the capacity
and the knowledge to create them. So, that is an easy way to
bridge it.
Mr. Bishop. I appreciate that. As you can see, I am not a
Millennial, and I really don't care.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. I just don't give a damn. But I am happy that
somebody is working on that.
Let me say two last things. Director Jarvis, the
Subcommittee Chair mentioned the issue of bottled water. Please
do not overlook that. The ability of banning bottled water by
allowing Gatorade and Coke cans and all the other stuff in
there, it does not make a whole lot of sense, and it does not
deem well for what we are looking at in the future. That is an
issue you have to look at. I am sorry, this is silly.
Second, for the future, as we go forward with this, we are
looking for ideas for this particular bill. Please do not give
me any ideas that would require an offset, because I cannot
find them. But any other ideas would be extremely helpful, and
I would appreciate that.
I yield back; and I apologize, I am going to have to leave
right now.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, and I appreciate the witnesses
being here, all of you, and your testimony.
Director Jarvis, earlier, to a question on this year's
appropriations in the transportation bill, I understood you to
say that the amount in the transportation bill is more than we
``sort of currently have.'' I was wondering what you meant by
``sort of currently have.''
Mr. Jarvis. It is basically about $15 million more
annually, if I remember correctly, than we currently get out of
the transportation program.
Mr. Gohmert. Than you currently get?
Mr. Jarvis. Yes.
Mr. Gohmert. OK, you just threw me with ``sort of have.''
Mr. Jarvis. Yes, but it is not a whole lot.
Mr. Gohmert. I was not sure what that meant. OK. Do you
know yet how much was spent in September and October of 2013 in
renting or purchasing barricades and closing down all the
facilities that the Park Service closed down?
Mr. Jarvis. No, sir, I do not know that number.
Mr. Gohmert. Mr. Nau, it is good to have you back again. I
was curious, with your experience on the Park Board, are a
board or board members allowed to reach out for corporate
sponsors, or is that something that is exclusively left to the
Park Service itself? How does that reach-out occur?
Mr. Nau. Actually, it is the contrary. It is not the Park
Service, it is the Foundation.
Mr. Gohmert. The Foundation.
Mr. Nau. Both the staff and individual board members reach
out. For example, I reached out to Anheuser-Busch and to a
couple of the others with whom we are still negotiating. So, it
is going to be the private sector, through the Foundation
Board, working with the Service. But the initial contact, in
most cases, is coming from the Foundation.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, I enjoy good apps. I am wondering if
there is room for sponsors that would provide those apps. Is
the Park Service director equipped adequately to provide those
kind of apps, or is it just the Foundation that will be doing
that?
Mr. Nau. I would look at it near term, and then long term.
Near term, Friends groups and others like the Civil War Trust
can create a fundamental, basic app to help the visitor
understand what they are experiencing. Long term, I believe it
will require the Service and the Foundation to identify the
large private sector people that are going to be able to come
in, improve the connection, the connectivity, and, at the same
time, provide the type of apps that will appeal to these
Millennials. But right now, it is Friends groups and others
that are creating these apps.
Mr. Gohmert. OK. Well, again, thank you for being here.
Thanks for the work you do.
I was curious, Mr. MacDonald, are there apps that have been
provided for your park?
Mr. MacDonald. Yes, there are a couple that have come out
of the private sector. Friends of Acadia is a resource and a
partner for those private companies.
Mr. Gohmert. When you say partner, how are they partnered?
Mr. MacDonald. Well, they look to us for some of the
content. They donate some of the proceeds back to the park. So,
it is housed in the private sector, but very much a partnership
with the Park Service and the Friends group.
Mr. Gohmert. So are those apps purchased?
Mr. MacDonald. No, they are free.
Mr. Gohmert. They are free. So then the proceeds come from
advertising?
Mr. MacDonald. Correct.
Mr. Gohmert. OK, all right. Well, thank you all very much.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. We are going to do one quick
bonus round of questions, and I want to start with Director
Jarvis.
Regarding the Centennial Challenge, could you give us some
examples of projects that might be funded by that program?
Mr. Jarvis. What we have been trying to do with the
Centennial Challenge Fund is to spread it broadly across the
system. It can be a range from very small projects in the
$10,000, $5,000 range, to multi-million-dollar projects.
Just from a process standpoint, we do a call out to the
field. We put priorities on the maintenance backlog and on
projects that help reduce the backlog, particularly projects
that relate to connecting the next generation involving
volunteers and youth. So, we sort of set a screen on that.
Then, we select the partners that we know can produce the match
on this, as well.
Mr. McClintock. Would these funds be used for land
acquisition?
Mr. Jarvis. No, not for land acquisition.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Nau, could you tell us about why there
is a 5 percent cap on the endowment spending rate?
Mr. Nau. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. McClintock. The legislation includes a 5 percent cap
for spending of the endowment. The Park Service originally
asked for 50 percent. Why such a low cap?
Mr. Nau. Well, the standard for endowment management is,
over a 20-year period, there is an 8 percent return on
traditionally-managed funds. The idea of putting a 5 percent
cap is that it is a range that goes from about 4\1/2\ to 5\1/
2\. In emergency years, you might go in and pull another
percent out. But a 5 percent cap is what the industry standard
would be. You do not spend up against the 8 percent, 20-year
level.
Mr. McClintock. And, basically, that prevents the endowment
from becoming exhausted, correct?
Mr. Nau. That is correct.
Mr. McClintock. OK. And that is standard for endowments of
this type?
Mr. Nau. That is correct. By the way, you mentioned that 50
percent. I have never seen an endowment level spending of 50
percent. It is not an endowment any more.
Mr. McClintock. Yes. Director Jarvis, looking at the NPS
budget, again, it is up 16 percent over the past decade in
nominal dollars after the prior decade, where it was up 65
percent. Inflation-adjusted, it is about flat even for the past
decade, but there is a huge bulge in 2009 and 2010--up $900
million in a single year, about a 35 percent increase.
The graph that the Ranking Member showed did not have that
bulge reflected in the construction fund, so that raised a
question. Where did that money go?
Mr. Jarvis. I cannot answer that off the top of my head.
But I would be glad to come up and show you all the numbers
later.
Mr. McClintock. That is a lot of money that was put into
the Park budget in a single year. When it is not reflected in
the construction numbers that the Ranking Member offered, that
becomes a big problem for me. I would really like to know where
that money went.
Mr. Jarvis. We would be glad to come up and show you those
figures.
Mr. McClintock. Great, thank you.
Mr. Nau, you talked about the need to engage the urban
dwellers, Hispanics, and Millennials that have historically low
park visitation rates. How do we do that? You have talked
about, obviously, the connectivity for Millennials. How else do
we get them into the parks?
Mr. Nau. The Find Your Park program, Mr. Chairman, is
really a marketing effort. We have reached out to national
media partners, both social and traditional. We have already
begun a media program. We have partnered with the corporations
that are paying fees. They are, in fact, converting a lot of
their media.
If I were to name the stars that have lined up to help us,
I don't think anybody in this room would recognize their names,
because I sure did not. But they have really stepped up, and we
have begun to get social media contacts, Mr. Chairman, the
likes of which I wish I could get in my company's business. So
it is working. And I believe, coming in the centennial year, we
will begin to be able to clearly measure the impact,
particularly on Millennials.
Mr. McClintock. Well, I have no idea what social media
means, but I am told it is quite significant.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. One final question. Could we put up the
overnight stays chart?
[Chart]
Mr. McClintock. Director Jarvis, that is the number of
overnight stays at the national parks since 1979. Obviously, a
significant decline from highs. In 9 seconds or less, what is
driving that, and what are we going to do about it?
Mr. Jarvis. I think that my chart, which I have here and
would be glad to share with you, is actually showing a turn.
You can sort of see it there, in 2013 to 2014. But we are
seeing a significant uptick in visitation, overnight stays,
campground uses, starting in 2014 and beyond. And that, I
think, is a direct result of the Find Your Park campaign and
using social media to attract a new audience.
But, your point is well taken. For the last decade, it has
been flat.
Mr. McClintock. Well, we will leave it at my point was well
taken.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Jarvis. But we are changing that.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
complicated conversation we have had today, as we have explored
the opportunities that come through philanthropy and private
contributions, and the ways in which the draft legislation
seeks to take advantage of that.
Looking at the way in which the Centennial Challenge has
been structured in the draft legislation, it really will be
funded by whatever dollars are raised by the increase in the
senior fee. And that, in and of itself, there are questions
around. Presuming that it goes forward as it is currently
drafted, that could roughly generate about $35 million, which
would then have to be met, dollar for dollar, by private
contributions.
My question really goes, though, more to the proposed
legislation from Mr. Grijalva, which would put in place $100
million for 3 years. It is a set amount for 3 years, in each
year. So, it is $100 million in each year. It is a set amount,
which seems to be to maximize the opportunity to raise private
dollars. You know that you have this set-aside from the Federal
Government, and now it tasks you, the Park Service, to go out
and raise the private match.
My thoughts from you, Mr. Nau, for somebody who has been in
the business of private fundraising, are we missing an
opportunity by not setting aside a set amount, given what you
have been saying about those of us, the Baby Boomers, who are
looking at estate planning, your own knowledge of how private
individuals give, or even the corporate world, as it makes
decisions?
Are we missing an opportunity by not setting aside a set
amount, and taking advantage of the Centennial to make it
larger?
Mr. Nau. Obviously, if you put more money into any kind of
a program, the ROI is going to increase, particularly for the
local communities that are at the parks.
The opportunity presented by the Centennial, ma'am, would
allow us to craft that private sector engagement in the
Centennial Challenge. That is the way that will help us, at the
Foundation and the local Friends groups, to go out and begin to
generate the kind of matches that we need to.
The way it is crafted, the dollar level is up to you all.
But the way it is crafted, we need to have that kind of
challenge grant. David said that in his opening comments. That
will help generate significant private sector and corporate
money.
Ms. Tsongas. I appreciate Chairman Bishop's concern with
finding offsets. But, given the unique times we are in, and
that we are celebrating 100 years, it is a missed opportunity
to not maximize for private investment.
But we also know that private investment cannot take the
place of the Federal responsibility, and that we cannot use
private fundraising to somehow relieve our obligation to really
focus on what the Federal Government should be doing.
Director Jarvis, there has been a 7 percent influx in
visitors to the national parks in 2014. I would expect that
visitation will continue to increase as the Centennial nears. I
have seen the Every Kid in a Park program. I have seen how
wonderful it is for those fourth graders and their families, as
they are presented with this visitors pass, the excitement that
they have that their families will be able to take advantage of
this.
But if that is the case, and we do confront robust
increases in visitation, do you believe the parks are prepared
to receive these increased numbers of visitors, given the cuts
in the National Park Service budget over the last several
years? And how does this draft bill, and the bill introduced by
Ranking Member Grijalva, help address the needs of the park?
Mr. Jarvis. I think we are on pace to set a record, in
terms of visitation for this year. I think it will be even
larger next year, with all of the attention that is being
brought to the National Park System.
It is stressing out the national parks and the staffs. I
have been out in the field throughout this year, and talking to
park superintendents and rangers on the ground. We are seeing a
large influx of new international visitors, particularly from
China and that part of the world. We are seeing more incidents
that we have to respond to: search and rescue, emergency
medical, those kinds of things.
The Fiscal Year 2016 budget requested operational support,
as well as these infrastructure investments. We would hope that
Congress would provide both, so that we can be prepared to
receive the number of visitors we expect in 2016.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. My time is up. Thank you for being
here.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Before I ask Director Jarvis some questions, I
do want to thank you, Mr. Nau, for your work on the Foundation
Board, and your long-standing commitment to our national parks.
It is exemplary. I hope there are many more clones of your work
in the future.
Director Jarvis, I have a question about what appears to be
a difference between the Bishop discussion draft and the
Grijalva bill related to the Visitor Service Management
Authority. Is this authority meant to work alongside the 1998
concessions law, or is it meant to replace it?
Mr. Jarvis. It is to work alongside the 1998 concessions
law.
Mrs. Lummis. OK. I am curious about how they would
interact. In fact, wouldn't it be easier to just revisit the
1998 law, instead of creating a new authority? Why not
integrate the two, instead of creating a parallel universe
here?
Mr. Jarvis. I think what we ultimately would like to do is
to work with you to amend the 1998 law. But I do not think we
are ready. We want to try some new models that are more
consistent with the private sector models, particularly lodging
and food service, and then bring to you the results of that so
that we can amend the 1998 law in a way that would both provide
an opportunity for the private sector to invest, which would
allow the Service to upgrade its facilities, and provide the
kind of experience that the public expects in our second
century. But I, frankly, do not think we are ready to make
those tweaks yet.
Mrs. Lummis. You see the need for a different model.
Correct?
Mr. Jarvis. I see the need for an adjustment to the
existing model.
Mrs. Lummis. OK.
Mr. Jarvis. Very much so.
Mrs. Lummis. OK. What would that adjustment be?
Mr. Jarvis. So, for instance, let's just take the
leaseholder surrender interest component that is in the current
1998 law. That creates, essentially, upside-down contracts. It
creates a contract where a new competitive bid coming in would
have to put up a significant amount of capital, in some cases
over $100 million, in order to be the new concessioner. Even
though the goal of the 1998 law was to create competition, the
leaseholder surrender interest actually creates a
noncompetitive environment.
We need a new model to allow, obviously, the private sector
to get a return on their investment. But this model, that was
created in 1998, really is problematic for us in the long term,
and it has resulted in a really small group of concessioners
out there that understand this enough to compete in that
environment.
It is a one-size-fits-all law. We are using the same set of
parameters without any negotiation for the Grand Canyon and a
very small lodge in Glacier Bay, or a marina in Lake Mead. We
need a broader range of tools to be able to provide these kinds
of services, work with the private sector, but also be able to
upgrade them to meet current standards. The current law does
not do that.
Mrs. Lummis. OK, thanks. That helped me understand where
you are heading with this.
I am going to switch to the senior pass. The price of a
lifetime senior pass was established at $10 in 1994. Currently,
you support, as I understand it, increasing the price of the
pass to match the current annual parks pass. Can you explain
why you support that increase?
Mr. Jarvis. Well, I have to say, and I am a current holder
of the $10 senior lifetime pass. It is about the price of a cup
of coffee and a muffin at Starbucks.
Mrs. Lummis. Right, yes.
Mr. Jarvis. I have yet to meet anyone that felt that that
was an appropriate cost for a lifetime pass, including many,
many, many seniors. We still think that seniors should get a
lifetime pass. By pegging it to the current America the
Beautiful Pass, which is, frankly, a deal itself at $80, we
think we will not only generate a new source of revenue for us
to reinvest in the national parks, but also make it available
to a generation that can afford an $80 pass one time.
Mrs. Lummis. Yes.
Mr. Jarvis. And I have talked to various senior groups,
including AARP, and they are supportive of this concept.
Mr. McClintock. Great.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Hardy.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you. Mr. Jarvis, as you know, in October,
Scotty's Castle in Death Valley had a flash flood that
basically has put the project in jeopardy of staying closed
until it gets repaired. It generates about $550,000 a year and
close to 120,000 people visit. This will cause $50 million in
damage over the whole entire park.
Can the Centennial Challenge endowment funds be used on
those types of projects?
Mr. Jarvis. First of all, let me just say, yes, it was
extraordinary damage. And, by the way, the state of Nevada was
an extraordinarily supportive partner there, in responding to
that.
The transportation funds that are in the transportation
bill would definitely be used. We have, within the Park Service
transportation program, as well as our line item, what we call
emergency repair funds. So, they would be the initial funds
that would go to this.
In terms of specific things like Scotty's Castle and the
collection, those are absolutely appropriate investments from
the Centennial Fund that are in this bill.
Mr. Hardy. OK, I am going to ask a little more difficult
and challenging question of you. I had the experience of being
a Director of Public Works for about 7 years for a city. I also
had the experience of being a City Councilman for two terms.
Through that process, whenever we created a park, opened a
recreation center, or did anything along those lines of trying
to create that better environment and better opportunity, I
made sure, or my other adjoining councilmen always made sure
that we had the funds. Are we able to finance that, and
maintain that at its highest standard, through future budgets?
Tell me if you go through the same analysis at this Federal
level when you do projects. How do you maintain things if you
use capital dollars to grow the project? It appears to me there
is a challenge of not looking down the road to the future to
see how we can take care of it on the existing dollars we have.
You just cannot keep going back to the taxpayer to continue to
increase taxes to pay for things. Is that happening at this
Federal level?
Mr. Jarvis. Well, analogous to your experience with parks
or facilities that were developed, you would have to go to the
City Council to receive some support to do that and also use
some user fees. That is exactly the situation we are in, as
well. We are using our user fees to support that as much as we
possibly can. At the same time, we need Federal support from
the taxpayer, from the Appropriations Committee, in order to
support these facilities.
We are not building any new visitor centers. We are in a
triage situation of basically not building new facilities
across the system, unless somebody else is paying for it,
because we just do not have the resources to do that.
Mr. Hardy. There seems to be a trend over the last 30
years, through the Antiquities Act, that national monuments
continue to grow and continue to be basically dumped on the
Park Service without the funding coming forward. Has that been
part of the challenge? Maybe some of these national monuments
that we continue to create may not be able to pay for
themselves?
Mr. Jarvis. Well, I will say that every year there are
proposals for new parks, both before the Congress and before
the Administration. I would say the Park Service attempts to
oppose a significant number of those because we cannot take
care of them. When they are presented to us, we really work
hard to minimize our responsibilities, make our footprint as
small as possible, take on no new facilities, and see if there
is a partner that can step up.
Mr. Hardy. I guess what I am leading to is could that be
part of the cause of the backlog?
Mr. Jarvis. It adds to the backlog, but the backlog
principally is our older infrastructure that was built in the
1960s and 1970s.
Mr. Hardy. Because at the Federal level, in my opinion, we
do not look forward to see what it is going to cost to take
care of things and budget for the maintenance after you do a
capital project.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you. I want to thank all of
our witnesses for their testimony today. As the Chairman said,
this is labeled a draft for a reason; it is a work in progress.
Now is the time for anyone with ideas on bolstering the parks
in the centennial year to come forward with them. I appreciate
all of the suggestions that you have offered today.
We may have additional questions. We will keep the record
open for 10 days to receive answers to those questions.
With that, if there is no further business before the
subcommittee, the subcommittee will stand adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Prepared Statement of Derrick A. Crandall, Counselor, National Park
Hospitality Association, Washington, DC

Mr. Chairman and Members, the National Park Hospitality Association
(NPHA) offers this testimony regarding the discussion draft of the
``National Park Service Centennial Act.'' NPHA is both enthusiastic
about and actively engaged in activities associated with the Centennial
of the National Park Service. The role of this agency in protecting and
supporting the enjoyment of the special legacy of America's more than
400 park units is important and appreciated by the public.

We applaud and share the interest of the Congress in using the
Centennial as a time to assess and improve the tools available to
operate our park units. We are especially proud of the role we played,
in concert with the Bipartisan Policy Center and the National Parks
Conservation Association, in 2013 at a Bridgebuilder session examining
Sustainable Supplementary Funding for America's National Parks. We
offered 16 white papers for congressional and agency consideration,
from a new Penny for Parks increase in Federal motorfuel taxes to
provide better public access to the Great Outdoors to changes which
would allow historic tax credits for investments in qualifying sites in
parks.

Concessioners have served park visitors since the 1870s and today
serve some 100 million park visitors annually in approximately 120 park
units. NPHA members have a combined workforce of nearly 25,000 persons,
mostly front-line, visitor contact jobs, and provide in excess of $1
billion in goods and services to visitors annually. Concessioner
franchise payments to NPS are more than $100 million annually.
Concessioner marketing and promotion efforts total more than $20
million annually, and are coordinated with marketing and promotion
efforts of states and gateway communities that equal that amount.
Concessioners are leading efforts to promote the National Park System
to all Americans. Visitation to parks has been flat over the past three
decades, and has actually declined if you discount new units added to
the system. Most importantly, concessioners are committed to meeting
America's needs--needs for healthier lifestyles, for better and
lifelong educational opportunities, for strong local and regional
economies that can sustain and protect our parks and for connecting all
Americans across differences in regions, ages, income and ethnicity.

We applaud efforts to enact meaningful NPS Centennial legislation.
The discussion draft provides the means to invite and challenge
individual and organizational donors--by leveraging the impact of their
contributions. This is a proven strategy for parks and philanthropy in
general. Several of our members were involved in an initial and
successful Centennial Challenge effort mounted under then-Interior
Secretary Dirk Kempthorne.

We further support the concept of an endowment for our parks,
although we believe that the mammoth backlog in deferred maintenance is
of such urgency that we cannot support diversion of fees and other
current funding streams away from critical current operational needs.
Based upon our knowledge about visitation to America's national
parks, we offer the following specific suggestions:

1.  We strongly support the purpose statement of the Discussion
Draft:

To prepare the National Park Service for its Centennial in 2016
and for a second century of promoting and protecting the
natural, historic, and cultural resources of our National
Parks for the enjoyment of present and future generations,
and for other purposes.

2.  We recommend a replacement in the funding stream proposed for the
endowment account established under the National Park
Foundation. The proposed 5 percent tax on lodging within
national parks should not be adopted for several important
reasons. First, it would alter the comparability provisions
for the pricing of lodging in parks established under the
1998 concessions law. Second, the tax would be paid by a
very small portion of all park visitors and would yield no
responsive benefits to those paying the tax. Third, the tax
could be a real deterrent to efforts to attract visitors to
parks during shoulder seasons, undermining important
streams of revenue to the agency from entrance fees and
franchise fees that are key to operations and maintenance.
Fourth, the addition of a new Federal tax on state and
county sales and tourism taxes, utility pass-through
charges and more is likely to have a chilling effect on the
guest donation program--again, an important source of
support for park programs and projects today and an
important opportunity for expansion as a funding strategy
once needed revisions are made to NPS Directors Order 21.
And fifth, the administration of this tax will be a
challenge and the transfer of the tax to a non-Federal
entity raises a variety of issues.

Instead, we suggest that the committee add a Centennial Park
Entrance Fee Surcharge of $1 on all existing entrance
fees--whether for vehicles or per person. We believe that
this would be a fair and appropriate means to raise
revenues of at least $10 million annually. We also believe
that park visitors can be told about the surcharge in a way
that will yield support, and perhaps interest in additional
actions to support parks.

3.  We enthusiastically support the continuation and expansion of the
Centennial Challenge Program. Encouraging nonprofits,
corporations and individuals to contribute toward important
national park programs and projects is a vital part of a
long-term strategy for keeping America's parks relevant and
well-functioning.

4.  We support the proposal to authorize an appropriation of up to
$25 million annually for the National Park Foundation. We
strongly support the Foundation's Centennial efforts,
including leadership of the Find Your Park Campaign, to
make our national park system relevant, enjoyed and
supported. We support continuing outreach efforts after the
Centennial. We think appropriated general funding, and
other sources including resource mitigation and penalty
funds, can dramatically increase available park resources.

5.  We urge the committee to act outside of the discussion draft to
support creation of a Centennial Penny for Parks Federal
motorfuel excise tax surcharge. We are attaching our letter
to the Chairman of the Committees on Transportation and
Infrastructure and Ways and Means that further outlines
this concept. The significant revenues associated with this
program would allow elimination of the large and growing
backlog in transportation-related investment needs in
national parks and other federally managed lands within a
decade and could underwrite innovative ways to improve
accessibility of our Great Outdoors to all Americans.

6.  We support the addition of a new title to the discussion draft.
We suggest use of this description: Visitor Outreach and
Experience Improvement Program. For decades, national parks
offered the leading example of use of private capital to
support public agency efforts. Investments by concessioners
since the early 1900s have produced a remarkable set of
treasured structures that are world-renowned. From Yosemite
Valley to the Grand Canyon, from Grand Teton to Glacier,
from Acadia to the Blue Ridge Parkway, lodges and
restaurants and stores and marinas have been built with
private capital--and are now some of the most prized
elements of our National Register of Historic Places. We
now see a similar pattern of public/private partnerships
emerging in transportation and other programs. The National
Park Service can and should build upon this wonderful
tradition in its second century, guided and encouraged by
new congressional direction in the Centennial Act.

Specifically, we urge this new title to include direction to
attract needed investment from concessioners to expand and
improve visitor services in parks, including through
modernization of lodges, campgrounds and marinas. Part of
this modernization will depend upon new flexibility by the
agency, including authority to issue concessions contracts
of up to 40 years--a provision that should permit
eligibility for historic tax credits by concessioners and
thus boost the attractiveness of significant investments
that can permit existing and iconic structures to be
functional and efficient and modernized to incorporate best
practices in design. Improved visitor experiences will also
result from extension of operating hours and seasons and
encouragement of the transfer of existing campgrounds to
concessioner operations which will offer more diverse
overnight options, serve more visitors and generate new
revenues for the agency.

We would also support experimentation with new models for
public-private partnerships, especially for park units that
now receive low visitation and/or have inadequate visitor
services to accommodate greater visitation. We have
suggested that NPS experiment with leases and
nonappropriated funding instrumentalities over the next
decade, and support congressional authority for up to 10
pilot efforts which supplement, but do not compete with or
replace, the agency's current concessions contracts and
authorities.

7.  We ask the Congress to support NPS efforts to promote visitation
of national parks, a core mission of the agency established
under its 1916 organic act:

``The service thus established shall promote and regulate the
use of the Federal areas known as national parks,
monuments, and reservations . . .''

Promotion efforts of the agency flourished during its initial 50
years of operations, including hosting the original U.S.
Travel Bureau. In order to revitalize this core program, we
urge the Congress to specifically authorize the use of up
to 10 percent of the franchise fees paid by national park
concessioners annually to support NPS outreach and
marketing efforts in partnership with states, gateway
communities and concessioners. We believe that outreach and
promotion efforts will increase collection of park entrance
and recreation fees sufficiently to underwrite both
improvements in visitor experiences and specific efforts,
including fee-free days, to successfully invite
nontraditional park visitors. There are numerous examples
of isolated and successful cooperative efforts now
underway, including shared interpretive costs and outreach
to international visitors through Federal Row at IPW, which
could be made commonplace.

Most concessioner franchise fees are retained in the park
generating those fees--80 percent of all franchise fees are
used locally. The remaining 20 percent are used at the
discretion of the NPS Director. We urge incorporation in
the Centennial Act of a new National Park Outreach and
Promotion Fund and the following funding strategy:

``Up to 10 percent of the concessioner franchise fees collected
by the agency each year may be used to support agency
outreach and marketing programs designed to connect all
Americans to their parks, and especially those portions of
the American public under-represented among current park
visitors. Nothing in this provision, however, shall
authorize any change in the use of concessioner franchise
fees retained by the park generating the fees. Outreach and
marketing programs shall be undertaken in cooperation with
state and regional DMOs and NPS concessioners, and shall
require not less than 1:1 matching of Federal funds.''

8.  We support increased use of conservation corps in national parks.
Concessioners in Shenandoah National Park, Yellowstone
National Park and other units are utilizing youth
conservation corps to undertake construction,
reconstruction and maintenance projects which replicate
many of the successes of the Civilian Conservation Corps
Program of the 1930s, including connecting urban youth to
parks. Pilot projects have shown that use of conservation
corps can also actually reduce project costs. Direction by
the Congress in the Centennial Act would aid in expanding
use of conservation corps in parks, working cooperatively
with The Corps Network, the National Trust for Historic
Preservation and concessioners, reducing the barrier of
current Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) and more.

Mr. Chairman and Members, we know you would agree that we need to
get Americans back in touch with nature, engaged in physical activities
and outdoor recreation, and connected to the magnificent culture,
heritage and landscapes that are celebrated by our National Park
System. We need to reach out to youth to encourage them to share in the
wonder and enjoyment of our national parks and discourage the
increasingly sedentary lifestyles that are contributing to our health
care crisis. We need to expand park visitation to encourage minorities,
disadvantaged communities, new Americans and urban residents to see
their national parks for themselves and to build a broader constituency
for America's Great Outdoors. And, we need to find new and innovative
ways to reinvest in the maintenance, restoration, and expansion of
critical park infrastructure--much of which was built either by private
investment when the national parks were first created, or in
conjunction with the work of the Civilian Conservation Corps more than
half a century ago.

The National Park Hospitality Association and the National Park
concessioners want to help you, the National Park Service, and all
Americans in achieving these objectives. As the 100th Anniversary of
the National Park Service shines a light on America's Best Idea, we
hope you will help us build on our long-standing partnership with the
NPS to find new and innovative ways to improve the parks and create a
new generation of Americans who share in the wonder of this amazing
legacy.

We thank you for considering this testimony.

Attachment

ATTACHMENT

National Park Hospitality Association
Washington, DC

December 1, 2015

Hon. Bill Shuster, Chairman
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Kevin Brady, Chairman
Committee on Ways and Means
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Shuster and Brady:

We are writing to urge your personal support in capitalizing on
important opportunities and national needs regarding the transportation
infrastructure of our nation's national parks and other legacy Great
Outdoors areas. The National Park Service will celebrate its 100th
anniversary in 2016--a wonderful testimonial to bipartisan leadership
to protect special natural and historic sites across our nation and to
use these sites to tell some of our greatest stories. Our national
parks and other public lands--including national forests and national
wildlife refuges and more--attract more than a billion visits annually.
But these special places are in trouble.

Nearly one-third of our nation is managed by federal agencies
ranging from the National Park Service to the Forest Service, from the
Bureau of Land Management to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. These
lands are vital to the nation for many reasons and certainly for their
importance to recreation and tourism. Recreation expenditures in this
country total more than $650 billion annually. To demonstrate the
importance of federal lands, consider just three numbers:

1)  national park concessioners provide more than $1.4 billion in
lodging, food, transportation and other services to tens of
millions of visitors to national parks annually, employing
25,000 persons;

2)  key sectors of the recreation community are especially reliant on
these lands and waters. More than 60% of all downhill
skiing occurs at ski areas in national forests; and

3)  the national strategy to dramatically boost tourism to the USA,
essential to achieving a better balance of trade, relies
significantly on America's Great Outdoors, according to
Brand USA, the Congressionally chartered corporation
charged with growing inbound visitors from 60 million in
2011 to 100 million in 2021.

The condition of infrastructure on federally-managed lands is
bleak. Key forest roads essential to reaching campgrounds, river access
points and trailheads are no longer safe for passenger cars. Our iconic
National Park System, less than a year from its managing agency's
Centennial, has a backlog of deferred maintenance of nearly $12 billion
in road, water system, dams and structures and has virtually no plans
to expand its capability to serve our growing population. Other key
agencies, including the Forest Service, also have backlogs of deferred
maintenance totaling in the billions of dollars, and are actually
closing roads and reducing public access.

Unlike virtually all other public roads in America, roads on
America's public lands receive no support from the state motorfuel tax
levied on gasoline sold at the retail level. For the estimated four
million miles of interstates, primary and secondary routes, these state
taxes fund 20% of road construction and reconstruction and nearly all
maintenance and operations. Yet roads vital to Americans seeking to
access campgrounds, trailheads, beaches and to reach rivers and lakes
on federal lands depend upon appropriated federal dollars from the
beleaguered domestic discretionary pot for operation and maintenance,
contrasting with most public roads in the nation which qualify for 80%
federal funding for construction and then use of state motorfuel
revenues for operation and maintenance.

The solution is simple. The nation needs to add a Penny for Parks
to its federal motorfuel tax rate for the next decade, a tax which
would acknowledge the federal responsibility for accessing our nation's
parks and other public lands. This funding would end the competition
road operations and maintenance now pose to federal recreation and
conservation programs in the annual appropriations process. Adopting
this supplemental tax for a ten year period would allow continued and
improved safe access by Americans to their public lands.

We believe that action on Penny for Parks in recognition of the
National Park Service Centennial would enjoy broad support among the
nation's recreation, tourism, conservation and transportation
communities. We invite your leadership on this matter and commit to
urging these communities to support your actions.

Sincerely,

Derrick A. Crandall,
Counselor.

______

Association of Partners for Public Lands,
Silver Spring, Maryland.

December 1, 2015

Hon. Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Hon. Niki Tsongas, Ranking Member,
House Committee on Natural Resources,
Subcommittee on Federal Lands,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman McClintock and Ranking Member Tsongas:

The National Park Service (NPS) Centennial in 2016 has the
potential to be a catalytic moment in the history of America's public
lands and their partnerships with nonprofit organizations. The
discussion draft of the National Park Service Centennial Act presented
by Chairman Bishop clearly recognizes the centrality of private
philanthropy and a vital network of nonprofit park partners in
developing sustainable solutions for improving our parks and enhancing
the visitor experience.

Since 1977, the Association of Partners for Public Lands (APPL) has
been the national voice for the nonprofit partners of America's public
lands, providing critical training to improve their effectiveness and
magnify their impact. Our members are nearly 100 friends groups,
cooperating associations, educational institutes and other nonprofit
partners of America's public lands. Our members range in scale from the
all-volunteer Friends of the Klondike Gold Rush to Eastern National, a
cooperating association partnering with over 160 national parks, and
the Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy which has alone provided
more than $350 million in park support.
APPL member organizations are operational partners in more than 340
of the 409 national park units. Our members staff most visitor centers,
provide interpretive materials, offer educational programs and give
back through grants and other partnerships. Not only do APPL members
save federal funds by providing these services, but they provide more
than $150 million annually in aid to the NPS through major projects,
grants, programs and services that respond to the agency's priorities.

We are grateful that you have called upon two of our member
organizations--the Friends of Acadia and the National Park Foundation--
to share how this legislation will positively impact efforts in the
field and among national partners. In this context, we offer a few
thoughts about the implications of the legislation for the broader
community of nonprofit organizations that APPL represents.
NATIONAL PARK CENTENNIAL CHALLENGE FUND (TITLE I)
APPL enthusiastically supports the discussion drafts creation of a
permanent Centennial Challenge Fund with a dedicated federal funding
stream. We view as a key strategy for enhancing America's national
parks in their second century.

For almost 10 years, bipartisan enthusiasm for the Centennial
Challenge idea has provided federal dollars that have been leveraged by
significant private contributions to enhance our national parks. David
MacDonald of the Friends of Acadia will speak eloquently to the ways
that his organization has tackled specific deferred maintenance
projects that could excite donors. Across the country, several APPL
members are among the 90 private organizations demonstrating the value
of the Centennial Challenge in 2015, contributing significantly to the
almost $16 million in donations that are matching $10 million in
federal funding. These members include:

Yosemite Conservancy is rehabilitating and restoring the
Mariposa Grove of Sequoia Trees. The project improves
hydrology related to roads and trails to benefit the giant
sequoias, enhances safety and traffic flow, adds new
accessible parking spaces and restores 3.93 acres of giant
sequoia and wetland habitats.

Blue Ridge Parkway Foundation is repairing and restoring
historic structures at Johnson Farm and making walkways in
Price Pak Campground accessible to all visitors.

Grand Canyon Association is enhancing a one mile segment
of the Bright Angel Trail, one of the most popular used by
visitors to reach the Colorado River.

The discussion draft importantly builds on this tradition by
establishing a sustainable public-private philanthropic opportunity
wherein federal dollars are matched at a minimum of one-to-one by
donations. By seeding the federal commitment with a much needed
increase in the price of the Senior Pass, the proposed legislation
enables the NPS and its nonprofit partners to plan and think big.
Nonprofit partners who can share the guarantee of a future federal
match with their donors and constituents will be better positioned to
attract greater philanthropy and aid--especially smaller organizations
that lack sizable philanthropic bases in their gateway communities.

The Centennial Challenge Fund is founded on the concept that parks
and their visitors will benefit by leveraging public and private
investment. Nonprofit park partners have resources, skills and
expertise that the NPS may not have, and these too should be leveraged
in the Challenge. We are concerned that the discussion draft requires
all funds to flow through the federal treasury. There are times when
dollars can be further leverages by enabling the nonprofit partner to
manage or provide a signature project or program. Additionally, some
foundations will not permit their funds to be sent to government
entities.

APPL would welcome the opportunity to work with the Subcommittee to
empower nonprofit park partners to have a larger role in the delivery
of signature projects and programs while maintaining the highest
standards of accountability and transparency. Further, we are eager to
work with the Subcommittee to identify additional funding streams for
the Centennial Challenge Fund.
NATIONAL PARK FOUNDATION ENDOWMENT (TITLE II and V)
APPL applauds the creation of a National Park Foundation Endowment
as a long term investment in the national park system and a legacy of
this Congress. The prospect of an endowment will provide a new avenue
for philanthropic park support and we appreciate the National Park
Foundation's willingness to steward such an important effort. We also
applaud the Chairman's requirement that the endowment function as a
traditional endowment would by using only 5% of its funds annually for
projects, thus increasing the likelihood of growing a substantial
corpus.

We join the National Park Foundation in strongly supporting the
amendments to the organization's Congressional charter that
reconfigures its board leadership. The result will be a model that has
been successfully employed by many nonprofit park partners.
NATIONAL PARK NEXT GENERATION STEWARDS (TITLE III)
APPL commends the inclusion of authorities that highlight the
educational mission of the NPS, expand opportunities for millennials to
join the conservation workforce through the National Park Service and
other land management agencies, and increase funding available to the
Volunteer-in-Parks program. Collectively, these authorities provide the
NPS with more tools to work with their nonprofit park partners in
serving a diverse and growing public.

The Chairman has provided a compelling road map for Congress to
consider its role in marking the 100th anniversary of the National Park
Service. APPL is eager to work with the Subcommittee to further refine
the discussion draft so that we continue to develop new opportunities
for nonprofit park partners in this second century of preservation and
enjoyment.

We thank you for your consideration of our views and
recommendations.

Sincerely,

Jerryne Cole,                 Diana Nielsen Saathoff,
President, APPL Board of
Directors,                    Government Relations Committee
Vice President, Denali
National Park                   Chair, APPL Board of Directors,
Wilderness Centers, AK.     Executive Director, Mount
Rushmore Society, SD.

Dan Puskar,
Executive Director,
Association of Partners for
Public Lands, MD.

ASSOCIATION OF PARTNERS FOR PUBLIC LANDS:
MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS THAT PARTNER WITH THE NATIONAL
PARK SERVICE

Adventures and Scientists
for Conservation              Great Smoky Mountains Association

Alaska Geographic             Harpers Ferry Historical
Association

Badlands Natural History
Association                   Hawai'i Pacific Parks Association

Big Bend Conservancy          Intermountain Natural History
Association

Big Bend Natural History
Association                   Isle Royale & Keweenaw Parks
Association

Black Hills Parks and
Forests Association           Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks
Conservancy

Blue Ridge Parkway
Foundation                    Jefferson National Parks
Association

Bryce Canyon Natural
History Association           Joshua Tree National Park
Association

Cabrillo National Monument
Foundation                    Lassen Association
Canyonlands Natural History
Association                   Lewis & Clark National Park
Association

Capitol Reef Natural
History Association           Manzanar History Association

Carlsbad Caverns Guadalupe
Mountains Assoc.              Mesa Verde Museum Association

Carver Birthplace
Association                   Mississippi Park Connection

Colorado National Monument
Association                   Mount Rushmore Society

Conservancy for Cuyahoga
Valley National Park          National Association for
Interpretation

Crater Lake Natural History
Association                   National First Ladies' Library

Craters of the Moon Natural
History Association           National Park Foundation

Death Valley Natural
History Association           National Parks Conservation
Association

Devils Tower Natural
History Association           Ocmulgee National Monument
Association

Discover Your Northwest       Pacific Historic Parks

Eastern National              Petrified Forest Museum
Association

Everglades Association        Point Reyes National Seashore
Association

Fort Laramie Historical
Association                   Protectors of Tule Springs

Friends of Acadia             Public Lands Institute,
University of Las Vegas

Friends of Aztec Ruins
National Monument             Redwood Parks Association

Friends of the Blue Ridge
Parkway                       Rocky Mountain Conservancy

Friends of Great Smoky
Mountains National Park       Rosie the Riveter Trust

Friends of Hawaii Volcanoes
National Park                 Santa Monica Mountains Fund

Friends of Independence
National Historical Park      Sequoia Parks Conservancy

Friends of the Klondike
Corridor                      South Florida National Parks
Trust

The Glacier Institute         Shenandoah National Park
Association
Glacier National Park
Conservancy                   Theodore Roosevelt Nature and
History Assoc.

Glen Canyon Natural History
Association                   Western National Parks
Association
Golden Gate National Parks
Conservancy                   Yellowstone Association

Grand Canyon Association      Yosemite Conservancy

Grand Teton Association       Zion Natural History Association

Grand Teton National Park
Foundation

______

The Corps Network,
Washington, DC.

December 1, 2015

Hon. Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Hon. Niki Tsongas, Ranking Member,
House Subcommittee on Federal Lands,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman McClintock and Ranking Member Tsongas:

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony for the hearing
record on Chairman Bishop's draft ``National Park Service Centennial
Act.'' On behalf of Service & Conservation Corps (Corps) around the
country, we appreciate your efforts to strengthen the National Park
Service (NPS) in anticipation of its centennial. This draft is a strong
step for the NPS, its thousands of visitors, and partners like Corps
that improve our parks and the visitor experience. We also greatly
appreciate Ranking Member Grijalva's leadership in previously
introducing the National Park Service Centennial Act, H.R. 3556 and the
President's efforts in putting forward the draft NPS centennial
legislation.

We particularly appreciate, and express our strong support, for
inclusion of key provisions to strengthen Public Land Corps in Sec. 402
of the draft. Through the Public Lands Corps Act of 1993, Corps work
with NPS to ``perform, in a cost-effective manner, appropriate
conservation projects on eligible service lands'' and expose
Corpsmembers ``to public service while furthering their understanding
and appreciation of the Nation's natural and cultural resources.'' Sec.
402 will allow us to significantly improve our Corps, and our work for
NPS and the nation, by raising the allowable age of Corpsmembers to 30
from 25 which will allow us to engage more veterans and by extending
the federal noncompetitive hiring status to ensure our Corpsmembers can
efficiently move on to the next step in their careers.

The Corps Network is comprised of over 120 Corps that work in every
state and engage over 20,000 youth and veterans (Corpsmembers) each
year in our Corps model which involves conservation service projects in
local communities or on public lands. Tied to those projects,
Corpsmembers receive educational, workforce, and supportive services.
Corps work in NPS units around the country in helping to make
improvements to trails, infrastructure, manage and improve park
ecosystems, and preserve historic structures. In addition we work with
NPS' concessionaires on accomplishing projects for the parks and
visitors. Modern-day Corps descended from the Civilian Conservation
Corps and continue that legacy by developing the next generation of
diverse conservation, recreation, and resource leaders.

Passage of this legislation along with additional investments in
NPS and its partners like our Corps will ensure our nation's parks are
ready for the next 100 years of providing ``enjoyment, education, and
inspiration of this and future generations.'' Thank you again for your
leadership, and we look forward to working toward passage of a
bipartisan National Park Service Centennial bill.

Sincerely,

Mary Ellen Sprenkel,
CEO.

______

National Parks Second Century Action Coalition,
Washington, DC.

December 3, 2015

Hon. Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Hon. Niki Tsongas, Ranking Member,
House Committee on Natural Resources,
Subcommittee on Federal Lands,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Tsongas, and Members of
the Federal Lands Subcommittee:

Next year, Americans will celebrate the 100th anniversary of the
National Park Service. We, the National Parks Second Century Action
Coalition and other partners, write in strong support of efforts
underway to prepare our national parks for a second century of service
for current and future generations.

The National Parks Second Century Action Coalition is comprised of
organizations supporting conservation, recreation, outdoor industry,
travel and tourism and historic preservation that are dedicated to
promoting the protection, restoration, and operation of the National
Park System to benefit the health and well-being of current and future
generations.

We applaud Natural Resources Committee Chairman Bishop for
developing the discussion draft National Park Service Centennial Act,
as well as Natural Resources Committee Ranking Member Grijalva for
introducing the administration's Centennial proposal (H.R. 3556). These
bills demonstrate needed congressional interest in providing a
significant commemoration of--and support for--the National Park
Service Centennial. The bills provide needed funding for programs and
maintenance through the Centennial Challenge Fund as well as a path
toward improved long-term fiscal health with the establishment and
investment of an endowment.

With an expected influx of visitors expected during and following
the Centennial year, it would be a shame if families arrived to
decaying facilities and too few rangers to greet them due to the
current fiscal challenges facing national parks. On the eve of the
National Park Service Centennial, our national parks are facing
billions of dollars' worth of overdue repairs. Additionally, there has
been more than a 7%, or $178 million reduction in the account to
operate national parks and more than a 12%, or $370 million reduction
in the total budget for the National Park Service over the last five
years in today's dollars. These Centennial bills provide important
support for helping relieve these significant funding shortfalls.

We support the provisions in the proposed legislation and H.R. 3556
that formally establish the Centennial Challenge Fund and an endowment
to help address some of the financial needs of our nation's parks. We
hope the committee will continue to investigate additional revenue
sources to more robustly invest in the Centennial Challenge Fund and
explore additional funding mechanisms for the National Park Service,
while also more directly reducing the deferred maintenance backlog.

The Centennial Challenge is an innovative program that encourages
private individuals, foundations, businesses and others to donate funds
to help restore and improve our national parks by providing a federal
match for the donations. Previous annual investments have supported
valuable centennial projects throughout the country. If this bill were
enacted, it would establish this program over three years, allowing
partners additional time and certainty to raise the matching funds. The
endowment would provide long term financial support for the national
parks by investing monetary gifts and other contributions to be used in
the future for projects and activities that support the national parks.

We also support provisions in the bills that recognize the
importance of national parks as places of learning by enhancing
interpretation and education programs, and by providing additional
opportunities for volunteers in our nation's treasures. We also support
the provisions that will help connect a new, diverse generation to the
great outdoors and allow the National Park Service to recruit and hire
more young and diverse Americans.

Passage of a bipartisan centennial bill, coupled with additional
investments for national park roads in the transportation bill and
operation and construction funding in the FY16 omnibus appropriations
bill, can ensure our parks are better prepared to serve another hundred
years and beyond.
Again, we thank Natural Resources Committee Chairman Bishop and
Ranking Member Grijalva and their committee staff for offering a forum
for discussion of strategies to keep America's national parks relevant
and cherished and for offering specific steps to achieve these goals.
We urge other members of the committee to support the effort and work
with the Senate to swiftly move a final Centennial Bill toward passage.

Thank you for considering our views. We look forward to working
with you to ensure final passage of a bipartisan National Park Service
Centennial Bill.

Sincerely,

American Forests              National Park Hospitality
Association

American Hiking Society       National Parks Conservation
Association

American Recreation
Coalition                     National Tour Association

Appalachian Trail
Conservancy                   Recreational Equipment, Inc.

Association of Partners for
Public Lands                  Southeast Tourism Society

Destination Marketing
Association International     Student Conservation Association

East Bay Regional Park
District                      The Coalition to Protect
America's National Parks

Friends of Acadia             The Corps Network

Friends of the Oregon Caves
and Chateau                   The Wilderness Society

Grand Canyon Association      U.S. Travel Association

Japanese American Citizens
League                        United States Tour Operators
Association

Mississippi River Fund        Western States Tourism Policy
Council

Mount Rushmore Society        Wolf Trap Foundation for the
Performing Arts

Nature Bridge
