- THE STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF BUILDING A STRONGER U.S.--CARIBBEAN PARTNERSHIP

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF BUILDING A
STRONGER U.S.--CARIBBEAN    PARTNERSHIP

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 14, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-189

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-749PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Eric Farnsworth, vice president, Council of the Americas and
Americas Society...............................................     4
Ms. Sally Yearwood, executive director, Caribbean-Central
American Action................................................    10
His Excellency Richard Bernal, pro-vice chancellor for global
affairs, University of the West Indies in Jamaica..............    24

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Eric Farnsworth: Prepared statement..........................     7
Ms. Sally Yearwood: Prepared statement...........................    13
His Excellency Richard Bernal: Prepared statement................    26

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    40
Hearing minutes..................................................    41

THE STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF BUILDING A STRONGER U.S.--CARIBBEAN
PARTNERSHIP

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 14, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock, in
room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Duncan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. A quorum being present, the subcommittee
will come to order. I would now like to recognize myself for an
opening statement. Thank you, guys, for your patience.
Today, we need to highlight a very important region in our
hemisphere that unfortunately often gets overlooked. Many of
our Caribbean friends have repeatedly urged the United States
to pay more attention to the Caribbean, and I want you to know
that I have heard you.
I would also like to thank Ranking Member Sires in
particular for his leadership in working to prioritize this
subcommittee's focus on the Caribbean. These islands, home to
many beautiful and popular travel destinations, often come up
in conversation for the average American only in the context of
tourism and planning a future vacation.
However, while these are certainly important strengths for
the region, the Caribbean has much more to offer which U.S.
businesses, universities, and local communities should consider
when planning future investment, academic research, or where to
develop stronger economic ties.
One of the primary tools of U.S. engagement with CARICOM
countries is the Caribbean Basin Initiative, or CBI, which was
created in 1983.
Can we turn that sound down a little bit, sir? Can we turn
that down just a little bit? Okay.
Which was created in 1983 and has subsequently expanded to
provide 17 countries and dependent territories with duty-free
access to U.S. market for most goods. This engagement has led
to a 44-percent increase in U.S. exports to the Caribbean over
the past 10 years, and last year the total trade relationship
between the U.S. and the Caribbean was $33.4 billion.
I believe it is critical to work with our neighbors to
mutually promote economic growth through trade liberalization,
respect for the rule of law, and adherence to free market
principles in order to achieve prosperity that is sustainable
for the region. In addition, I am a firm supporter of deeper
U.S.-Caribbean energy relations. To me it is a win-win
situation.
U.S. possesses an abundance of oil, natural gas, and
technical expertise, and the Caribbean has some of the highest
energy costs in the world and needs to lower these costs by
building infrastructure for delivering energy, integrating
energy markets to attract investment and financing, and
establish pipelines and liquified natural gas frameworks.
In view of Venezuela's instability, its oil production
decline, and low global oil prices, countries in the Caribbean
dependent upon Venezuela's Petrocaribe programs should
seriously consider how they can diversify their energy matrix
and build stronger energy partnerships with the United States
and other energy-producing countries in the region. After all,
the United States is the largest energy producer in the Western
Hemisphere; collectively with Mexico and Canada, North America
accounts for 71 percent of the hemisphere's crude oil and 28
percent of natural gas reserves in the hemisphere.
Similarly, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Peru, and Trinidad
and Tobago have significant oil and natural gas production. In
my view, freedom-loving, market-friendly, energy-producing
countries in this hemisphere should be working more closely
together to pursue hemisphere-acquired, energy independence and
that means assisting non-energy producing countries including
the Caribbean neighbors in reaching this objective. Ultimately,
if the Western Hemisphere were more energy independent it would
go a long way to transforming our societies and security and
independence and our economic growth.
So today, there are many trade energy opportunities for
U.S. and CARICOM. However, I remain concerned about the growing
security challenges in the region from transnational criminal
organizations that seek to use the region to ship drugs,
migrants, and contraband to United States shores. The Caribbean
Basin Security Initiative is another tool the United States has
used since 2010 to address regional security issues, and given
the Caribbean's strategic location to U.S. homeland, we need to
keep considering ways to improve CBSI and more effectively
cooperate with the regional partners to control borders, block
criminal groups' ability to exploit permissive environments to
their advantage.
I am also concerned about the people from the Caribbean
that have joined Islamic extremist organizations. Last year,
the former head of the U.S. Southern Command, General Kelly,
testified before Congress that close to 100 people had left the
Caribbean to go fight in Syria. At a subsequent briefing, he
specifically named Jamaica, Siriname, and Trinidad and Tobago
as having had people leave for the battlefield. These threats
to the United States and regional security should motivate all
of us; give us all a greater willingness to do more to
strengthen security cooperation.
Moreover, I want to point out at a previous subcommittee
hearing on border security threats in the region, I raised
concerns regarding reports that I had seen about citizen by
investment programs in the Caribbean which have enabled fraud,
corruption, and exploitation by foreign nationals. I hope our
Caribbean friends will consider the regional implications of
poorly managed CIPs. They pose security vulnerabilities to all
of us since improperly vetted CIP applicants might allow a
transnational criminal to evade sanctions and travel
restrictions.
In view of the growing security threats that I have
mentioned, it is vital for regional security that Caribbean
countries, as well as all Latin American countries, adopt and
follow strong vetting mechanisms according to international
best practices using all checks of law enforcement sanctions
and terrorist database that are available to them.
And finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention the
importance the United States places on cooperation in the
multilateral organizations such as United Nations or the OAS,
Organization of American States. I want to thank the Caribbean
countries that voted with the United States recently at the OAS
on the situation in Venezuela. I recognize your support and
friendship, and I commend your courage of conviction to speak
the truth to power even when it is difficult.
These countries that chose to abstain from voting or voted
against the resolution at the OAS regarding the situation in
Venezuela, I want you to know that your decision only furthers
oppression and tyranny in the Americas. It is my hope that you
will reconsider how your vote on these type of issues in the
future.
Ultimately, we all have a responsibility to actively
safeguard freedom in the Americas, but that can only require
very tough choices. I realize these decisions are complex, and
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on all these
topics today, and so with that I will turn to the ranking
member for his opening remarks.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for working together on
this hearing, and I want to thank the witnesses for being here
today. Thank you very much.
The Caribbean is often described as America's third border
and I agree with this description. With almost 45 million
people encompassing 16 independent countries and 14 overseas
territories, the Caribbean is a diverse region that includes
some of the hemisphere's richest and poorest nations. It is a
region of great economic and cultural, political and security
ties to the United States. The U.S.-Caribbean relationship is
characterized by extensive economic linkages, significant
security cooperation, and continued U.S. assistance to support
economic and social development, including efforts to combat
HIV/AIDS and to mitigate the effects of climate change.
Over the past 3 years, the administration has put forth a
new effort supporting energy diversification and clean,
sustainable energy projects to improve the region's energy
security and to help it move away from its dependence on oil
from Venezuela. Venezuela, which has long subsidized energy
costs to many Latin American and Caribbean countries, must turn
inward to rescue itself from economic and political collapse.
Amidst these troubling times we must work with our Caribbean
partners to diversify energy sources, strengthen their
economies, and build upon a mutual security interest.
On the legislative front, last month the House approved
H.R. 4939, the United States-Caribbean Strategic Engagement Act
of 2016. This act is designed to increase engagement with the
Caribbean that requires the Secretary of State to submit a
multiyear plan to Congress for U.S. engagement with the
Caribbean regions and update on its U.S. diplomatic effort to
engage the eastern Caribbean countries.
As a global power, the United States faces challenges and
threats from every corner of the world. However, it is vital
that we remain engaged in the Western Hemisphere and not lose
sight of our interests so close to home. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on how the U.S. efforts in the
Caribbean can improve and how America can continue to
strengthen its partnership with our Caribbean neighbors. Thank
you.
Mr. Duncan. I will thank the ranking member, and I will
just say I don't know how many other members we are going to
have today. We have adjourned for the August recess break and
we wanted to continue. Knowing that we were going to adjourn,
we were willing to continue with this hearing because that is
how important it is to the ranking member and myself, so don't
think because no other members show up that it isn't a vital
issue to the committee and to the subcommittee. And I look
forward to hearing from the witnesses who are very well known
to the committee so their bios are available to us, and I will
recognize Eric Farnsworth for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. ERIC FARNSWORTH, VICE PRESIDENT, COUNCIL OF
THE AMERICAS AND AMERICAS SOCIETY

Mr. Farnsworth. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
continuing with the hearing on such a vital topic. Thank you
for your leadership overall on these issues as well as the
Caribbean specifically, and Mr. Ranking Member, you as well. It
is really important to have a bipartisan voice on these issues
and we note that. We take satisfaction in that and thank you
for that leadership, and we ask that that would continue in
some way given the importance of the issues at hand.
The United States does have strategic issues in the
Caribbean Basin and we don't often talk about it in that way,
but in my view they are strategic, from support for democratic
institutions--some of which are quite fragile; some of which
are strong and enduring--we have security interests including
drug trafficking, counterterrorism, the fight against financial
crimes, obviously immigration and humanitarian concerns,
energy, the environment, economic development; it is a very
wide range of issues to which the United States has interest.
The United States also maintains significant diplomatic
interests in the region most notably in the current context
related to Venezuela's slow motion collapse and related
discussions at the OAS and the United Nations, and both of you
have referred to those issues as well.
Recognizing this, the administration has made a number of
efforts along these lines to improve relations with the
Caribbean. Presidential and vice presidential travel has been
well received as have initiatives on security and energy. The
Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, for example, has proven to
be a workable concept. In my view, enhanced results would be
anticipated with the availability of greater resources for that
program.
At the same time at least in this instance, geography
really is destiny and the hard reality is that the Caribbean
lies between the major drug producing region of the Andes and
the overwhelming demand for drugs in North America and also in
Europe. It has also been a jump-off point for extraregional
migration to the United States. Security is a constant
challenge for regional law enforcement requiring close
coordination and assistance from the United States and other
interested parties.
Economically, the Caribbean Basin is also under strain.
With generally small productive capacities, the region has
relied on preferential trade access with the United States and
Europe, robust tourism receipts, and most recently Venezuelan
energy largesse via Petrocaribe. With the reduction both in
global energy prices and also Venezuelan production Petrocaribe
is less important now than it once was, but the program has
nonetheless left a significant debt overhang for a number of
Caribbean nations.
Likewise, tourism is being impacted by new market entrants
in the region as well as the possibility of reduced demand from
the United Kingdom in the wake of Brexit and also health
related concerns such as the Zika virus which we are hearing so
much about. The Obama administration has sought to address
several of these economic concerns by promoting the Caribbean
Energy Security Initiative to catalyze a cleaner, more energy
secure future, consistent with the Paris climate change
accords, nonetheless still greater progress might be made.
I thought for some time, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member, that we need to think bigger and bolder and more
strategically about the Caribbean, and this hearing is part of
that process and again I thank you for doing it. In my judgment
and with the new expansion of the Panama Canal, it is time
perhaps for a new Caribbean Basin Initiative which will bring a
number of the policy priorities together under one strategic
initiative. For this reason I am particularly pleased that the
House has just passed the United States-Caribbean Strategic
Engagement Act, and Mr. Sires you referenced that in your
opening comments. This is a worthy bipartisan effort to begin
the process and I urge prompt Senate passage of the bill.
Several related initiatives might also be considered,
learning from successes like Costa Rica, for example. The
Caribbean should consider branding itself the cleanest, most
environmentally friendly region for tourists and citizens which
the United States can actively support. Not just technical
assistance, but also concessionary financing, technology
transfer, debt-for-nature swaps, and a regional commitment to
open markets perhaps through expanded trade investment ties
with the United States particularly in natural gas exports,
which would all be part of a new CBI designed in full
consultation and coordination with Caribbean leaders themselves
to rebrand the region as a model for environmental and clean
energy development.
Caribbean leaders for their part would be encouraged to
strengthen regional integration and cooperation, reduce
barriers to trade and investment, create efficiencies
particularly in clean energy related sectors including
standards and regulations, and promote a regional vision not
just a national vision for each individual nation.
A focus on investment climate issues would also be welcome
as would mechanisms to ensure that de-risking by U.S. banks not
unduly burden the Caribbean banking sector or reduce access to
trade finance and development support including remittances.
Diplomatically, we could anticipate a favorable response
from the region if the United States took a more proactive
approach. Additional Embassies and pre-clearance facilities, a
commitment to ongoing high level consultations including
visits, and the naming of a senior level envoy for Caribbean
Basin affairs could all be considered. In the meantime,
recognizing the collective weight of Caribbean nations within
the OAS and other international bodies should motivate the
United States to look for quick dispersing deliverables which
can be highlighted. One of these in my view should be a high
profile, joint assault on Zika including subsidized access to
vaccines as soon as they can be developed and effectively
deployed.
Other nations, including China and Venezuela, are
particularly good at these sorts of diplomatic initiatives. The
goodwill they have engendered in the region through such
activities should be a wake-up call for Washington that the
Caribbean Basin cannot be taken for granted. In the current
environment the United States must contend for the Caribbean as
indeed we have to contend for all of Latin America, and I
believe that additional U.S. efforts in the Caribbean would be
rewarded. So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, thank you again
for the opportunity to join you. It is a privilege to do so,
and I look forward to the questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farnsworth follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Eric. Next witness very well known
to the committee as well, Sally Yearwood, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. SALLY YEARWOOD, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CARIBBEAN-
CENTRAL AMERICAN ACTION

Ms. Yearwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Sires. Thank you for holding this timely hearing on the U.S.-
Caribbean partnership. Coming as it does in the wake of the
House passage of H.R. 4939, we have an important opportunity to
assess and recalibrate the relationship.
The Caribbean is the United States' third border. U.S.
security interests in regional stability are intrinsically
linked and so, by extension, collaboration on critical
economic, political, and social development issues must be a
foreign policy priority.
Today there is no dominant partner in the region. Russia,
China, Canada, Taiwan, Venezuela, and the European Union all
have a substantial presence. The Islamic Development Bank has
established significant ties with financing in some Caribbean
nations, and other countries ranging from Qatar to Japan and
Brazil have had a significant impact on how and where the
countries of the Caribbean have turned to search for trade and
financing alternatives.
The United States remains the region's primary trading
partner, but there is no doubt that when it comes to overall
engagement other countries are filling, and in some cases
exploiting, a vacuum. What can be done to build this stronger
partnership? I will speak to the areas of economic cooperation
that we believe could have an impact.
Trade and Assistance. The 1983 Caribbean Basin Economic
Recovery Act remains one of the most generous nonreciprocal
trade bills ever granted by the U.S. The Caribbean Basin
remains a top ten trading partner with a balance of trade
surplus in favor of the U.S. It is also worth noting that the
Caribbean is the only area of the world where U.S. ship
operators and U.S. nationals remain significant players in the
international carriage of goods by sea.
When CBERA was passed, regional economies were very much
oriented around agricultural and manufactured products.
However, the world has changed. The economies today with some
exceptions are largely dominated by travel and tourism, the
financial services sector and other service based industries.
At the Inter-American Development Bank, the World Bank, and
the United States Agency for International Development there
are substantial programs that are designed to build regional
competitiveness. With H.R. 4939, the U.S. Government can
examine what exists, where there are gaps, and recommend
potential areas for trade and cooperation which reflect today's
reality.
Correspondent Banking and De-risking. While the technical
issues behind this are under discussion among your colleagues
in the Financial Services Committee, and recently they sent a
letter to the OCC requesting clarity on the application of
rules and compliance, this issue has been front and center for
the countries of the Caribbean for a while.
This is a global problem, but it is widely acknowledged
that the Caribbean has been disproportionately affected because
of the size of the markets and the perception of risk. CCAA has
been working with the region, the U.S. Government,
international financial institutions, associations, and the
private sector to help identify solutions for the Caribbean.
The CEO of the FIBA describes the situation as follows: We are
working on financial inclusion in developing countries and de-
risking is then blocking access to finance. This amounts to a
de facto embargo on the region in the area of financial
services.
When international banks sever relationships with regional
banks, there is a direct impact on economic growth, trade, and
remittances. As important, when the costs of complying with
regulations create a burden on the legitimate banks and they
shut down, there is a threat that underground or less regulated
institutions will take their place. This brings the issue into
the territory of economic stability, viability, and ultimately
security for the region and the United States.
While we can all agree that the banking community's ability
to combat money laundering and terrorist financing is a shared
priority, what we cannot do is place undue burdens on any
individual party. There exists an opportunity for all
stakeholders to come together to craft a balanced, risk-based
approach between regulation and inclusion, where all parties
recognize that they have a role in the problem as well as in
the solution.
Travel and Tourism. Millions of travelers move by air and
sea between the Caribbean and the U.S. every year. Air and sea
ports are a critical part of the security apparatus every day.
Sharing the security responsibility at the front lines gives
the U.S. additional control over its borders and creates a
collaborative environment for managing terrorist watch lists as
well as trafficking of guns, drugs, and other contraband.
Pre-clearance facilities in-region are an instrument for
building a security partnership. While the cost does not
justify pre-clearance in every Caribbean country, a strategic
look at increasing pre-clearance presence through a hub and
spoke system would be beneficial to shared collaboration and
security.
Diplomatic Presence. Representative Engel has long called
for the establishment of a diplomatic presence in the countries
of the Eastern Caribbean. There are nine member states of the
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, six of which are
independent. The OECS is a political and economic union that
has proven effective and proactive. If there is no appetite for
diplomatic presence in all of the countries of the Eastern
Caribbean, I believe that there should at least be stronger
recognition of the force that the OECS represents in the
region, and at least one full Embassy should be established
there.
Security and Disaster Resilience. CCAA has run a Disaster
Management Workshop Series with our partners from Tropical
Shipping and other regional partners for almost two decades.
This event underscores the importance of public-private
partnerships in disaster management. Previously focused very
much on natural disasters, we now look at broader threats to
the specific countries.
The United States Southern Command is an important
collaborator and I would be remiss not to mention their ongoing
engagement as well as their responsiveness to regional
disasters whenever called upon. The region is vulnerable to
range of natural and other disasters and resilience is
critical. Any breakdown has trade, economic, and security
implications for the broader region and for its partners
outside the region. A multi-country strategy forged in
collaboration with regional partners should be a part of the
engagement.
Time does not allow for the full range of matters to be
addressed. Energy, for one, is a regional priority and there I
would urge continued U.S. engagement on the sustainable energy
front, building on the Vice President's hallmark Caribbean
Energy Security Initiative. Furthermore, Haiti remains an
ongoing challenge and the current political crisis has
implications for the region as a whole.
In conclusion, the United States and the Caribbean are
natural allies, and today, with the uncertainty over the future
of Venezuela and the added uncertainty about what Brexit means
for the countries of the Commonwealth Caribbean, we can
alleviate the insecurities that these small, vulnerable
economies face when there is a direct disruption on the
horizon. A quick look at the communique issued after the recent
CARICOM Heads of Government meeting reflects the wide range of
issues that the region is dealing with. H.R. 4939 could not
have come at a more strategically important time for the
relationship.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sires, members of
the committee for the opportunity to be with you today. I look
forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yearwood follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much, Ms. Yearwood.
We will now enter in the question phase of it. We have a
lighting system in here. I don't know if we are going to use
that with just the three of us here, and I think Representative
Meeks is coming. So we will just try to get through it and I
will try to monitor it.
All eyes are on Venezuela right now, and Venezuela's impact
on the Caribbean nations from energy to trade and other things
are very concerning, especially Eastern Caribbean nations. So,
I guess the question that I have is, all six countries of the
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States are members of the
Bolivarian Alliance known as ALBA, which includes efforts to
promote regional cooperation and alleviate poverty; so to what
extent have ALBA and Petrocaribe increased Venezuela's
influence in the Caribbean? I think I can answer that question
tremendously.
What effect will it have with the waning influence of
Venezuela given the nature of the Maduro government and the
issues with energy, and the issues with poverty, and food
security and that sort of thing? So Eric, you know, let's just
delve into how Venezuela and the situation there is actually
going to impact especially the Eastern Caribbean ALBA
countries.
Mr. Farnsworth. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I agree it is
the pregnant issue if you will of the region. Venezuela is a
country that is in collapse. Economically, some are saying it
is no longer a democracy. It is a country that has severe and
lasting internal problems which it is going to take years to
get beyond.
And so, the relationship that Venezuela has developed with
a number of countries of the Caribbean in good times has become
strained, because the largesse that Venezuela has been able to
frankly give away or to provide a concessionary on
concessionary terms has been much constrained in the current
environment. You know, you talk to Caribbean leaders and they
say we are not big fans of the Venezuelan regime, but if they
are giving us free stuff why not take it? And I think in some
ways, it is very much a commercial relationship or, it has been
a commercial relationship.
I guess what I would say is in the current environment,
because of the troubles that Venezuela is having and frankly
because of the opportunities that we have in the United States
through the entire revolution of energy that we have seen in
our own country over the last several years, we have an
opportunity to come into the Caribbean as a partner and say,
look, you know the programs and the activities that you may
have been doing with Venezuela are no longer relevant and we
can provide the same things that you need without the political
or without the ideological overhang that you might have had
previously.
Mr. Duncan. Let me ask you something about that. Is there
enough trust of the United States for us to step into that void
with those countries? I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Farnsworth. Well, I think in the current environment we
need to do some groundwork. We need to do some spade work. I
mean, look, Petrocaribe was a very successful program and we
understand why. I mean, it was timely, it provided something
that the leaders needed when they needed it. It was symbolic.
It was very, very easy to explain to people. I mean, we are
getting oil from Venezuela. It was focused. It was on one
issue.
And I think sometimes, when the United States engages with
the countries of the Caribbean, we have a lot of well meaning
programs and wonderful ideas, but they are diluted, right? Not
deluded, but diluted in terms of the effort and the focus.
Under Petrocaribe, it was one product easily explained, highly
symbolic, and people said Venezuela's our friend.
And I think what we need to do better from the United
States' perspective is to build that level of trust through an
ongoing sustained engagement with the region so that people can
say, look, we do trust you. We do take this partnership on the
terms in which it is offered because it is mutually beneficial.
Mr. Duncan. I personally think energy is a great
opportunity for us, no doubt about that. Let me delve into
money laundering and terrorism financing a little bit. There is
a big push by the U.S. to have U.S. banks sever relationship
with Caribbean-based banking institutions. Does that policy
work to reduce money laundering and opportunities for terrorist
organizations to access the financial system? And that is
probably to Sally.
Ms. Yearwood. In a lot of ways it does the opposite,
because once U.S. banks move out of the region what you have
created in fact is a void and that becomes filled by other
institutions. And there are anecdotal accounts of people when
taking remittances between jurisdictions that have to carry
that in cash in a suitcase. So, what is being created is a
situation where there is more opportunity for terrorist
financing or something to go wrong and somebody to exploit that
void. So I would say that the U.S. banks absolutely need to be
a key and vital player in the regional money system.
Mr. Duncan. I am probably less concerned, and maybe I
shouldn't be, but less concerned about terrorism financing
through the Caribbean financial institutions as I am about
money laundering. We just saw in Panama, a huge $800 million
money laundering scheme, real estate involvement, huge number
of employees involved in a legitimate business--still a money
laundering scheme. And so I want to make sure that we are
cognizant of the possibility in the Caribbean nations as well.
Ms. Yearwood. Part of the issue is the perception of risk
versus the reality of the risk. Banks are not leaving the
Caribbean because there is money laundering. Banks are leaving
the Caribbean because the costs of compliance are
overwhelmingly stacked against the banking system. You have
small jurisdictions and for every account that you are dealing
with you have to put a huge amount of money into making sure
that the cost of--that the businesses is clean.
But what we have to do in effect is create a system where
the regulators, the banks, everybody is working together,
information is being shared, and when information is passed
between the regulators and the Treasury or the regulators and
the banks, people know where the voids are. What we need to
also do is see what the technology, the tools that are out
there that can create better compliance that can--the
blockchain and other things that can build a more stable and
more verifiable, transparent banking system.
And the problem in the Caribbean is that the economies are
small, putting these systems in place costs a lot, but all the
Caribbean will tell you that they meet the compliance
regulations. And so there is a disconnect between what is
actually happening and what people are saying is happening. I
think one of the common complaints is the breakdown between
what is going on in offshore financial services and what is
going on in banking.
And the Panama Papers were very largely linked to the
offshore financial services industry versus the correspondent
banking and de-risking issue that is currently being faced.
And, so, that break needs to be made so we can tackle the
problem at hand which is the ability to move money back and
forth in a clean, transparent manner.
Mr. Duncan. I am assuming that the Federal Government is
monitoring--in Panama Papers an individual is never implicated
in that and start shifting financial resources around, in
possibly, the Caribbean nation. I am assuming our Treasury and
FBI are monitoring that, I would assume. So I am going to go
ahead and yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Sires. One of the reasons that I supported, or I still
support the export of energy from this country is to offset the
influence of Venezuela because basically they were using it for
political purpose. You know, if you look at the votes they took
at the U.N. or even the OAS, you know, these people just became
so dependent on Venezuela that we had to, I felt, offset that
influence.
So now Venezuela is in trouble. I think their production is
something like 40, 50 percent less, and there is a void there
that we can help fill and, you know, we can really help in
terms of just having a little bit more influence on people.
The other thing that worries me is that on the eastern part
of the Caribbean. Basically, we have an Embassy in Barbados and
it serves all those islands there. Meanwhile, you have
Venezuela, Cuba, Brazil, they all have a presence there. So I
was just wondering how much of a competitive disadvantage this
puts us when we don't have, really, a presence in the Eastern
Caribbean.
Mr. Farnsworth. Well, Mr. Sires, I think both of your
points are very well made and I would agree with both of them,
the implications of both of them. You can't ask somebody for
their vote and their support as an international institution if
you haven't done anything to build that rapport in advance, and
I think having diplomatic presence is part of that.
And, you know, again, I go back to what I said earlier.
Petrocaribe was a very successful program. Now I wish that we
had done Petrocaribe and not Venezuela, but now there is an
opportunity to change that. But we see the results. And when
the OAS under a very courageous secretary general, Luis
Almagro, tries to bring the institution toward recognizing that
Venezuela is no longer in compliance with the Inter-American
Democratic Charter, he is not getting the full support of the
hemisphere, and indeed much of the Caribbean Basin has not gone
along with that. And if you line up the votes, who voted in
favor and who abstained, you can do a pretty easy one for one
comparison based on who is a member of Petrocaribe.
And so the implication of your question I think is spot on,
you know, and that is why I think when we talk about the
Caribbean in Washington, oftentimes we think about it in the
context of, you know, island nations or programs or social
development, and all of these are very, very important issues.
Venezuela looks at this as a strategic issue. And the dividends
pay off down the road when Venezuela itself is in the spotlight
of the international community. Then they have friends that
they can rely on and it pays dividends for them.
So I think that at the end of the day that is a lesson
frankly that we can learn, and I think we can build toward
reversing that course.
Ms. Yearwood. I agree 100 percent with Eric. Venezuela
stepped in at a time that was very important for much of the
region and now the region is very much paying the price,
whether it is in debt or other areas related to votes and other
requirements that they do as a result of the----
Mr. Sires. Increased costs in energy too now.
Ms. Yearwood. Sorry?
Mr. Sires. An increase in the cost of energy also.
Ms. Yearwood. Oh, absolutely, absolutely. And so I think to
the point, we are at an important juncture now with the cost of
energy being what it is with the U.S. energy supply going up
and the region looking at ways to increase sustainable energy,
whether it is through natural gas or getting the region less
dependent on Petrocaribe and able to make these switches to new
types of energy is going to make a huge difference.
Mr. Sires. See, I don't think things happen by accident. I
think this was well calculated between Venezuela and Cuba and,
you know, unfortunately--well, we have an opportunity now to
fill in a void.
The other concern that I have is the significant increase
of China in this region. You know, we seem to be put to a lull
of sleep or something because everybody seems to move in and
then we react. And we don't seem to catch these things until
something like this happens, you know, like Venezuela.
So unfortunately, you know, since I have been here we have
been pushing--and I know Mr. Meeks and the other members that
are here, you know, this is an important region for us. It is
an important region for America and we really should
concentrate. So now you have the Chinese moving in. They are
going to go through the Panama Canal and they come in and they
throw money, you know, at these small countries, which in
reality they can't afford not to accept the money. So how much
of influence is there now of the Chinese? And I know it is
growing, but----
Ms. Yearwood. The Chinese influence, it is actually very
interesting to watch the way China has kind of come into the
region and the types of projects. Sometimes it is a sports
stadium. I think the recent, the Baha Mar debacle in the
Bahamas, you have seen the Chinese Government come in in a way
that the U.S. businesses cannot come in to any country. If a
Chinese developer comes into a country in the region they have
the Chinese financing and the Chinese Government behind them.
Mr. Sires. And the employees.
Ms. Yearwood. And the employees. And so you have
effectively got a package that the U.S. cannot--the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act and all sorts of other reasons, the U.S.
cannot compete in terms of the types of investment that they
are able to take in without kind of having to do the due
diligence behind it. And it is very welcome in a lot of places,
but what Baha Mar has shown us is that it can create a very
difficult situation for the countries where they go.
Mr. Farnsworth. I think Sally raises a really interesting
and important point in this context. You know, the Chinese or
Venezuelan model is a state-led model, so the capital of the
country, the leaders in the country can say this is what we are
going to do. We are going to create Petrocaribe or we are going
to build a sports stadium or we are going to declare that we
are going to develop these projects, whereas the U.S. model is
private sector-led model.
And the disconnect here is that we are dealing with smaller
economies, island nations, and in comparison of other
investment opportunities in other countries in Latin America,
much less worldwide, these are economies that generally aren't
going to draw that large investment except in a couple sectors
like tourism like we have been talking about.
And so there is a place, in my view, for the United States
Government to help leverage and facilitate private sector
engagement in the Caribbean Basin, but I think we have to be
very intentional about it. We can't just assume that okay, the
private sector will show up or they won't based on market
conditions and we will be happy with that. I think that this is
where the strategic emphasis comes in to say, look, you know,
during the 1980s we created the Caribbean Basin Initiative. It
was private sector-led, right, but the government facilitated
it, and that has been in large measure how we have worked in
terms of Caribbean issues.
I don't have any problem with that. I think that is
appropriate. But we are competing against state-led competitors
with a lot of money. And so this is some of the disconnect and
I think we have to recognize that and then develop the approach
based on what the reality is so that we can be more effective
in our approach.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. The Chair will now go to Mr. Yoho from Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you putting this
together, and I want to thank you for putting the pivot on our
neighbors in the Caribbean.
As you have stated and that we have seen, and it is not
just this administration, it is probably over the last 20 or 30
years where we have taken our eye off the ball in the
Caribbean. When we have nation states that close to us with
like cultures, you know, we value the same things, our family
values, things like that, that close to us, and we take the eye
off of that we start losing our competitiveness and we have
seen that.
I come from Florida, and we have over 105 million visitors
a year in the tourist trade and it is the gateway to the
Caribbean whether it is through our airports or through our
shipping ports. And it is so important down in that area and we
want people, you know, number one is to be secure in that area.
And with the conflicts going on in the world we don't want them
to invade in that area and unfortunately, we are starting to
see that.
And I think one of the biggest things is President Maduro,
after Chavez, seeing what is going on in Venezuela.
And we have seen in the past, when you have self-appointed
dictators that come to power and when they fall there is a
vacuum filled. We have seen that around the world. We have seen
it in the Middle East. And when that happens you are never
quite sure who is going to fill that void.
And we want to make sure that we can have, I don't want to
say an influence, but we want to, you know, promote the people
with the ideals, the same values that we have and help them
succeed in that without being meddling into their societies.
And it is just so important, especially with this time in our
nation and around the world with the conflicts going on. You
know, there is a collection of islands down there--nation
states, satellite countries--and like I said earlier we share
the same cultures, values in all except maybe for that one sore
thumb about 90 miles off our coast, and there is possibility of
changing.
And I think my questions are with the energy for the
Caribbean islands, if Venezuela collapses, which I know the oil
production will still go on, it is going to hurt all the
Caribbean nations. And so who will fill that void? Who would
best be to fill that? And what I want you to think about, I am
being a little bit jaded here. I think I would like to see an
American company come in there and fill that void. How would
you see that happening and what would you recommend? We will
start with you, Ms. Yearwood.
Ms. Yearwood. Thank you, Mr. Yoho. I think that the U.S. is
well placed to fill the void in the event that Venezuela is no
longer able to provide through the Petrocaribe program. I think
the surplus natural gas, I think the growth of clean and
renewable energy, the region is really at a crossroads in terms
of transitioning to clean and renewable energy whether its
solar or wind.
But there are other areas if I can make a couple of
recommendations. One of the issues, for example, is OPEC has a
large amount of investment in the Caribbean in the energy area.
But there are two issues. The size of the markets in the
smaller countries of the Caribbean don't necessarily enable
them to receive OPEC financing or really be able to put
together a good package for OPEC financing, and the second
point is lack of feasibility studies. OPEC doesn't make grants
and it doesn't do feasibility studies and so there is a lot of
legwork that needs to be done in order bring some of this new
technology into the space.
Mr. Yoho. Is there any private partnerships, private-public
partnerships or NGOs that you would recommend that would be
best suited, you know, with the oil companies and, you know,
one of our think tanks up here?
Ms. Yearwood. I would recommend Eric. No.
Mr. Yoho. You have to like that. Is that a segue you want
to----
Ms. Yearwood. No, I think there are a lot of entities in
the U.S. that are working on energy in the Caribbean.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. And I guess my concern is we can't worry
about what happened in the past over the last 20 or 30 years.
We can start from this point forward so that we have policies
in place so that we have a strong foothold in there. And I know
our feelings are we don't want to tell you how to live, we just
want to be good trading partners with you, but help become
strong trading partners where we develop an economic base in
your countries.
And with the influence of China, all my life China was kind
of an adolescent, but in the last, say 10 years, I have seen
them grow into puberty and they have a lot of money and they
are starting to feel the effects of their testosterone. And we
have seen that in the South China Sea, but we have seen the
investments they have done in the Caribbean, you know, in the
Bahamas--I think it was $3\1/2\ billion--and what they have
done in Panama and Honduras and all that.
I don't want to deny anybody doing business. I just think
there are better partners that we can have and I think that
would come from the good ol' U.S. of A. And so policies that
you would help direct us, you know, whether it is ag, energy,
just merchandise trade, what would you recommend, Mr.
Farnsworth?
Mr. Farnsworth. Well, Mr. Yoho, thank you for the question.
And let me make a quick footnote on the China issue, first, if
I can. You know, China's engagement in the Caribbean--and
Ambassador Bernal is the true expert on this. I don't want to
step on your toes.
But it is different in the Caribbean than it is in South
America, for example, where it is much more commercial, it is
much more commodities based. In the Caribbean, there is a very
healthy political component because of the desire for China to
be recognized globally, right. You still have the political
competition with Taiwan in parts of the Caribbean and Central
America, et cetera, et cetera, so we have to remember that part
of the aspect as well.
In terms of the energy relationship, one of the things we
are learning from the reforms in Mexico is it is not just oil
and gas drilling, for example. Everybody focuses on that in the
majors in the deepwater in the Gulf of Mexico and when is the
next bid round and all that. But what it is even more impactful
in Mexico is the power grid, the electricity, and when that
gets freed up the cost of electricity comes down and that is
really good for the consumer.
And what we see in the Caribbean, across the Caribbean is
the cost of electricity is really, really high. And so if you
can bring that cost down to the consumer, first of all, you
have more disposable income to spend on other things, but also
it becomes a much more competitive commercial platform to begin
to produce and so that begins to bring investment, which right
now is more limited because again on the size of the economy.
So if there is one aspect that could really be focused on,
you know, it is not let's continue to import dirty diesel fuel
and some of the really dirty pollutants that Venezuela is
providing. Let's help convert the Caribbean to a clean energy
power grid that can be used much more efficiently that where
the cost of electricity can come down and make the entire
region a much more competitive productive platform which will
help their economies long term.
So energy isn't just then seen as an energy sector issue,
it is seen as an economic issue which I think is how we need to
begin to view it.
Mr. Yoho. And I appreciate it. And I am out of time, but I
look forward to working with you in the future so that we can
draft legislation to help bolster the presence of America
there, and I think everybody wins in that situation. And I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. We are then joined by Ambassador
Bernal. Thanks for coming. I am sorry about the DC traffic and
probably exacerbated by the DC heat. But we are going to go
ahead and recognize you for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HIS EXCELLENCY RICHARD BERNAL, PRO-VICE CHANCELLOR
FOR GLOBAL AFFAIRS, UNIVERSITY OF THE WEST INDIES IN JAMAICA

Mr. Bernal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, my apologies for being
late. I left my house at 3 o'clock a.m. this morning. I was
going well until the Falun Gong had a demonstration on
Constitution Avenue.
I will very briefly summarize my verbal statement which is
that I think this is an important time for the U.S. to re-
examine its policy toward the Caribbean and to take a new bold
initiative in the Caribbean; because, the Caribbean has been
having a very difficult time since the global economic crisis;
a combination of long term structural institutional factors as
well as some short term cyclical factors, such as oil prices.
It is important for the U.S. and for Jamaica because the
U.S. is the main and largest trading partner and main source of
investment and tourists. It is in the interest of the U.S. to
have a prosperous, peaceful, and democratic Caribbean. In that
regard I focus on the economic issues, because I think the
economic issues impinge on all the other issues which are
important such as governance, democracy, anti-narcotics
campaigns.
I have identified six issues which I think need to be
addressed. The first issue which I think needs to be addressed
is the debt situation. The Caribbean countries have become some
of the most highly indebted countries in the world. The levels
of debt now for many countries have the necessity of several
restructuring exercises, and indeed the debt is now at a level
where these countries cannot grow out of debt; that something
has to be done.
The debt is in three forms and it is multilateral debt,
bilateral debt, and commercial debt. It is time to take an
initiative which significantly reduces the debt structure which
will free these economies to try to stimulate their own growth
process.
The multilateral debt needs to be stretched out and at a
much lower interest rate. The bilateral debt can be reduced
through a range of initiatives from debt-for-environment swaps
to cancellation. The commercial debt needs to be transferred
over to the multilaterals. This will give some fiscal space and
allow these countries to resume public investment and
investment in health and education.
Second issue is what I call international financial
intermediation. The de-risking of the correspondent banking
relationships are very important to the Caribbean because
international financial banks have been critical not only to
domestic economy but in its link to the global economy. Some
services have already been choked off and there must be a way
for us to find an initiative that combines the security goals
which we subscribe to, and also at the same time, allow
financial intermediation such as trade financing, transfers of
profits, debt payments, et cetera, to continue.
Thirdly, security. The small states of the Caribbean find
it very difficult to contend with transnational crime linked to
narcotics trafficking, international terrorism, cybersecurity,
et cetera. The U.S. has done an outstanding job in supporting
these countries, but I think there is room to do more in the
interest of our mutual security. Security these days can only
be defined as international and can only be responded to by
cooperation among countries.
Fourthly, in the trade area there are some good legislation
in place for trade. However, many of the Caribbean countries
are now service oriented countries and we need to examine
possibilities for promoting mutual and beneficial value chains
which combine U.S. and Caribbean in services such as health
care, education, and back office support. I think by combining
the skills on Capitol Hill with some of the human resources in
the Caribbean, these firms can remain competitive both here and
in the U.S.
Climate change. The Caribbean countries are coastal
societies. Infrastructure, economic activity, population, the
building environment are all concentrated on a narrow strip on
the coast, even for those countries which are not islands, for
example, Belize and Guyana. It means that they are among the
most vulnerable countries to climate change. More resources
need to be made available in a more accessible way to mitigate
climate change and to assist these countries in surviving. And
I point particularly to the tourist industry which is
critically dependent on the quality of that immediate coastal
strip.
Finally, energy. The Caribbean, bar the exceptions of
Trinidad and Tobago, depend heavily on importation of energy.
It is time for the Caribbean to move toward alternative energy
sources. Solar, wind, and thermal all have possibilities, and
to shift the production of electricity which is among the
highest cost in the world onto energy in less expensive
sources. That would serve to revive a whole range of economic
activity, including manufacturing.
And I conclude, Mr. Chairman, by saying that all of these
are interrelated aspects that need to be addressed. If we could
address them in one overall initiative led by the U.S. and
involving the development of financial institutions, I think
that they reinforce each other and it is time for a new bold
initiative in U.S. policy toward the Caribbean.
Thank you for allowing me to make this brief statement at
this late stage in the proceedings.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bernal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you so much for making the effort
to be here. Mr. Meeks has agreed we are going to skip over him
and go to the former chairman of the full committee, Ms. Ros-
Lehtinen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so very much and I apologize
for coming late. And we have another hearing which I am
chairing on Syria, but thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking
Member Sires, for holding this important hearing.
And I don't think that we can discuss U.S. foreign policy
initiatives with the Carribean without focusing on PDVSA and
Petrocaribe. Venezuela established Petrocaribe in 2005 to help
influence many countries in the hemisphere and up to this point
the strategy has worked. However, now we see the collapse of
the Venezuelan economy because of the incompetence of the
Maduro regime.
So it gives the U.S. an opportunity to fill that void, and
this is where we need the State Department and the Department
of Energy to be extremely focused on this effort right now
because it is in our national security interest to coordinate
an energy solution; a strategy so that fewer countries in the
Western Hemisphere would be dependent on a very unreliable
Venezuela.
And if we don't--and when not if Venezuela falls because
you see the writing on the wall--we mitigate the fall by not
allowing other countries in the region to go down with the
sinking ship. And I think that we have got to be working with
our partners, our allies in the Caribbean to help them take
advantage of the abundant and cheap natural gas and the new
advanced clean wind and solar technologies available. This way
we strengthen our partners' economies, we buffer the region
from the impacts of Venezuelan collapse and take realistic
steps toward reducing carbon emissions.
So the crisis in Venezuela may cause an oil supply
disruption. What impact would such a disruption have on the
Caribbean nations?
Mr. Bernal. My colleagues are determined to make sure I
carry a fair share of the load. First of all, I would like to
recognize your longstanding interest in Caribbean affairs.
Thank you for that.
The relationship with Venezuela is a long and complicated
one. Venezuela initiated the Petrocaribe at a time when many
Caribbean countries were really very stretched financially and
really needed some assistance. However, the relationship has
its complexities. For example, Venezuela claims a very large
share of Guyana which is a member of the CARICOM group. It also
has extended its claims in terms of coastal waters based on an
island almost 400 miles away from Venezuela and mainland, so
that the relationship is not all the Caribbean benefiting from
some financial support.
I think we are at a juncture where the relationship is
going to become very unpredictable because of nobody knows
exactly what will happen in the Caribbean with Venezuela. But I
think that this is time for a re-examination of the
relationship. Several Caribbean countries are thinking beyond
Petrocaribe because they don't assume that it will continue in
its present form and they have to be thinking of alternatives.
This creates a juncture in which new initiatives, including
from the U.S. in energy, would be very welcome in the region.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you. Thanks for taking time to run
down here. The Chair will now go to Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being
here, and good to see all of you who, you know, we rely upon
very much with your expertise and because the Caribbean is
extremely important, I think. I know it is to all of us in the
United States of America. It is really, you know when you look
at our hemisphere and we have got to make sure that we
strengthen and working together.
And I hear my colleagues in regards to especially
Petrocaribe, but I think that the issues that are confronting a
lot of the islands--and I notice, for example, Mr. Ambassador,
you listed as number six in order of priority the energy
crisis, et cetera, in trying to make sure. So I want to try to
find out as it pertains to the islands themselves the things
that are most pressing with them that would help them overall
with their economy, because I know, for example, you can't just
depend upon tourism or you can't just depend upon, you know,
they have the diversification of it needs to be there.
And one of the things that I know we have worked on and I
would like to get your assessment on the success of it. We have
been doing a lot in regards to in trading. And let's talk, for
example, in 2020 for Haiti the HOPE Act expires. Is HOPE good?
What do we need to do? How can we improve it? Would it help the
situation in Haiti because Haiti is crucial, I think, also to
the Caribbean. I don't know, and so that is important.
The two preferential trade programs with reference to
Caribbean imports the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act.
That is--where are we with that? Is that helpful? Do we need to
do more? Do we need to relook at it? You know, in some other
parts of the world, but looking at these trade agreements as a
mechanism of economic benefits for both sides.
So how do you see and how do you think that we can continue
to improve, you know, extend or modify some of the trade
agreements that we have with the Caribbean?
Ms. Yearwood. Thank you, Mr. Meeks. Thank you for your
leadership on Caribbean issues. I am going to tackle two issues
here primarily, and I will leave my colleagues to address some
of the others.
I think one of the key issues that the Caribbean has is
competitiveness. And I think to make better use of U.S.-
Caribbean trade agreements a lot of the competitive issues need
to be addressed. I mentioned in my testimony that the IDP they
are doing a lot of work on trade facilitation. That is going to
be important to getting the Caribbean more able to kind of have
single windows, reduce the costs of transportation, and reduce
the cost of clearance in moving goods.
There are interregional issues as well. Issues such as
traveling from one Caribbean island to the other can be more
expensive than going to Miami and then going back down. So
there are a lot of issues that the Caribbean needs to tackle in
order to become a more competitive place to do business and to
trade more effectively.
I didn't want to, however, not take the opportunity to say
something about Haiti. I did live there for 13 years and I do
follow what is going on there very closely. And I think it is
extremely critical that the HOPE bill not just go to 2020, but
go--there has to be some sustainability to what is going to
succeed the HOPE bill following 2020.
Haiti is in a very difficult situation right now
politically. Parliament is shaky to say the least, kind of an
interim President that may or may not constitutional. I am not
a Haitian constitutional expert, but I have questions. But at
this point in time, what Haiti needs more than anything else
once this particular juncture of political difficulty is
overcome, Haiti is going to need sustainability and stability
to its relationship for trade and investment with the United
States. So I think that is a critical issue that the Congress
needs to keep its eye on. Thank you.
Mr. Meeks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Farnsworth. If I could simply reinforce what Sally just
said, the issue of competitiveness is real and we deal with the
business community all the time. And again if you are are
dealing with smaller economies which don't have as many
prospects as some of the other opportunities for the
international investor, folks are going to go elsewhere. And so
there has to be in my view a singular attention to investment
climate issues. Energy is part of that. It is certainly not the
only aspect.
I think we also have to be aware of unintended
consequences. And you have done some really good work obviously
on the trade agenda, Mr. Meeks. Clearly the TPP is something
that Council of the Americas supports. We appreciate your
leadership and others of the subcommittee on that.
But there are perhaps some unintended consequences. And for
example, when the North American Free Trade Agreement was first
passed one of the strongest advocates for something that became
known as NAFTA Parity was Ambassador Richard Bernal of Jamaica
who came into the U.S. Government of which I was a member at
the time and said we support, we the Jamaicans, for example,
support NAFTA. It is a good thing, but we want to make sure
that Jamaica and the other Caribbean countries are not
negatively impacted by the trade and investment diversion that
might go to Mexico as a result of NAFTA.
I think that was a very important point then and it is a
very important point now. And to the extent that TPP goes
forward, and again I hope that it does. I strongly support it
and we hope that it is a near term issue. Nonetheless, with
some new entrants into textiles, for example, and agriculture
that are highly competitive in the global environment that will
impact countries in the Caribbean Basin.
It will impact Central American countries, some of the
Northern Triangle countries where we are giving a lot of U.S.
taxpayer assistance to which we support, but again the issue is
one of trade and investment diversion. We have to be careful
that doing the ``right thing'' with other economies we are not
negatively impacting some economies which are already stressed.
And so what is the answer here? I think the answer is to go
back to the original idea in some way of NAFTA Parity only this
is TPP parity, right? If Haiti, for example, is dependent on
the textiles trade with the United States, we I think need to
make sure that whatever we do in TPP doesn't unnecessarily
undermine that or doesn't create difficulties in a way that
would take away some of those advantages that Congress has
worked so hard over the years to develop. And it is not just
Haiti of course, but that is perhaps the best example.
So my point is that if we look at these in a more
comprehensive way, in a way that where you have a lot of
different, integration of different strands, then I think we
will come to a better place. And so as we are looking at these
issues strategically, I just very much support the way that you
are putting this in the context of it is not just this issue or
that issue or another issue, it is all of these together and
how can we move forward in a comprehensive integrated manner in
support of the Caribbean, and I think that is what we have to
keep foremost in mind.
Mr. Bernal. Let me begin by thanking you, Congressman
Meeks, for your consistent leadership on Caribbean issues. In
response to the issue that you raise, I believe that the onus
is not only on the U.S. but is on the Caribbean. We in the
Caribbean have to do some things to make it easier for business
to operate and to become internationally competitive. I remain
convinced that if we create the right kind of environment
between the U.S. and the Caribbean that there is private sector
initiative on investment and there are opportunities, very real
opportunities which can take place by combining Caribbean and
U.S. resources in a way beneficial both to the U.S. and to the
Caribbean.
In that regard, I think that we are focused a lot on trade
in goods. That is going to be difficult for the Caribbean
because of its energy imports and because of the small scale of
production. So I think we now have to begin to think about
services. After all, services is the fastest growing sector in
the world economy. There are areas in which the U.S. could
provide more services and there are areas for collaboration
where doing some of it in the Caribbean can allow U.S. firms to
retain their international competitiveness against China, Asia,
et cetera.
And I think we now need to look at what is it we have to do
to free services? For example, health care, retirement homes,
tourism, higher education, all of those are potential growth
sectors which are mutually beneficial. What the onus has to be
is to find ways to clear and establish a seamless economic
space between the U.S. and the Caribbean so that private sector
capital can work. There are opportunities.
Lastly, I would say that the Caribbean is becoming a much
more complex area because of the changes in policy toward Cuba,
the cross-cutting trade agreements such as CAFTA, et cetera,
and we have to think of the Caribbean now in a wider sense. In
regard to Haiti, I think very important is its continued
integration with the English-speaking Caribbean, because these
are well established democracies and it is an economic area
which holds opportunities for Haiti and there is now quite a
lot of Caribbean investment going into Haiti and vice versa.
One very large investment in petroleum distribution in the
Caribbean is from a Haitian firm.
So I think it is very important for that Caribbean
integration to continue to embrace Haiti and that should be
encouraged from the U.S. end as well.
Mr. Meeks. I think I will ask one question and that is,
what has been the engagement activity when you talk about some
of the planning of folks, say, of some of the international
banks like the IDB? Are they participating and they have ideas
to help and finance some of the businesses there? Or the IMF,
are they in--you know, in Jamaica we had a big problem at the
time when you talk about debt and trying to figure out.
What is the involvement of the international development
banks in the Caribbean and can, or should, the United States
use some of its influence with some of the banks that it also
makes contributions to?
Mr. Bernal. I will take the first shot on this one because
I just finished a week ago, 8 years on the board of directors
of the Inter-American Development Bank. I can assure you that
the Inter-American Development Bank in particular has been very
active and has provided substantial support across a range of
sectors. I believe that our big brother, the World Bank, has
contributed, but I would venture to suggest that there is scope
for much more resources to be put into the region.
The issue here is that the Caribbean is classified as
middle income, developed countries and are therefore excluded
from certain concessional facilities and are not necessarily
seen as a priority when it comes to poverty alleviation. But
while these are middle income countries, the basis of their
economies is fragile. Sometimes it is one sector, tourism, and
therefore while they are middle income they are vulnerable and
need continued support. The U.S., I think, has a critical role
in urging the development institutions to continue to play a
role in the Caribbean.
Mr. Farnsworth. Just a quick coda to that as well. We have
talked a little bit about the debt overhang that affects the
Caribbean and so there is a potential future role, maybe not
too far in the future, in terms of the international banks
perhaps the IMF as well to really help work through some of
those debt issues in a meaningful and lasting way. So a lot has
already been done as the Ambassador was indicating, but I think
there is even a greater role going forward that could be
contemplated.
Mr. Duncan. We have time for a few more questions. I
thought it was going to be just the ranking member and myself.
I am glad we had such active participation. I am glad you
showed up.
Brazil is concerned about tourism with regard to the
Olympics. And tourism being such a big part of the Caribbean
nations' economy and a big part of the U.S. tourism headed
there--Zika. It has got to be on their minds. I guess I am
concerned about how much U.S. assistance will make it to the
Caribbean nations and whether Zika is even a concern on the
island nations themselves and what effect that may have on
tourism, or expected effects. So if you all could delve on that
a little bit because that is on my constituents' minds.
Eric?
Mr. Farnsworth. It is very much on the minds of the
hemisphere community. You referenced Brazil and I think that is
absolutely correct. Although, in Brazil right now it is the
winter and the mosquito population in the winter tends to go
down, and so at least we hear from the Olympic organizers that
Zika won't be as much of an issue during this current time of
the Olympics, et cetera.
But look, Zika is an issue across the region and indeed
here in the United States too. As I explain in my prepared
comments, it seems to me that this could be an easy win for the
United States if we want to put it in those terms. Zika affects
all of us. We all have a very real incentive to get rid of it
as fast and as quickly and as comprehensively as possible.
So there is a lot of good research going on in the United
States and other places. Once the vaccine or the right approach
to address Zika comes forward, why not, working with the
Caribbean partners and others in the hemisphere have a very
significant public health initiative that affects people where
they live? I mean, this is the type of thing, these are the
types of lessons we are learning that are very effective from
other countries when they do it whether it is Venezuela,
whether it is China, whether it is other countries because this
is what people need.
And if the United States could be seen as helping to
address a very relevant public health issue and do so in a cost
effective way in partnership with host governments, I think
that is an obvious area to try to explore.
Ms. Yearwood. The Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Association,
the Caribbean Tourism Organization, the Caribbean Public Health
Agency, and the Pan American Health Organization are all
intimately involved in trying to deal with the Zika crisis not
just at the global level but also at the tourism level. People
recognize Zika as a singular issue that could impact the
economy of the entire region and so they are very cognizant and
working toward trying to contain the threats and dealing with
the vector management, et cetera.
I think to Eric's point, the ability of those agencies to
have greater participation by the U.S. Government providing
support, technical assistance, and working with CDC, getting
additional resources into the fight could only be helpful.
Mr. Bernal. Mr. Chairman, if you will permit me. Zika is a
problem in itself, but it raises a much broader issue which is
hemispheric and global pandemics. There are so many people
moving around the region from the U.S., Canada, from the
Caribbean--several million a year--that it is an interest of
common and mutual importance that we try to combat these
pandemics.
Early intervention is critical. The moment--we need to have
a fast-acting reaction to the possibility of pandemics. We
know, for example, that way back in the '60s when there was an
outbreak of polio in Jamaica that for a relatively small amount
of expenditure on preventive measures, vaccines, we could have
prevented a major human tragedy.
So one of the things we can look at is a fast-reacting
mechanism for possible pandemics. It is in our mutual interest.
These are issues which are not national or even regional. They
are global, and the only way to tackle them is by effective
cooperation.
In passing, let me say that the debt situation is such that
it is beginning to constrain the governments and their ability
to do health and education which has long term adverse
consequences for development. If we could address the debt, and
maybe one of the areas to look at is to bring in foundations
and development agents to look at debt-for-health swaps in
which some of the debt can be alleviated and that money be put
into preventive health care.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that. I would be remiss if I
didn't mention Haiti and Dominican Republic, and ask--I will
let you ask the question if you would like.
Mr. Meeks. I would be remiss if I didn't ask about Haiti
and the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Duncan. So migration, economy, situation in Haiti with
the government, if you all just want to touch on that.
Ms. Yearwood. That is opening a rabbit hole, but there are
a lot of possible ways to go at this question. Haiti is in a
particularly interesting situation. As I mentioned I was there
for 13 years. I have been working on the issue for almost 20
years, and I think at this particular point in time it is as
bad as I have ever seen it in terms of the simple inability to
know what is going to happen. And whether it is with the
Parliament or the government, crime is on the rise.
Budget wise, we know the U.S. and European Union are not
going to be providing money toward elections. Last I heard,
there was no money in the Haitian budget for elections, so
somehow they need to find 55 million to get to a set of
elections that nobody is certain, you know, if it can happen
and if it will happen because of the impasse on the ground
there. That of course has repercussions on the DR-Haiti
migration issue. If Haiti continues to slide downhill, it is
going to be hard pressed for anybody to be able to stop the
flight of migrants either to the Dominican Republic, the
Bahamas, Turks and Caicos, Jamaica, and of course Florida and
the United States.
So I don't know if the question is how do we solve this
because I don't know, but it is I think something that is just
critical at this moment and I think that the potential is there
for this to go very bad very quickly.
Mr. Duncan. I recognize the ranking member for a question.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. You know I would be remiss if I
didn't bring up Cuba. You know, many of these island nations,
their main source of income is tourism. We have this push now
to open up Cuba, lifting the travel embargo and making it
easier for Americans to travel to Cuba. Now how much of a
detriment is that going to be for the rest of the islands,
because Cuba has always been seen as the place to go in the
Caribbean. And I think that that is going to hurt the economy
of a lot of these islands.
First of all, it is 90 miles from Miami, you could
practically swim there, and, you know, it has always been this
destination with this mystique. They still think they are going
to see Hemingway having a drink over there at La Bodeguita. So
how do you see that happening? What do you see happening there
as tourism keeps increasing and people don't go to the other
destinations? Yes.
Mr. Bernal. The return of Cuba to as a destination for
American tourists has both negative and positive effects. In
the short run it is a new destination. It is going to attract a
lot of investment and tourists there, and that could divert,
particularly, tourists from the nearest islands to Cuba such as
the Bahamas and Dominican Republic, but it could affect the
entire Caribbean.
However, the tourist industry has grown steadily each year
globally and in the Caribbean even in the wake of the global
financial crisis, so there is room to accommodate further
growth. What is important for the Caribbean is to do the
following: One, to maintain the freshness of the tourism
product and its international competitiveness in price and
quality; and secondly, to look for the possibility of multiple
destination tourism. That is, some time in Cuba, some time in
the rest of the Caribbean, find collaborative ways.
Lastly, the Caribbean has tremendous tourism expertise and
management which it can offer to Cuba in building Cuban
tourism. One of the essential things is to ensure that as
airlift comes from new markets like China that the Caribbean
also makes sure that it is competitive with the new
destinations. For example, direct flights from China to Cuba,
but not yet to the rest of the Caribbean.
So the Caribbean faces competition, but it is an industry
in the Caribbean which has shown an ability to remain
internationally competitive and attractive. I have no doubt
that the industry will continue to grow, but it needs to up its
game because of the new competition.
Ms. Yearwood. I don't have a lot to add to Ambassador
Bernal's point. International tourism grew by 4 percent in
2015; global trade grew by 2.8 percent. So what we do know it
that the tourism market continues to expand and the Caribbean's
growth has been positive for awhile now. So I think on the
whole, the Caribbean is doing well.
To the point, Cuba does present a little bit of a challenge
and there have been a number of studies done. The Caribbean
Hotel & Tourism did do a study on the disruption that Cuba
could cause. But one of the points that there is, is that the
U.S. is the only country that has the embargo on Cuba and other
countries have been traveling to Cuba without any interference
forever, I guess, and so that market is safe. You have the
Canadians, the Europeans. To Ambassador Bernal's point the
emerging Chinese and Asian market coming into the Caribbean, so
I think it is both a challenge and an opportunity. But I think
as long the Caribbean does work on its competitive issues and
does remain able to compete with Cuba on cost and quality they
should be okay.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Well, as you can see, on a day when sessions
end and people are leaving town we have the committee members
come even unexpected to the chairman, and that shows the
importance that the Caribbean region is to our subcommittee, to
Congress as a whole, and I think to the government.
We are going to continue delving into these issues and
figuring out ways that we can engage more, especially in light
of Venezuela as we have talked about, and what may or may not
happen with Petrocaribe. I think there is great opportunity. I
talk about jobs, energy, and the founding fathers all the time.
I think there is opportunity in jobs, opportunity in energy,
and opportunity for hemispheric engagement for the country and
especially in this region.
So witnesses are reminded there may be other questions that
are submitted and we ask you to respond to those. We will leave
the record open for 10 days. And we want to thank you Eric,
Sally, and Ambassador. Thanks for coming and I look forward to
continuing the conversation. Yes, thank you. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bernal. It would be remiss of us if we didn't place on
record our appreciation to you for your leadership and chairing
of the committee and for convening this session to give us an
opportunity to share some views with you, and we place on
record our appreciation. It will be remiss of us.
Mr. Duncan. Well, let's put the attention where it is
directed. My ranking member wanted to focus on this issue and I
am glad he did. We were welcome to, happy to accommodate him
and I appreciate that. It kind of directed my focus toward the
region and I am super glad that he did.
So we will look forward to seeing you in September after
this break and I hope everyone has a good break as well. And
with that the committee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:39 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
