- THE CRUDE OIL EXPORT BAN: HELPFUL OR HURTFUL?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE CRUDE OIL EXPORT BAN:
HELPFUL OR HURTFUL?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-22

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-178 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade

TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
PAUL COOK, California                BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Michael McCaul, United States House of
Representatives................................................     3
The Honorable Joe Barton, United States House of Representatives.     8
Mr. Jason Grumet, founder and president, Bipartisan Policy Center    12
Ms. Elizabeth Rosenberg, director, Energy, Economics, and
Security Program, Center for a New American Security...........    22
Mr. Jason Bordoff, founding director, Center on Global Energy
Policy, Columbia University....................................    32
Mr. Stephen Kretzmann, founder and executive director, Oil Change
International..................................................    42

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Michael McCaul: Prepared statement.................     5
The Honorable Joe Barton: Prepared statement.....................    10
Mr. Jason Grumet: Prepared statement.............................    15
Ms. Elizabeth Rosenberg: Prepared statement......................    24
Mr. Jason Bordoff: Prepared statement............................    34
Mr. Stephen Kretzmann: Prepared statement........................    44

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    64
Hearing minutes..................................................    65
The Honorable Dana Rohrabacher, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California: Prepared statement....................    66
The Honorable Scott Perry, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Prepared statement...............    69

THE CRUDE OIL EXPORT BAN:
HELPFUL OR HURTFUL?

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 14, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Poe (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Poe. The subcommittee will come to order. Without
objection, all members may have 5 days to submit statements,
questions, extraneous materials for the record subject to the
length limitation in the rules.
The United States is now the largest crude oil producer in
the world. We have more oil than we can refine or store. The
majority of U.S. refineries were built to handle heavy, sour
crude, but oil production is light, sweet crude. The United
States' refineries cannot keep up with the new production.
Normally producers would simply pump oil into storage
containers, but experts say those storage tanks could fill up
before the end of this very month. Instead of exporting excess
oil like producers get to do in other nations, the ban is
already forcing U.S. oil producers to leave oil in the ground
and lay off workers. About 50 percent of the working rigs in my
home state of Texas have had to shut down in just the last 6
months. Seventy thousand oil workers have been laid off since
Thanksgiving.
The solution to this problem is clear: Export crude oil;
have the ban lifted so that it can be exported. Critics of
lifting the ban are afraid the United States' oil exports will
lead to higher domestic gas prices. However, many studies have
debunked this myth. Gas prices are more closely linked to the
international market, or Brent Price, than the domestic price
of crude because refined products like gasoline are traded
freely on the international market. So the more crude oil we
have, the more we can put on the international market, and the
lower the international price of crude. The lower the
international price of crude the lower the price of gas for
America.
A Rice University study released in March 2015 reviewed
previous studies that examined the impact of removing the ban
on gas prices. They found that all studies underscore that
lifting of the export ban will not translate into higher
gasoline prices. In fact, studies generally project gasoline
prices in the U.S. will fall once the ban is lifted.
U.S. crude entering the global market will increase the
international oil supply and decrease the price of gas. The
only thing the studies do not agree on is just how much the gas
prices will drop. Lifting the ban will also lead to more jobs
and higher GDP. An IHS study predicts crude oil exports would
support nearly 300,000 jobs by 2018. Removing the export ban
would add 26 billion to the GDP per year and improve labor
income about $158 per year on average.
As it improves the U.S. economy, removing the ban will also
improve our national security. The original purpose of the ban
put back in 1973 was to insulate the United States from the
volatility of the international oil market. Ironically, today
the ban exposes the United States' market to volatility. If
ISIS continues to wreak havoc and disrupt oil prices in places
like Libya and Iraq, having more U.S. crude oil on the market
would help prevent a spike in the price of crude oil and gas
prices. Lifting the ban would free us up to help our allies.
Europe gets 40 percent of its oil from Russia. Exporting
crude oil would give the Europeans an alternative to having to
depend on Russia. It would also increase our influence in Asia.
Japan and South Korea partly rely on crude oil from Iran to
satisfy the growing energy consumption. U.S. exports can help
diminish that reliance.
It is ironic to me, with the so-called deal with the
Iranians, that it is now the U.S. Government's long-term policy
to allow Iran to export crude oil and inject billions of
dollars in their own economy. At the same time, it is still the
U.S. Government's policy to prohibit American producers from
doing the same. It seems to me what is good for the Iranian oil
exports, should be the same deal that the United States' oil
producers get.
U.S. exports offer a stable energy to our allies and
decrease their reliance on dictators and state sponsors of
terror. Lifting the ban shows the U.S. is serious about
supporting free markets around the world. We criticize China
for not exporting rare earth materials and yet we are not
exporting crude oil. Removing the ban will give us more
credibility when we criticize export bans in other nations.
All in all, it is time we remove the crude oil export ban.
Exporting crude oil will lower gas prices, increase American
jobs and strengthen our national security. And that is just the
way it is, to coin a phrase.
I will now yield to the ranking member, Mr. Keating from
Massachusetts for his opening statement.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Chairman Poe. And I would
like to thank our witnesses, my colleagues, for being here. I
feel a little bit relieved, because I am juggling between an
important bill in Homeland Security today. And it is great to
see the chairman here, and I think it also shows how important
he believes this issue is for his district.
And I look forward to an informative discussion today
concerning what our witnesses see as the costs and benefits of
lifting the current ban on exporting U.S. crude oil. It is
vital that we consider the economic, environmental, and foreign
policy implications of our dependence on fossil fuels and of
the imports by the United States and our allies of oil and gas
from volatile regions such as the Middle East and Eurasia.
And while some oil companies advocate for diversification
of energy sources on geopolitical grounds, I have seen
instances of some oil companies actually obstructing renewable
energy technologies, thereby undercutting their own argument,
some of them, for diversification. I am concerned about the
environmental consequences of ending the crude oil export ban
and look forward to hearing from our witnesses in that regard.
Lifting the export ban would cause the domestic price of
crude oil to increase, many say, which would then lead to an
increase in the production of U.S. crude oil. An increase in
the production of domestic crude oil would have serious
negative environmental impacts as well.
For example, rising domestic crude oil production would
heighten the risk of spills in transporting crude oil by
pipeline, rail, truck, barge or tanker, and the negative health
and environmental impacts of those spills are a concern as
well. In addition to expanded domestic crude oil production, it
would likely cause a significant increase in the release of
carbon dioxide which contributes to climate change.
The environmental cost of producing crude oil and
continuing to rely on fossil fuels underscores that U.S. energy
policy must seek to diversify our sources of energy and
increase the production of wind, solar and other forms of
cleaner, renewable energy. So I hope that is part of the
discussion today as well and with that I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Poe. I thank the ranking member. All members may file
their statements. Without objection, all the witnesses'
prepared statements will be made a part of the record, and I
will now introduce our first two witnesses on the first panel,
both Members of Congress.
Congressman Michael McCaul represents the 10th
congressional district in the great state of Texas. Congressman
McMaul, as already stated, is chairman of the House Committee
on Homeland Security.
We also have Congressman Joe Barton. He is from Texas as
well and represents the 6th district. Congressman Barton is the
chairman emeritus of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
Both representatives have introduced legislation to lift the
crude oil export ban that is pending before this subcommittee.
I appreciate both of you being here. I will say for the
record, Mr. McCaul does have a markup very soon. And without
objection as soon as you testify you may leave, and Mr. Barton
will stick around and answer all of the questions that would
have been addressed to you after he testifies.
Mr. McCaul?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL MCCAUL, UNITED STATES HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES

Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am sure Mr.
Barton will do a fine job answering questions directed at me. I
must say we mentioned how intimidating it is to be sitting in
the well here with the chair and ranking member so high up on
the dias, and I can only imagine what the criminal defendants
in your courtroom, how they must have felt before they went
before you. Fortunately, I never had that opportunity.
So I just need to say thank you for having this hearing and
markup on this very important issue. It is long overdue to lift
the 40-year-old ban on crude oil exports. And I think it is
fitting that we should have this discussion in the Foreign
Affairs Committee because crude oil exports is a major foreign
policy issue.
Around the world our friends and allies are looking for a
stable and reliable supply of American energy. And countries
like Russia abuse their status as a dominant energy supplier to
bully their neighbors in Europe and Central Asia, while supply
disruptions from places like Iran and Libya leave the global
oil markets vulnerable to price spikes. The geopolitical
benefits of American energy exports as a diplomatic tool will
both make us stronger economically and provide critical support
to our partners around the world.
But don't take it from me, take it from the European
Union's trade negotiators who leaked a memo last year
acknowledging that the crisis, and this is their
quote:
unquote. deg. ``The crisis in Ukraine confirms
the delicate situation faced by the EU with regard to energy
independence.''
And then they urged the administration privately to lift,
they said, ``Lifting bilateral restrictions on gas and crude
oil to increase security and instability through open
markets.'' To lift these restrictions to increase security and
stability--this is the European Union. This is not you or I
talking on the Republican side of the aisle.
Or take it from Larry Summers, President Obama's former
director of the National Economic Council and President
Clinton's former Treasury secretary, hardly a Republican from
Texas--I put that one in my script. He argues that if we wish
to have more power and influence in the world in support of our
security interest and in support of our values, and if we wish
to have an influence, that we pay for with neither blood nor
taxes, I do not see a more constructive approach than
permitting the export of fossil fuels. Larry Summers. Of course
the ranking member knows him well having represented the Boston
area, and of course Harvard University being there. Some of my
colleagues--I yield.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McCaul follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Keating. Mr. Chairman, you have gone there too, as a
Texan.
Mr. McCaul. Some of my colleagues are skeptical. I don't
question their intent, but they are skeptical about lifting the
ban. They contend that allowing crude oil exports could
increase gas prices. They also argue that keeping our crude oil
here at home makes us more energy secure.
Allow me to address both of these points. First, the
nonpartisan Government Accountability Office found that
removing crude oil export restrictions will actually decrease
gasoline prices by 1.5 to 13 cents per gallon for American
consumers. The Energy Information Administration explained this
somewhat counterintuitive phenomenon, pointing out that the
effect that a relaxation of current limitations on U.S. crude
oil exports would have on U.S. gasoline prices would likely
depend on its effect on international crude oil prices rather
than its effect on domestic crude oil prices.
We already allow for the free trade of gasoline so there is
no reason why crude oil should be treated differently. Keeping
the ban in place will in fact make us less energy secure,
restrict economic growth, and without the option to export to
foreign markets our producers will continue to be forced to
sell their crude oil at an artificially discounted rate--which
is already causing them, as the chairman mentioned, to cut back
production by 50 percent. This is a real problem in states like
mine where independent small producers are laying off workers.
It also holds back growth in states that produce little to no
energy at all because of the effect on other industries that
support crude oil producers.
Moreover, U.S. refineries are not fully optimized to
process the explosive growth in domestic production of light,
sweet crude in states like Texas and North Dakota, rather, they
are configured to refine heavy crude from countries such as
Canada and Mexico. Allowing for the free trade of crude oil
will make the market more efficient by correcting this
producer/refiner mismatch.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the crude oil export
restrictions enacted in the wake of the 1970s era oil embargo
are no longer justified given today's market conditions. And as
the chairman of Homeland Security, if this has a devastating or
detrimental impact on ISIS and Iran, I think that would be a
positive thing in our foreign policy and homeland security and
I urge the subcommittee to repeal the export ban in its
entirety as my bill does. But I think it is critical that
Congress create a safety valve that ensures the President has
the ability to restrict our exports in the case of unforeseen
national emergencies. My bill, H.R. 156, the Crude Oil Export
Act, which has been referred to this subcommittee, has such a
provision.
So I want to thank you again for drawing attention to the
issue. It is an important issue. I think there will be a
healthy debate on the committee that I serve on as well on this
issue and I look forward to the day that they are both marked
up and sent to the House floor for a vote. And with that I
yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the chairman, Chairman McCaul, and you can
leave whenever you need to get to your committee. However,
hopefully Mr. Keating the ranking member will stick around here
for awhile.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. McCaul. When we have votes I will need the ranking
member on the markup. So with that I yield back.
Mr. Poe. All right.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOE BARTON, UNITED STATES HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES

Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
Ranking Member Keating, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Cook, Mr. Perry, Mr.
Ribble, and Mr. Rohrabacher for attending this hearing. A
special thanks to you, Chairman, for scheduling it. I am glad
that your committee doesn't have a limitation on the number of
Texas witnesses. Most committees do, but I am glad that you are
ecumenical. I am going to submit my written statement for the
record and just speak extemporaneously.
My bill is a very simple bill. It is a page long. It
repeals the ban on crude oil exports that was first established
back in 1975. It repeals it in its entirety. It is not phased
in and phased out. It just repeals it very simple, and then it
requires a study of what to do, if anything, with the strategic
petroleum reserve which we established at about that same time
as a buffer against any future Arab oil embargoes.
Back in 1975 when the ban was put in place the world was a
different place. U.S. production was declining and imports were
increasing. We were in a bad economic situation. And it was
felt at that time that oil was of such strategic importance
that it should not be allowed to be exported. It is the only
energy commodity that is so restricted. We export coal. We
export natural gas. We even export wood chips and electricity.
But we don't export crude oil.
Now oil is fungible, Mr. Chairman and members of this
subcommittee. There are differences in viscosity and sulfur
content, but basically oil is oil. It can go anywhere. If we
had a barrel of West Texas intermediate and we had a barrel of
Saudi light, an expert with some testing could tell the
difference but nobody on this committee could tell the
difference.
So the reason that I think we need to repeal the ban is
pretty straightforward. U.S. oil production is increasing. It
is over 10 million barrels a day and going up at least for the
time being. We produce more oil than Saudi Arabia which is
number two, or Russia that is number three. If we were to
repeal the ban on crude oil exports, we would allow U.S.
producers to sell their oil to any willing buyer whether it was
domestic or foreign.
What difference does that make you might ask? Well, it is
pretty straightforward. Because we have a ban on producers
selling on the world market today they can only sell to
domestic refiners. Now that is automatically a bad thing. I am
a friend of the U.S. refining industry. But because they can't
sell on the world market and because there is such a glut of
oil being produced in the United States, U.S. refiners don't
have to pay the world market price. So they get a discount,
what I call a ``domestic discount.'' And again, that in and of
itself is not automatically a bad thing.
But the refiners take this discount, they offer our
producers less, they refine it and then they export on the
world market. We are exporting about 3 million barrels a day of
refined products. Those products are sold at world market
prices, but the producer who is producing the crude oil is not
getting the world price.
Now that discount has varied over time. Right now it is
about $10 a barrel. It has been as high as 30. If we repeal the
ban, Mr. Chairman, on crude oil exports that discount
disappears. Now that is not necessarily a bad thing for U.S.
refiners, but it will be a good thing for U.S. consumers
because putting more U.S. oil or any U.S. oil on the world
market will tend to depress or at least stabilize world market
prices, and that will result in lower pump prices over time for
our consumers whether they be in Massachusetts, California,
Texas or wherever.
So Mr. Chairman, my time is about to expire but let me
simply say, this is a win-win. It is a win for the consumer. It
is a win for the producer. It is a win for the strategic
interests of the United States, and it puts pressure on the
Saudis and the Russians which are not, at least in the case of
Russia is not always our friend.
With that, my time is expired. I would be happy to answer
any questions. But thank you for the hearing and thank all the
members for their attendance.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barton follows:]

----------

Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman for his testimony. Are there
any questions from members of the panel?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Rohrabacher. And let me
just congratulate our colleagues, Mr. McCaul and Barton, moving
forward like this. This is a really important issue and in the
long run it is going to have a very positive impact on our
people. And it is time that government got off our hind end and
just got out there and got some things done and this is one of
the things we could do to make things better. So thank you very
much for your leadership.
Mr. Poe. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Anyone else?
I want to thank you, Mr. Barton, for being here. You are
excused. You do not have to stay.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, sir. And let me simply say I am
willing to discuss this one-on-one with any of the members of
your subcommittee or the full committee. I do sincerely
appreciate you having a hearing and I look forward to
discussing this in the future. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Barton.
We will get ready for our next panel, if they will come up.
I want to thank our panelists for being here. I will introduce
each one of you, and then we will go in the same order for your
testimony; and limit your testimony to 5 minutes please.
Mr. Jason Grumet is the founder and president of the
Bipartisan Policy Center. Previously Mr. Grumet founded and
directed the National Commission on Energy Policy.
Ms. Elizabeth Rosenberg is director of the Energy,
Economics and Security Program at the Center for a New American
Security. Prior to this position, Ms. Rosenberg served as a
senior advisor at the U.S. Department of the Treasury to the
assistant secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial
Crimes, and then to the undersecretary for Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence.
Mr. Jason Bordoff is professor of Professional Practice in
International and Public Affairs and founding director of the
Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University. Before
joining the Columbia faculty, Mr. Bordoff served as special
assistant to the President and senior director for energy and
climate change on the staff of the National Security Council.
Dr. Stephen Kretzmann is the founder and executive director
of Oil Change International. Mr. Kretzmann has worked on
environmental and social issues around the global fossil fuel
industry for the last 25 years.
Mr. Grumet, we will start with you, and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. JASON GRUMET, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT,
BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER

Mr. Grumet. Thank you very much, Chairman Poe, Ranking
Member Keating, Mr. Sherman. I will thank you again, Chairman
Poe, Ranking Member Keating, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Ribble, Mr.
Rohrabacher, the committee, for the privilege to be with you
this morning. As I hope my testimony reveals, the Bipartisan
Policy Center supports efforts to lift restrictions on crude
oil exports.
In the broadest sense, this ban is a 40-year-old
anachronism. It was passed at a moment of significant national
weakness. The irony is that this policy is now inhibiting one
of our nation's greatest strengths. Our energy abundance has
profound potential to continue to accelerate our economic
recovery, to strengthen our interests internationally, and we
do believe it is time for it to be reconsidered and lifted.
Left unaddressed, the policy will undermine domestic production
and it will weaken our recovery.
But more relevant, I think, to this committee, keeping U.S.
resources and market power on the sidelines empowers our
adversaries to use their energy as a weapon. It diminishes our
ability to produce a myriad, and pursue a myriad, of policy
imperatives, and it undermines our ability and credibility to
advocate for free trade in open markets.
What I would like to do is try to summarize and frame a few
ideas around the economy and then around foreign policy, and if
the clock allows a few words about maybe a path forward. And
let me just begin in the crucible of at least the political
conversation which of course is gas prices.
Inevitably, the political debate will ultimately come down
to assertions and perceptions about the impact of any policy
change on the price at the pump. But fundamentally, consumers
are really somewhat on the sidelines in this debate. This
debate is fundamentally a commercial dispute between producers
who want access to the prices in a global market and refiners
who are enjoying, as the Congressman said, the discount of a
lower cost crude supply.
For many, I think, the expectations about consumer impact
rest on the misconception that refiners through some
imagination of altruism are going to pass on these savings to
consumers and drivers. But this simply is not how competitive
markets work. Refiners appropriately seek the highest price for
their product capturing any windfall for their shareholders.
Because gasoline and refined products are of course sold
globally, it is the global price that affects us here in the
U.S. and not the price of domestic crude.
And there have been a number of studies which I hope we
will talk about a little bit that basically endorse this
proposition. The group, IHS, did a detailed assessment which
asserted that prices in the U.S. would fall by 8 to 12 cents a
gallon. Mr. Bordoff has done fine work that I believe suggests
that the price could go down by up to 8 cents a gallon. Rice
University, the Energy Information Administration, and the
Resources for the Future, have all essentially confirmed the
same idea: That lifting the mandate will increase global
production, and in doing so, add supply to the market which
will create reductions in price and more resiliency.
And while none of us can pretend to know exactly what the
extent of those benefits are--and I would suggest, Mr. Poe,
that if we did I would ask you to pause the hearing so we could
all run and call our brokers--it is pretty clear that adding
supply to the global market is going to have a beneficial
impact on prices.
One last point about economics and that is the simple but
obvious point about jobs. The abundance in energy has been a
dramatic, I think, improvement to recent economic struggles and
by increasing production we will in fact increase the
availability of good high paying jobs in this country. It is
true that the market for jobs around energy production has
diminished as prices have gone down, but consumers have had
that benefit of lower prices. The double whammy of the ban is
that it depresses economic productivity at home without in fact
providing those consumer benefits, and that I think is the
reason economically why we believe it is a barrier to progress.
Let me turn now to trade and then a moment on how we
project power. I think the U.S. has righteously decried
resource nationalism for decades and protectionism that has
inhibited and hindered global energy markets. And until
recently our four decade old ban was essentially, I would like
to think, was kind of a quaint hypocrisy. It was an aberration
in policy, but it really had no impact on markets because we
had no excess capacity in fact to share with the world. This
has now of course changed, and for the Congress to perpetuate
the ban at this moment I think would in fact undermine our
credibility in promoting open markets.
Finally, talking about the impact on foreign policy, the
ban simply empowers our adversaries. Absent spare capacity in
the global market, any unanticipated loss of supply can have a
devastating effect on our economy and the economy of our
allies, and so in a no-margin environment people who wish us
harm are essentially empowered. Our ability to pursue our
national interests are also inhibited. If our economy and the
global economy is essentially looking over its shoulder at
every moment, our ability to have significant coalitions like
that we brought together around Iran, I think, would be
disabled. Our ability to go to our allies and say, ``Listen, we
need you to stick with us; sanctions only work if, in fact,
they are broadly applied and we can now give you confidence
that this is not going to cause you economic harm at home,'' we
were able to say that because of domestic production. Lifting
the ban would only strengthen our hand.
And so while it is impossible to precisely delineate the
prospective foreign policy of our energy abundance, I don't
think it is exaggerated to say that our ability to fortify the
global energy market will neutralize a myriad of threats and it
will increase our options and strengthen our hands across the
globe. And I thank you for the opportunity to be here.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Grumet follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you.
Ms. Rosenberg?

STATEMENT OF MS. ELIZABETH ROSENBERG, DIRECTOR, ENERGY,
ECONOMICS, AND SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER FOR A NEW AMERICAN
SECURITY

Ms. Rosenberg. Thank you, Chairman Poe, Ranking Member
Keating, members of the committee, for the opportunity to
testify today on the U.S. crude oil export ban. Recent dramatic
increases in U.S. energy production have reshaped our oil
industry, our industrial output and many of our global trading
relationships, as my co-panelists and the prior testifiers
already indicated. The oil boom has improved our GDP and
balance of trade and meaningfully advanced our energy and
national security. These benefits however will be clipped if
policymakers do not change 1970s era crude export policies that
prevent U.S. oil from moving to markets overseas.
In today's abundant oil market, supply conditions with a
problematic mismatch between increasing new volumes of domestic
light oil and a refining industry geared toward heavier oil,
having export restrictions does not make sense. They prevent
U.S. producers from accessing international buyers able to
process more light crude and who will pay international
benchmark prices. They depress domestic prices and distort the
market. And in turn, this constrains the growth potential for
domestic producers and our economy more broadly. Only a subset
of American refiners benefit from the depressed domestic oil
prices and they do not pass on cost savings to consumers as
gasoline prices are largely set by global benchmarks.
Removing the oil export ban while promoting responsible
production and energy efficiency will help to alleviate energy
market distortions, and improve productivity, natural resource
stewardship and economic performance. It will stimulate energy
production growth which will decrease domestic gasoline prices
and expand GDP.
Strengthening our economy, the engine of our national
security, strengthens the United States to lead on
international economic, strategic and defense matters. Lifting
the ban will also support our foreign partners and our
interests abroad. More U.S. crude shipped overseas will
diversify the global supply pool and allow our trading
counterparts abroad to achieve a better mix of imported energy
commodities. This will enhance market efficiencies and lower
costs for consumers.
These factors make the United States a more important
trading partner for economies abroad and therefore expand U.S.
leverage in trade negotiations and in the conduct of our
foreign affairs. At a critical moment in the evolution of trade
negotiations with Atlantic and Pacific partners, the United
States should affirm a commitment to free trade and energy and
expectation that trading partners will adopt similar
commitments. Additionally, open energy trade is in line with
U.S.-WTO commitments and will be indispensable in winning
potential future natural resource trading disputes.
Another important benefit of lifting the oil export ban is
the contribution it will make to energy security. When more of
the oil supply pool comes from stable producers such as
producers in the United States, the overall market is more
stable. U.S. crude will be shipped by fewer maritime hot spots
and choke points such as the Straits of Hormuz and the South
and East China Seas.
Particularly in times of market crisis, the unrestricted
ability of U.S. producers to export will make them more
responsive to market signals and better able to adapt quickly.
This contributes to market conditions that can quickly resolve
and possibly even deter actions by foreign producers to use oil
as a strategic weapon. Lifting the export ban will also give
the United States more flexibility to sustain and expand energy
sanctions in the future. Notwithstanding the potential for a
successful nuclear deal with Iran, this is important as a
contingency measure, at a minimum.
Allies of the United States, many of whom reluctantly
participated in energy sanctions in the past, may prove
unwilling to participate in future sanctions unless the United
States makes a proactive effort to stimulate alternative oil
supplies and keep the market balanced. If the United States
cannot convince allies to join on energy sanctions against
adversaries in the future, the threat of new sanctions will not
be credible and their effect will not be forceful.
Washington has a unique window of opportunity to harvest
dividends from abundant domestic energy. Policymakers should
lift the oil export ban and promote responsible energy
production to promote economic growth and allow the United
States to reap the geopolitical advantages of having a larger
and more flexible role in the global oil market.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I look forward
to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Rosenberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. We now turn to Mr. Bordoff for your statement.

STATEMENT OF MR. JASON BORDOFF, FOUNDING DIRECTOR, CENTER ON
GLOBAL ENERGY POLICY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

Mr. Bordoff. Chairman Poe, Congressman Keating, members of
the committee, thank you for the invitation to be with you
today. I would like to summarize some of the findings from a
recent report I co-authored at the Columbia University Center
on Global Energy Policy, copies of which you should have in
front of you.
The oil export ban was originally adopted in the 1970s in
response to concerns not only about oil scarcity after the Arab
oil embargo, but also to prevent producers from getting around
domestic price controls by exporting their oil into the global
market where they could fetch a higher price. Price controls
were eliminated 30 years ago, but the export restrictions
remain.
U.S. oil production, as we all know, has boomed and imports
have plummeted as a result. We are still going to be an
importer of oil though for as far as the eye can see, most
likely, so why are we even talking about exports? As we talked
about this morning, the concern is the ability of domestic
refiners to absorb the kind of oil that we are producing in the
U.S. U.S. shale oil is very light oil, while many of our
refineries have invested billions to handle heavy sour oil. You
can run light oil through those refineries but it becomes
increasingly economically challenging to do so. So as we have
heard the price of U.S. oil may become discounted relative to
the world price to incentivize domestic refiners to take it.
It is about $6 today for a variety of reasons. A lower U.S.
price would in turn mean less U.S. production, lower economic
activity and higher net imports. To date, U.S. refiners have
made low cost adjustments where they can. We have backed out
mostly the import of light oil, and we have also exported what
is allowed. Exports after all are not completely banned. They
are restricted. Exports are allowed, for example, to Canada,
and our exports there have surged, to almost \1/2\ million
barrels a day. And we have also had a surge in the export, as
you heard, of refined petroleum, which is also allowed.
As U.S. production grows, however, at some point you run
out of these low cost options. The oil price crash means that
the pace of U.S. supply growth is slowing down. The Energy
Information Administration said yesterday production will
probably decline next month, the first decline in U.S. shale
oil output in 4 years. Storage is at an 85-year high.
However, the oil export issue is still relevant. First,
production may rebound faster than we expect. Second, the
export ban may still depress U.S. prices periodically and
temporarily, for example, during refinery maintenance or in
response to other outages. Third, U.S. production may be more
sensitive to any price discount at today's lower levels. And
then fourth, the policy process takes time. So I think it makes
sense to prevent a market problem rather than wait for one to
develop and then respond to it.
Now what about gasoline prices? Wouldn't lower U.S. oil
prices mean lower U.S. pump prices? Well, we have talked about
that already. The answer is no. This is because gasoline and
diesel can be freely traded in the global market so the price
is set by the world price. If U.S. crude is discounted that
means refineries can buy crude more cheaply, but they still
sell their product at the global price. And we saw this from
2011 to 2013 when the U.S. price was depressed not by the
export restriction but by pipeline bottlenecks in Cushing. And
as you heard, the Brookings Institution, Resources for the
Future, Rice University, the Energy Information Administration
and others, have found exports won't raise pump prices, they
might slightly lower them.
We also want U.S. supply to respond to global
circumstances. Consider how OPEC decided in November to let oil
prices fall, forcing higher cost producers like the U.S. to cut
production instead. We know shale oil can go off line very
quickly compared to conventional oil, but it can also bounce
back quickly too. And if the world price were to rise again to
the $70s or $80s or $90s, U.S. oil supply could rebound quickly
to slow that price rise to temper the impact on consumers at
the pump. But that U.S. supply response may be impeded if we
have to sell our crude at a discounted price.
Briefly I would add, allowing exports I think is consistent
with America's longstanding commitment to free and open markets
and it enhances our credibility in trade negotiations and
avoids creating a potentially harmful precedent. Increased U.S.
supply can also weaken the economic power, fiscal strength and
geopolitical influence of other large oil producing companies
and enhance U.S. diplomatic leverage in certain circumstances.
And then, finally, I want to talk about the critical issue
of climate change. We need to do much more to address climate
change. To the extent oil exports boosts U.S. oil supply and
lowers global prices, oil use and carbon emissions will rise,
but climate change, I think, is best addressed with policies
targeted at that problem. Restricting trade is a very costly
way to achieve modest emission reductions relative to the
benefits. Many government policies may raise emissions, like
achieving faster GDP growth or a deal with Iran that allows
Iran to sell more oil, but may still be desirable when the
benefits are weighed against the costs.
Members of the committee, thank you again for inviting me
to appear here today and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bordoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Bordoff. We now turn to Mr.
Kretzmann.

STATEMENT OF MR. STEPHEN KRETZMANN, FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, OIL CHANGE INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Kretzmann. Chairman Poe, Ranking Member Keating and
members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify today. These comments are a summary of
my written statement which you all should have for the record.
Oil Change International believes the crude oil export ban
should not be lifted and that maintaining the ban would be
helpful from the perspectives of community safety and climate
protection. Our analysis predicts that lifting the ban will
lead to a hazardous increase in U.S. oil production. This
production would in turn likely lead to greater greenhouse gas
emissions and threats to public safety such as increased crude
by rail traffic.
The crude oil export ban was certainly not designed to play
a role in climate change mitigation or to reduce the likelihood
of a mile-long freight train full of crude oil destroying a
community in America's heartland, however, it plays an
important role in regulating an industry that currently has few
limits placed upon it. More broadly, this issue points to the
urgent need to harmonize energy policy with climate policy. We
cannot drill our way out of the climate crisis, and arguments
to that effect are nothing short of climate denial.
Oil Change International conducted an analysis of the
impact of lifting the crude oil export ban on U.S. oil
production. We estimated a projected production increase of
more than 476,000 barrels per day by 2020, which incidentally
is very similar to the estimate that was arrived at by the
American Petroleum Institute of 500,000 barrels per day.
The critical question to consider is what will oil
producers do when confronted by this additional U.S. supply?
The conventional wisdom had been that OPEC would counter new
supply by reducing production to support higher oil prices.
This conventional wisdom has been proven completely wrong over
the last year. In the past 9 months it has become increasingly
clear that Saudi Arabia is determined to maintain market share
rather than cut production to support higher prices. This makes
the conclusion that increased U.S. production will lead to
increased global production and increased emissions clearer
than ever.
Lifting the crude oil export ban will likely increase crude
by rail traffic putting 25 million Americans at greater risk of
disaster. Since 2005, the amount of tank cars on U.S. railways
has increased over 4,000 percent. At any given time there are
about 135 100-car trains carrying a total of 9 million barrels
of crude oil through American communities. If all of the
projected increase in U.S. production were to go by rail, crude
by rail traffic would see a 50-percent increase. If increased
production were to reach the top end of the CGEP analysis, some
1.2 barrels of oil per day, this could more than double crude
by rail traffic from today's levels.
Dozens of terminals on the Gulf Coast, at least four on the
East Coast and at least six planned terminals on the West
Coast, have facilities or will be designed with facilities for
unloading crude oil from trains and loading it onto tankers for
export. Lifting the crude oil export ban would put hundreds of
communities and the lives of 25 million Americans at increased
risk of an oil train disaster such as the one in Lac-Megantic,
Canada, last year where 47 people perished because an oil train
derailed and exploded.
It seems only a matter of luck that the incidents to date
have not caused further loss of life. Crude oil trains pass
through more than 400 counties including major metropolitan
areas such as Philadelphia, Seattle, Chicago, Newark, Richmond
and dozens of other cities. This is an already untenable
situation that we cannot afford to exacerbate by creating
further traffic for exports.
Lifting the crude oil export ban would also hinder progress
toward the goal of climate protection. The stark reality laid
out by the latest climate science is that more than three-
quarters of existing proven fossil fuel reserves need to stay
in the ground if the world is to maintain a two in three chance
of limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius.
While it is not clear how much of U.S. oil reserves in
particular need to be left in the ground, it is clear that
lifting the ban would increase the incentives for production
which is precisely the wrong signal to be sending. In fact, a
gradual slowdown in U.S. and global oil production over time is
exactly what we need in order to avoid catastrophic climate
change. Any policy that could result in a net increase in
global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be evaluated in terms
of its climate impact.
As President Obama noted in June 2013 in regards to the
Keystone XL pipeline, our national interest will be served only
if this project does not significantly exacerbate the problem
of carbon pollution. This climate test should be applied to all
policy decisions as well as the permitting of infrastructure to
extract, transport and process fossil fuels. The lifting of the
crude oil export ban almost certainly fails this test. Our
communities and climate in short are worth more than so-called
free trade and the profits of the oil industry. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kretzmann follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank all our panelists. I will begin with myself
asking questions. Try to limit questions by the members to 5
minutes, and so therefore you have 5 minutes to answer these
questions.
Start with you, Ms. Rosenberg. We have lifted, so to speak,
the sanctions, the ban on Iran for exporting crude oil. That
would be the long term policy if this deal goes through
allowing Iran to export some of their crude oil. Does it make
sense to you that we would allow Iran to put more oil on the
world market but still prohibit America from putting more oil
on the world market?
Ms. Rosenberg. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chair. In
fact, I don't think that makes sense at all. The U.S. has the
greatest degree of leverage and influence in the market if it
allows its producers to produce and sell their oil in an open,
international market. Then the United States will be in a
better position to, if necessary, if the additional sanctions
or the reimposition of sanctions is appropriate in a policy
circumstance, be able to quickly move, to credibly impose that
policy and ask international allies to join with the United
States in doing so which of course represents a sacrifice on
their own part. They will be looking for alternative supplies
to enter the market in order to go along with that policy.
Lifting the crude exports ban will help make that a reality for
them.
Mr. Poe. Let me talk about our allies. Countries need
obviously crude oil imports. Europe is a primary example. And
they have mentioned to me that it seems to be we want them to
support sanctions against a country so they can't export, but
we don't provide them an alternative for importing crude oil
from the United States. That seems to be our policy. Would that
help our ability to deal with our allies in an easier way if
they had an alternative for, okay, you want us to have
sanctions on Iran where we get oil, but you don't provide us
crude oil. Do you think that would be a better policy to say,
okay, here comes the Cavalry? We are going to supply you some
Texas crude oil.
Ms. Rosenberg. I think such a policy would put the United
States in a much stronger position to encourage and influence
our allies to join with the United States in imposition of
sanctions. And experience from the Iran case would certainly
bear that out where international allies said to the United
States, this is very difficult for us economically. We join in
this policy because we think it is the right foreign policy
measure, but we have come to a point, or are near a point,
where we can go no further unless there are alternative
supplies.
Mr. Poe. Russians, well, the Europeans get about 40 percent
of their energy oil from Russia. How would lifting the export
ban on America thwart Russian monopoly, aggression maybe,
policy, how would that impact it in your opinion?
Ms. Rosenberg. Lifting the----
Mr. Poe. U.S. ban.
Ms. Rosenberg. Lifting restrictions on U.S. exports.
Mr. Poe. U.S. ban on American exports, not on Iranian
exports.
Ms. Rosenberg. Exactly. What it will do is stimulate
greater supply from the United States, and greater diversity in
the international supply pool, which will make Russia work much
harder to supply Europe with oil. That will reduce its revenue
if it plans to keep its market share, which is certainly in
line with U.S. policy toward Russia which involves degrading
their revenue generation ability in the energy sector in the
medium and long term.
Mr. Poe. The United States is critical of China for not
exporting its rare earth minerals. There may even be a
complaint with the World, WTO, I am not sure. Are we somewhat
hypocritical by criticizing China for not exporting but yet we
don't export our energy?
Ms. Rosenberg. Not only hypocritical but also poorly placed
to influence other countries to embrace free trade policies not
just on energy but on other natural resource commodities. More
broadly, at a time when the United States is engaged in very
serious, significant discussion about free trade arrangements
with Atlantic and Pacific partners, now is the opportunity for
the United States to be sending the signals to some of those
countries particularly in East Asia that will be making trade
related decisions that will in fact impact our economy in the
decades to come.
Mr. Poe. Thank you.
Mr. Kretzmann, you mentioned that the U.S. policy, our U.S.
policy, of not exporting crude oil is because of the
environment concerning climate change or to protect the
environment. More exports would allow the environment not to be
as good as it should be. I assume then that your organization
then recommended to the administration that they not lift the
ban on Iran because Iran now will be able to produce more
energy and therefore they will pollute more. And so did you
make this recommendation to the administration that they don't
lift the ban on Iran because they are going to produce more and
it is going to hurt the climate?
Mr. Kretzmann. In general, we actually believe oil
production across the globe should be phased down to levels
that are consistent with the climate challenge. And so, no, we
didn't make a specific recommendation on Iran, but we weren't
called on to either. And we are quite consistent----
Mr. Poe. Maybe that is why they didn't.
Mr. Kretzmann. We are quite consistent--yes, I am sure. We
are quite consistent on the fact that less oil needs to be used
and we need to keep oil production and consumption to limits
that are prescribed by global climate science.
Mr. Poe. The other comment that you made is that more rail
cars are in America now because there is more oil. We could
probably diminish the rail car capacity if we had more
pipelines. That is just an observation. But my time is expired.
I will yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to know
that in the whole scope of things our sanctions with Iran deal
more with, much more with their ability to have a nuclear
weapon than international oil prices.
We talked about the effect and I think it really can't be
questioned that lifting the ban would create more jobs. But in
my state of Massachusetts, and I know how Texas has such an
interest in this and I understand that too, in my own state one
of the fastest growing industries has been surrounding the
renewable energy. And I would just like to ask what effect
would this have on the growth of renewable energy, wind energy,
solar energy, geothermal in our country? I will ask Mr.
Kretzmann.
Mr. Kretzmann. I think unfortunately ongoing policies that
support the further growth of the oil industry in the United
States tend to at least diminish investment in renewables,
although on the other hand we are seeing more than we have ever
seen before and that is good news. But I think the sooner that
we can make it clear that our energy future is about
renewables, and oil and coal and natural gas are about our
energy past, the faster we can move markets to create more
investment to create that transition that we all know is
coming.
Mr. Grumet. Mr. Keating, Massachusetts did a profound job
of advancing renewables but the vast majority of it is in the
electric power section. The wind power is displacing coal and
natural gas. We have almost no oil left in the electric sector.
So I think the renewables question here really relates not so
much to wind or solar or bio, but to biofuels and ethanol. And
I think there is a conversation to be had about how domestic
oil prices create or discourage market for alternative
transportation fuels, but really not so much of a conversation
about the interaction with wind power.
Mr. Keating. Because I have noticed in Europe how they are
ahead of us in so many of these other areas as well and I
assume some of their problems with access to oil and their
concerns that were referenced by our witnesses today also
spurred growth there in renewables.
But I would just too like to touch base on the effect
economically on our domestic refineries. What effect would this
have on our refineries and could you put it in the context of
what has been happening over the last few decades with our
domestic refineries too? I will address that to anyone that
wants to take that.
Mr. Grumet. I will take a shot, and Jason Bordoff knows
more about it than I do so he will go next. I think the most
important point I would like to make is that honestly none of
us know. And it is critically important to recognize that the
question here is not should we mandate oil exports, the
question is should we step back and actually let that truth
reveal itself?
There are arguments made that in fact the most economic
outcome would be for the refining industry to make significant
investments here at home so it could process all of our
domestic oil. The depressed price right now suggests that is
not the case at the moment, but it is entirely possible that
could be true. It is not my guess, but it could be true. The
only way we figure that out is if you lift the restriction and
let the truth become the truth.
I think the mistake here, and we have often found there is
a certain seduction to wanting to know the answer which
encourages us all to want to try to pick market outcomes, the
history of Congress picking market outcomes has not actually
been a very proud one. And so I think most broadly, the best
thing that we could do is not try to figure out whether it is
the producers or the refiners who have the best of this
projection and, in fact, let the market make that
determination.
Mr. Keating. Yes, and if the refiners have that discount.
And I would just like to ask you, what has been happening with
domestic refineries? Have they contracted? Have they become
more scarce? And if that is the case what effect could this
have on that domestic job industry?
Mr. Bordoff. I can take a crack at answering it. I mean I
think we know a little bit what the impact would be. As we
heard, the U.S. refineries have been running at a very high
utilization rate. The U.S. has gone from being the largest
importer of refined petroleum in the world in 2006 to the
largest exporter today. That is a dramatic turnaround.
It is true that we saw refineries that depended on light
crude, particularly in the Northeast, at risk of closing
several years ago, and some were kept open because they were
acquired by airlines or private equity firms or others and they
have been enjoying a benefit of the discount that we are
talking about, so this is sort of the direct corollary of the
issue we are talking about.
To the extent that this is as big of an issue for
production as many producers say, it is because there is a
discount that would otherwise develop in the market and that
would benefit some refineries. If you don't allow that discount
to develop they won't enjoy access to discounted crude and they
won't have that benefit. The question is whether, if you are
concerned about the access to refined petroleum product in the
Northeast, you think the right policy approach is to put in
place an economy-wide restriction on energy trade in order to
create a price discount that is, in effect, a subsidy to some
refineries that are economically challenged, or whether it
makes sense to allow energy trade and develop other policies to
promote security of energy supply for refined petroleum in the
Northeast. The administration recently put in place a gasoline
product reserve in the Northeast. There are a host of other
measures that one could put in place as well.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Poe. I thank the ranking member. The chair will now
recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Ribble.
Mr. Ribble. Good morning, everybody, and thank you for
being here. Mr. Bordoff, have you done any research in your
study about the comparative regulatory regimes in environments
around the globe as it relates to oil production? In other
words, is the U.S. regulatory regime regarding cleanliness,
safety and what not, similar to that that is going on in
Venezuela, Iran, Russia, Saudi Arabia? Could you talk about
that for a minute?
Mr. Bordoff. We didn't look at it in this study. I would
say the answer is generally no. I think the U.S. has quite high
regulatory and safety and environmental standards relative to
many of the countries you just mentioned for oil production.
Mr. Ribble. Yes, those are the primary other competing
nations, correct? Did I miss anybody there? Canada, I suppose.
Mr. Bordoff. Yes, and Canada. If we think about where U.S.
refineries are getting their oil from and the heavy crude that
they are optimized to run we would be on the margin importing a
little more from Canada and Venezuela along with Mexico and
some others. Yes.
Mr. Ribble. Ms. Rosenberg, do you have any comments on
that?
Ms. Rosenberg. Nothing further, thank you.
Mr. Ribble. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Kretzmann, in light of that would you agree with Mr.
Bordoff's assessment?
Mr. Kretzmann. I think that there is certainly great room
for improvement in U.S. oil production standards.
Mr. Ribble. That wasn't my question.
Mr. Kretzmann. But I hear your question and I think U.S.
oil production standards are often higher than in some other
countries, although perhaps not absolutely the top of the class
worldwide. That said, I think the question implies----
Mr. Ribble. Who is top of the class worldwide?
Mr. Kretzmann. Norway, I think, is pretty good, and
actually Brazilian offshore is also really good. But besides
that the question implies that somehow U.S. oil production
would replace other oil production, and the experience in the
market over the last 6 months makes it clear that it will just
be added to ongoing production. And so----
Mr. Ribble. The question didn't imply that at all. The
question implied that U.S. regulatory regime is more stringent
than other countries. That is all the question implied.
Mr. Kretzmann. Oh, I certainly assumed that what you were
saying was wouldn't you rather have U.S. oil than other oil,
and that seems to be a reasonable conclusion to pull. And my
point is, it is not a question of one or the other, it is
actually going to be both.
Mr. Ribble. But in light of that though then wouldn't you
say you would rather have cleaner production than less clean
production?
Mr. Kretzmann. I would rather have less production.
Mr. Ribble. I get that. You would rather have no
production.
Mr. Kretzmann. Ultimately I would rather have production
that brought us within climate limits.
Mr. Ribble. Right. And I don't know that in light of that,
the approach of saying, ``Let us get rid of production'' is the
fastest way to get at a cleaner climate. I think the faster way
is to get at the user than it is to the producer. Producers
respond to demand as opposed to creating demand. They respond
to it. And if you can change that paradigm you are likely to
reduce demand. However, I would say until that time comes--and
let us face it. With CAFE standards and other things that have
happened, things have gotten better rather than worse in light
of carbon use.
It just seems to me it would behoove global climate
interest to have production happening in places that are
cleaner and safer as opposed to places that are dirtier and
less safe. And so it is almost like you are arguing against
your position here.
Mr. Kretzmann. No, not at all. Producers actually impact
demand quite a bit as we have seen over the last year. I mean
the increase in production that has happened since the U.S.
increase in production, which has been quite substantial over
the last several years, and then the Saudis not responding by
reducing their production has actually significantly lowered
the price as we see and that in turn has increased global
demand. And so producers obviously impact global demand, and
that is an important part of the equation for us to consider
from an economics perspective when thinking about how to
influence the market. I mean this is a complex challenge about
how to begin to wind down our global addiction to fossil fuels
in order to respond to climate change. I think we all recognize
that. But there are things that we have to do both on the
supply and demand side in order to meet that challenge.
Mr. Ribble. Yes, and I guess my only challenge to you in
your thinking, and it is not necessarily related to the trade
issue, is that as you look in the long view it seems to me that
you are better off really accepting the fact that between now
and where you would like to be there are maybe better processes
to get there than the one that you are pursuing at this
particular moment. That would just be my suggestion.
Mr. Grumet, could you also help me understand a little bit
better on how you come to the conclusion that gas prices would
be lower even though oil prices would be higher?
Mr. Grumet. I don't believe my testimony indicates that
global oil prices would be higher.
Mr. Ribble. But the U.S. produced oil would be sold at a
higher price.
Mr. Grumet. The U.S. produced oil would be sold at the
global market price. And I think the question for gasoline
prices is the relationship between the refinery and the
ultimate market. So the assumption that a discounted crude
price, a refinery in the U.S. can get crude at $6 or $7 a
barrel less than someplace else, is that that will somehow
again altruistically be passed on to you and me. And that would
be an irresponsible choice by a refiner with obligations to
shareholders.
What a refiner should do is seek the best price for their
product. Because they of course appropriately have access to a
global market, they will get the same price as any of the
global competitors. And so the challenge of course is to find a
way to have the benefits of a robust global market that creates
consumer benefits and foreign policy benefits, and at the same
time make sure that we have a dynamic economic situation here
at home.
Mr. Ribble. All right, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman. And the chair recognizes
the gentleman from California. Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. I have a lot of comments here. It may eat into
my question time so the witnesses can relax for awhile. I talk
to a lot of Ambassadors, as we all do, I never bring up oil.
Oil is not--in sense of oil production, but I just ask them
what is on their mind and none of them have ever said, gee, the
most important thing is U.S. exports of oil. So I am not sure
that we are going to get huge concessions on other trade issues
by adopting the policies that three of our witnesses would
like.
As to the environment, environmentalists have not focused
on the tremendous harm to the environment of wars in the Middle
East. And the fact is that lower energy prices worldwide will
drive down the power of the those who cause those wars. The
most extreme example, well outside our discussion here, was
already brought up, and that was Iran. Yes, Iran may be
producing another million barrels a day. That may be bad for
the environment. But if we reduce by 1 percent the likelihood
that nuclear weapons are used and you weigh that against 1
million barrels a day, now I am not sure which you go to reduce
the chance of a nuclear Iran, but whatever we can do to do that
is a plus for the environment even if it means 1 million
barrels a day.
The idea that we should have bottlenecks and problems and
restrictions to drive up the price of oil so that we have less
carbon, maybe we should get rid of the bottlenecks and the
problems and then have a tax to support infrastructure and that
way we can have infrastructure instead of bottlenecks.
As to rail transport, the only thing worse than bringing a
train through my district loaded with crude is to bring a train
through my district loaded with refined gasoline. And so if we
encourage moving a lot of gasoline around so we can export it
that might be worse. But I would hope that as part of the bill
we put together we go even further than the administration
already has in terms of safety of our oil by rail
transportation. I think we are being given kind of a false
choice. It is, stick with the present policy, which is kind of
crazy, or lift all the barriers. Well, one thing we might do is
go completely the other way and that is ban the export of
refined petroleum. Make them give the discount to people who
live in my district. That ought to be explored so that we can
go in both directions.
We can also take a look at our rules for exporting natural
gas, which I know are unpopular with some members of the
committee. But perhaps we can just go to that point instead of
completely lifting the ban, and have the administration have to
license the export. And I would point out that in the natural
gas area, Americans are paying much less than the world price.
Part of that is physics and the cost of transportation, but
part of it might be our limitations on export.
For those who support this idea, you might want to make it
a little easier for us to vote for it. When people hear this
they hear a threat to the security and price of the oil and the
gasoline they buy at the pump. So you may want to explore the
idea of expanding swaps and making it practical. One could
imagine a situation where if you bring in a barrel of crude you
get a chit. And if you want to export a barrel of crude you
need a chit. I think the price of these chits would be about a
penny a barrel, and that solves 99 percent of your problem.
Because if we can turn to people and say, yes, this is a swap,
for every barrel we are exporting we are importing a barrel, a
company is importing and exporting or is in partnership with
the import or the export. That is very different than saying
that you are going to take that oil from North Dakota or
wherever, bring it to the Port of Los Angeles right by my
thirsty consumers, and ship it to Japan, if that is the only
part of the picture.
We drive a lot in Southern California and that is, if this
is part of a system for more efficient refinery and more
efficient pricing that is swaps, that is a lot better picture
to put forward than to see all that oil leave our country,
until of course we all buy Teslas and then we will be able to
do it. And I look forward to that day and I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from California. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson of South Carolina. Thank you, Judge Poe, and
thank each of you for being here today.
Mr. Grumet, do you believe that lifting the crude oil
export ban would bolster the U.S. negotiating position on other
trade issues?
Mr. Grumet. Mr. Wilson, thank you. I think that is an
important point that a number of us have spoken to, and again
it goes back to kind of a fundamental value question. The
United States of America has always been, I think, the global
leader in advocating for open markets, efficient and free
trade. And we have a little bit of a challenge. There is a bit
of a hypocrisy in suggesting to others that they share their
riches with the world but we are somehow going to hold tight on
this commodity.
And again I think Mr. Bordoff makes the important point,
that this is a policy that was adopted in a very different
environment. It really was not designed to kind of be Fortress
America, but that is the effect it is now having, and now in
fact it actually does matter. Now we have a profound
opportunity through this remarkable abundance that none of us
predicted to reassert a voice in a global economy in a very, I
think, challenging global environment.
This is benefiting us in a myriad of ways. It is benefiting
us in trade. It is benefiting us in our ability to provide
opportunities to our European allies to fend off some of the
manipulations of the Russians. It is enabling us to hold
together coalitions around sanctions. So I think you have heard
a lot of consistency at least from the first three witnesses
that there is a very significant advantage to being part and a
forceful player in this global market.
Mr. Wilson of South Carolina. And thank you for your
points. And Ms. Rosenberg, I am particularly interested in
lifting the crude oil ban. What would be the effect on jobs?
And I put it in the context of Keystone Pipeline that was with
our Canadian allies, the bringing of crude product through our
country. I know personally that almost 1,000 jobs, permanent
jobs, would be created in a community that I represent.
Michelin Tires makes the tires for Fort McMurray, Alberta,
Canada. They are 12 feet high, $60,000 each, and nearly 500
jobs. And then MTU makes engines for the processing of the oil
sands. Again you could get three engines in this room. They are
very nice engines. And again nearly 500 jobs. A total of 1,000
jobs just in the district I represent. And so by lifting the
ban, what would be the effect on jobs across our country?
Ms. Rosenberg. Thank you for the question. Essentially,
lifting restrictions on crude exports sends a signal to those
producers who find it difficult to access international
benchmark prices for their crude to be able to access them,
which drives an incentive for them to expand production, expand
their market share. Broadly speaking, what that does is create
additional jobs for those producers and for associated
industries that support them in services in those communities,
et cetera.
Now the number of jobs that that will create there are
different studies, they offer different numbers, and it is
important to remember this is also a function of what the
international oil price is. If it is particularly strong that
will incentivize greater investment, and that is of course a
cyclical, it is a cyclical market that moves up and down. I
would defer to Jason Bordoff whose study has a particular
comment on this if he wants to speak to it, but in broad terms
it is true that job creation would be a function of lifting
export restrictions.
Mr. Wilson of South Carolina. And Mr. Bordoff, again an
excellent report. And on the issue of jobs what do you see?
Mr. Bordoff. Well, our study didn't estimate a particular
number of jobs, but generally we had a range of the impact it
could have on production. Our estimate was anywhere from zero
to 1.2 million barrels a day and it depends on a host of
circumstances including how quickly U.S. production grows, how
much of a price discount might otherwise emerge, how quickly
refineries can adapt.
But it is a function of how big an impact this has on U.S.
production; so to the extent the export restriction is eased,
the more significant an impact it has on increasing U.S.
production, the more economic activity, the more employment you
are going to see in the oil and gas sector in the U.S. The
magnitude and timing of that impact is frankly highly
uncertain, particularly given the price collapse that we have
seen and what is happening to U.S. production, but
directionally it is going to be positive.
Mr. Wilson of South Carolina. Well, and I know personally,
in fact my family, I understand the opportunities provided by
the oil industry, the liberating, fulfilling lives that people
can have. My great grandfather started with Standard Oil New
Jersey in Virginia in 1895. My grandfather was the division
manager at Standard Oil of New Jersey in South Carolina Esso,
and then my dad was a sales representative for Exxon Humble,
and I am very grateful in them. My brother was an oil jobber.
So I know that the oil industry is very important to
providing opportunity and I appreciate every effort to expand
it for the benefit of jobs and opportunity and fulfilling lives
to the American people.
Mr. Poe. Yield back?
Mr. Wilson of South Carolina. Yes, I do.
Mr. Poe. All right. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman Poe, and thank you to each
of the witnesses for your testimony this morning. Of course
this is an issue. This is a policy, a longstanding policy, 30
years or so. We seem to be taking on a lot of these issues
lately with Cuba being another one, and it seems to me that
there are basically three issues here--one of geopolitics,
another of environmental concerns, and third, the domestic
business consideration that has expressed itself as a battle
between producers and refiners. But I guess with those three
things in mind, I have a few questions.
First of all, if we were going to put together a bill that
would lift the ban as it exists, whether it is a partial
lifting or a complete lifting, what would the safeguards look
like, right? So, for example, what if we were in a situation
like the 1970s again where you had a scarcity of resources?
What would the safeguards be that we would need to put in place
to make sure that we don't go through a situation like that
again? I mean there was a reason that this ban was put in place
back then, right? If we are in a situation like that again what
do we do?
And then the second part is, since this is kind of the
first round of discussions about this, if you were going to
design a grander bargain, a larger bill where you would allow
for some perhaps partial lifting of this ban, but also an
infusion of resources or the support of policies to develop
alternative energies, what would that look like? What would a
grander bargain look like? Please.
Mr. Grumet. Well, as the Bipartisan Policy Center we love
grand bargains, Mr. Castro, so I am going to take a shot, I
think maybe try to address the second part of your question
first. I think the first point is that while the benefits
economically, I believe, strongly outweigh the costs, and there
will be costs, there will be a handful of refiners, a few in
the Northeast, who are clearly going to have to struggle with
this recalibrating market. And I believe that the Congress is
going to have hopefully look to opportunities to smooth that
transitional challenge. I have yet to see a specific proposal
to do so.
There is not a lot of conversation: I mean I love phasing
and all those kinds of ideas, but I think there is a certain
reluctance upon the part of those who feel that they might be
injured to suggest a path forward because they believe it will
in fact make it easier for you to pursue that path. I think as
the debate becomes more and more serious and this becomes, I
think, what it will be which is an inevitable move to change
policy, I think those ideas will come forward. I certainly
hope----
Mr. Castro. What would you do? What safeguards would you
put in place?
Mr. Grumet. You are asking another important question which
is what happens if something changes, right? I mean all of a
sudden the oil market is certainly proven to be volatile. The
President, in current law, has significant authority to make
decisions in the national security interest to right now allow
exports in contradiction to the ban, and I certainly think that
that authority should be mandated or, sorry, preserved and even
strengthened in reverse. So once this market, I think, is
opened and we have the opportunity to engage in the
international stage, the President certainly must have a
sustained authority to interrupt those exports if necessary to
ensure the security interests of the nation. And so I think the
way one crafts that is important, but that it an important
aspect of this debate that I certainly hope Congress continues
to pursue.
Mr. Castro. Sure.
Ms. Rosenberg. Following on that briefly, I think there are
two main elements of the question that you just asked. And the
first one is how do we make the U.S. economy its most resilient
version in order to protect U.S. consumers from the
circumstances of the 1970s that were so economically painful,
particularly deriving from energy sector changes, dramatic
changes?
And the second element of your question I see is that what
are the reassurances that you could put, the policy measures
particularly including reassurances that you could put into a
piece of legislation that give consumers the confidence to know
that in fact this policy is consistently on an ongoing basis
performing in a way that benefits them and additionally that
maintains for the executive branch the ability to put the
brakes on if circumstances merit?
And speaking to that particular issue, the way to provide
information, there are a variety of ways to do that. One
popular way is to ask the EIA, for example, to produce regular
public information and updates as they have done in the past
but specific to this policy which would give consumers the
confidence to know that this is working to their advantage.
Additionally as we just mentioned, the policy that gives the
administration the ability to restrict exports if that makes
sense in circumstances would do so.
Mr. Castro. Let me have 20 seconds.
Mr. Bordoff. I just want to very quickly--I am sorry. I was
just going to answer your question which is if the President
allows exports under a national interest determination, he can
revoke it. EPCA allows the immediate issuance of regulations to
restrict exports without seeking public comments in the event
of a true supply emergency and disruption. And if Congress
repealed the ban it could give the President authority to re-
ban, or the Secretary of Commerce could impose controls under
the Export Administration Act, short supply controls, or
potentially the President can invoke his emergency authority
under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to limit
crude oil exports. So authorities exist in the event of a true
emergency like the 1970s.
Mr. Castro. Okay, I am out of time but can I just make a
final comment, Chairman? Thank you. That I think it is going to
be difficult to lift that ban carte blanche. That there is
going to have to be safeguards in place and I think we ought to
consider whether there is an opportunity to also support
alternative energies if this is going to happen. So thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Poe. The gentleman yields back. The chair recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher, for his
comments.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. Mr. Bordoff,
in your testimony you mentioned several times about these
trains, about dangerous long trains. No, but I think you did
too and I caught that. Maybe I am mistaken.
Well, then I won't ask you the question. I will just
suggest which is the next--well, let me ask you this then. Did
your organization support the Keystone Pipeline? No, no, Mr.
Bordoff.
Mr. Bordoff. I am a professor at Columbia University. We
don't take institutional positions on particular issues.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, did you support the Keystone
Pipeline?
Mr. Bordoff. I have said that with Keystone, I think we
should be focusing on the issues that really matter to achieve
meaningful reductions in climate change and carbon emissions,
and I think a decision in either direction on Keystone doesn't
have a huge impact on affecting greenhouse gas emissions.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, first of all, let me just note that--
is it Kretzmann?
Mr. Kretzmann. Yes, that is right. Kretzmann.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Kretzmann, first of all, let me say
that it is refreshing to have someone as open and honest as you
are about your positions testifying before us. Most of the
people who come here opposing the pipeline, the Keystone
Pipeline, and supporting all of these various controls are not
as open about what their goal really is, and you honestly have
expressed you want us to end oil production. You are not in
favor of any more oil production and would shut down oil
production now if you could. And that is, frankly, refreshing
to hear someone being this open about this because that is not
what we get.
And in terms of your motive, I understand and appreciate
it, the fact that you believe that production of CO2, which
goes hand in glove with oil production in our country, that
that is harmful to the world environment via a theory that CO2,
increased CO2, will increase the temperature of the planet.
Let me just note, Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous
consent at this point, to be put in the record, the name of 10
prominent scientists from around the United States who totally
disagree with that particular theory that more CO2 means that
there will be higher temperatures.
Mr. Poe. Without objection it will be made part of the
record.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And so, and I know there are other
scientists who disagree with that. So we have people who are
prominent scientists on both sides of this issue, and I can't
help but notice, however, that the predictions based on that
particular theory haven't been coming true in the last 18 years
based on--I mean I can remember the debate that we have had
here, where several scientists were quoted as saying we are
going to reach a tipping point, and the tipping point will be a
major jump within a very short period of time of temperature.
And not only have we not seen this tipping point and major jump
in temperature, but there has been a basically no increase in
temperature for 18 years, yet the CO2 rates have gone up.
So just my, the scientists that I am talking about as well
as my common sense tells me, we shouldn't be basing policy or
energy policy on that theory. And I respect the fact that you
are an intelligent person and the people who you have spoken to
are intelligent, but we have a difference of opinion on that.
And I would think that trying to implement what you have
honestly expressed, which I believe is not being honestly
expressed by others, would mean a major decline in the standard
of living of our people. And I would appreciate an honest
discussion, so thank you for being here and being open in your
testimony today. But I will give you 30 seconds to refute
everything I said.
Mr. Kretzmann. That may take a little bit longer but I will
make some reference quickly. Thank you for your honesty,
Congressman. On a variety of different things I would say that
it is quite clear the majority of, the vast majority, 97
percent of climate scientists are completely clear on the
dangers associated with climate change. And I would like to
submit for the record the contents of skepticalscience.com, in
which you will find the questions that are often posed by
people who are questioning climate change and answers from
climate scientists. So if that would be possible I would love
to do that.
Re your question about not observing temperature changes,
you should look at the temperature of water. Because the oceans
have been absorbing the heat over the several decades and that
is where the heat is going and they are pretty much done with
absorbing the heat, now we are going to see the rest of it jump
up very high. That is what the scientists tell me.
I do not want to bring oil production to zero immediately.
That would be irresponsible and disastrous. However, it is
clear that if we can, we will need to cut oil production and
fossil fuel use down to essentially zero by 2050. That is a
long time particularly for a country as great as ours that can
put a man on the moon and do anything we want to. I believe we
can make this transition, and I believe we can do it in a way
that will be healthy for our economy and great for our
communities and we will all have a better standard of living at
the end of it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you for expressing that vision. I
disagree with it but----
Mr. Kretzmann. That is not a surprise.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. I appreciate that. Thank you
so much, Mr. Kretzmann.
Mr. Kretzmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman. Yields back. The chair
recognizes the ranking member for a final comment.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just, since my
colleague and friend wanted to submit 10 different scientific
references against climate change, I would like unanimous
consent to put in a paper reflecting the 12,000 peer reviewed
scientific articles, 97 percent of which indicate climate
change exists as well.
Mr. Poe. If you have those names they will be submitted to
the record.
Mr. Kretzmann. I can get names for you.
Mr. Keating. And just in closing, thank you again, Mr.
Chairman. Thank the witnesses. And I think each of you in your
own way really gave important information and I appreciate your
testimony. I would just say too there is another cost that,
really, it is hard to quantify perhaps besides just the cost in
the Northeast, the potential with the refineries contracting
more, and that is the cost of climate change. I have the
highest yielding dollar fish industry in that city of New
Bedford that I represent and climate change has affected
drastically the fishing industry.
And also in terms of the flooding and the erosion, our
tourist industry is threatened and is threatened right now from
that. And look at the cost of the historic snowfalls that the
Northeast and my state in particular have suffered through. So
I have left the cost of spills and mitigation of that and
clean-ups as well. So there is costs all the way around and I
think it is an important discussion to have. And I appreciate
the witness and I appreciate the opportunity, Mr. Chairman, to
have this hearing.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman. And just a final word. I am
very concerned about the loss of jobs because of the recent
developments, 50 percent of the rigs in the state of Texas have
been shut down since Thanksgiving; 70,000 people have lost
their jobs. I think it is important that we at least treat
America the same way we treat the Iranians. If we lift the ban
on exporting Iranian oil we ought to lift the ban on exporting
American oil. I think it makes sense. It is a national security
issue. It is also an energy issue, and it is a jobs issue as
well.
But I do thank all of the panelists for being here and the
members who have participated in this lively discussion. The
subcommittee is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
