- U.S. POLICY TOWARD LEBANON

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. POLICY TOWARD LEBANON

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 28, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-229

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-950 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     7
Andrew Exum, Ph.D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Middle East Policy, U.S. Department of Defense.................    19

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein: Prepared statement...........    10
Andrew Exum, Ph.D.: Prepared statement...........................    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    42
Hearing minutes..................................................    43
Written responses from the Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein to
questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the Middle East and
North Africa...................................................    44
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Questions submitted for the
record to Andrew Exum, Ph.D....................................    46

U.S. POLICY TOWARD LEBANON

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 28, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in room
2138 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself and my friend, Ranking Member Ted
Deutch, for 5 minutes each for our opening statements, I will
then recognize other members seeking recognition for 1 minute
each.
We will then hear from our witnesses. Without objection,
the witnesses' prepared statements will be made a part of the
record. Members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes. Two years
ago this month, this subcommittee held a hearing on security
challenges and U.S. interests in Lebanon with an administration
panel represented by State's NEA Bureau and DoD's Middle East
Policy Bureau.
I opened that hearing by stating that Lebanon is a country
that is seemingly perpetually in a state of conflict or on the
verge of breaking out into a conflict at any moment.
The same can be said about the country's political
stability. Lebanon is a country that is seemingly perpetually
in a state of political crisis or on the verge of breaking out
in a political crisis at any moment.
We're now 2 years deeper into the political deadlock that
has gripped Beirut. The presidency has remained unfilled for
nearly 2 years while long-overdue legislative elections have
been pushed even further back to 2017 at the very earliest. The
more things change the more they stay the same in Lebanon.
Two years ago, Lebanon was struggling to cope with the
economic strain of hosting over 1 million Syrian refugees who
had fled to their neighbor, seeking refuge from the fighting
between Assad, Hezbollah, ISIS and other terror entities.
These refugees would be the equivalent of roughly one-
quarter of the Lebanese population. Estimates suggest that over
3.3 million people in Lebanon are now in need of assistance.
As has been the case throughout the region in response to
the Syrian humanitarian crisis, the U.S. has stepped up and to
date has provided over $1.1 billion in humanitarian assistance
for Lebanon to help it cope with the strain of its refugee
influx.
However, as has also been the case throughout the region in
response to the Syrian humanitarian crisis, appeals for
assistance to Lebanon have gone drastically underfunded and
many of our partners and allies have failed to step up as
needed.
The American people are generous. They understand there is
a real need to support some of these nations struggling to cope
with this large influx of refugees. But their generosity and
understanding is not unlimited.
The administration must do more to press other responsible
nations to increase their contributions so that we don't bear
the full brunt of the cost. Two years ago, Lebanon's stability
was a great concern for the United States.
Hezbollah was fighting alongside Assad in Syria and the
Syrian conflict threatened to spill over into Lebanon. Again,
the more things change the more they stay the same for
Lebanon's security instability.
However, now Lebanon has taken on an even greater strategic
importance for the United States and for the entire region.
This small country, trapped in a political stalemate for nearly
2 years now, has an increased significance and is one of the
battlegrounds in the proxy battle between Saudi Arabia and
Iran.
In the absence of any consensus on a way forward in the
political deadlock, Hezbollah, aided and abetted by the Iranian
regime, has moved to fill the leadership vacuum and increase
its presence and influence in Lebanon.
In the aftermath of the weak and dangerous Iranian nuclear
deal and even during the negotiations, Iran has increased its
support to Hezbollah. Indeed, key to Iran's strategic
objectives in supporting Assad in Syria was maintaining the
supply route from Damascus to Lebanon, which they have
successfully managed and reports even suggest that they may
have accelerated the transfer of weapons including strategic
weapons systems to Hezbollah through Syria.
More troubling still, it is apparent that Hezbollah has
managed to gain sufficient influence in Lebanon to hinder its
relationship with its Arab neighbors.
In fact, in February of this year the Lebanese justice
minister resigned, explicitly citing Hezbollah's undue
influence and the harm it was causing to Lebanon's
relationships.
This same month--that same month, Saudi Arabia led the Gulf
Corporation Council nations to designate Hezbollah as a
terrorist organization with the Arab League shortly following
suit.
The Saudis, taking aim at Hezbollah and Iran again, also
announced they were halting $3 billion in military assistance
to Lebanon. No doubt the Saudis recognize that it is not just
in the political sphere that Iran and Hezbollah have gained
undue influence.
Hezbollah has increased its presence within and partnership
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. This synergy between the
Lebanese Armed Forces and Hezbollah should really call into
question then the administration's continued support for the
LAF and the President's budget request that doubles the foreign
military financing assistance we provide to Lebanon.
It is also worrisome that the commander of the Lebanese
Armed Forces is now currently in Moscow and will meet with
Russian military officials to discuss coordination on anti-
terror operations.
A senior Russian official was quoted as saying that Moscow
and Beirut are true partners in combating terrorism worldwide.
This is on the heels of the Czech Republic recently releasing,
after refusing an extradition request by the U.S., two members
of Hezbollah wanted in America on charges of planning to murder
U.S. Government officials and drugs and arms trafficking.
At least one of these individuals is known to have had
close ties to a notorious Russian arms dealer and is Russia's
link to Hezbollah.
So I'm interested in hearing the administration's
assessment of the relationship between Iran and Lebanon and,
more specifically, Hezbollah and the LAF as well as Lebanon's
relations with its Arab neighbors, the nexus between Russia,
Hezbollah and the LAF as well as the prospects for Lebanon's
future stability.
I'll also like to hear how the administration's policy
toward Lebanon fits in a larger picture with the fight against
ISIS and the conflict in Syria, the Syrian humanitarian crisis
and how we plan on ensuring that the spillover from Lebanon
does not threaten our friend and ally, the democratic Jewish
state of Israel.
And with that, I'm pleased to yield to the ranking member,
my friend, Ted Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thanks for calling
this hearing. Thanks to our witnesses for appearing today.
Welcome back, Ambassador Feierstein.
We are delighted to see you again before you retire and I
am sure there is no place you'd rather be to celebrate your
birthday than appearing before our committee. So happy birthday
to you.
And Dr. Exum, it's a pleasure to welcome you to the
committee as well. You're welcome to celebrate your birthdays
here. It's a standing offer we make.
We tend to look at Lebanon in pieces in the context of
other regional actors and conflicts. But today is going to give
us the opportunity to look at the range of challenges facing
Lebanon and how U.S. policy can best address those challenges.
Lebanon has been locked in a political stalemate that has
all but frozen the country's ability to effectively govern its
diverse population.
The Parliament has been unable to agree on a consensus
President since 2014, struggled to face down its number-one
internal threat, Hezbollah, while outside pressures from the
Syrian conflict continue to mount.
Divisions within Lebanese society have long made it
susceptible to outside influence. The ouster of the Syrian
military 11 years ago yesterday unfortunately did not free the
country from those looking to exploit it.
Iran has only sought to strengthen Hezbollah's grip on
Lebanon. Moving weapons and money to the group to carry out its
attacks on Israel and other targets worldwide, Iran turned
Hezbollah into its own proxy terrorist organization.
This culminated in the deployment of somewhere between
6,000 and 8,000 Hezbollah fighters into Syria to fight
alongside Assad's troops as Iran is desperate to save its
Syrian lifeline to Hezbollah.
Conflict in Syria has devastated Lebanon's economy. Nearly
a quarter of the population are now refugees. This has only
intensified the economic turmoil already plaguing Lebanon and
drawn deeper divisions between Sunnis and Shi'ites.
Hezbollah's power grip on Lebanon towns in the south
remains tight as the group provides everything from protection
to paychecks to basic social services. Hezbollah in effect
functions as a state within a state.
And despite the government's desire to remain neutral in
the Syrian conflict, it has unfortunately been unable to avoid
attacks from Hezbollah's continued involvement on the ground.
Bombings in Beirut in November 2015 by alleged ISIS recruiters
unfortunately killed 43.
U.S. policy toward Lebanon has long sought to counter
Hezbollah by focusing on building up the capabilities of the
Lebanese Armed Forces to act as the sole legitimate guarantor
of security in the country.
But despite gains made in counter terrorism and border
control, gaps exist in the LAF's ability to control the
security of its country. Particularly concerning is the LAF's
ability to control the flow of weapons in and out of its
territory.
In recent years, the U.S. has consistently increased
assistance and cooperation to the LAF to counter both the
threats emanating from Syria and Hezbollah. Dr. Exum, I look to
you today to provide us with an updated assessment of LAF's
capabilities.
Further, how significant will the effect be of the
withdrawal of $4 billion in aid from Saudi Arabia to the LAF
and can we count on other like-minded partners who have an
interest in seeing Lebanon succeed fill that gap.
Of great concern to many of us in Congress is the
enforcement of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1701, which, by
all accounts, has been a dismal failure. With no one to enforce
the resolution, Hezbollah has rebuilt its arsenal of rockets
and now possesses over 100,000 capable of reaching every corner
of Israel.
Fear over the transfer of advanced weaponry from Assad's
stockpiles to Hezbollah has prompted numerous strikes on
weapons convoys by Israel and with the prospect of additional
weapons coming from Iran and Hezbollah, it's now more important
than ever that Israel's qualitative military edge be
strengthened.
And as talks over the new memorandum of understanding
continue with Israel, every consideration must be given to the
strength of Hezbollah's arsenal. As Lebanon grapples with its
tenuous security situation, its state institutions,
unfortunately, grow weaker.
Deputy Secretary Blinken said on his most recent visit to
Lebanon unless and until a President is chosen, he said, the
erosion of Lebanon's political institutions will only deepen.
To that end, the United States must continue to support
Lebanon's legitimate state institutions and work with elements
in the government to help prevent an economic crisis.
I am pleased to see the Lebanese banking sector working
with the United States to implement the provisions of the
Hezbollah International Financing Prevention Act, which will
help wall off Lebanese banks from Hezbollah's illicit
activities.
If we want to see success and stability for the people of
Lebanon we must focus attention on those communities hosting an
extraordinary number of refugees. With no U.N.-run refugee
camps in the country, many Syrians have sought shelter in
parking garages and abandoned buildings.
The international community must provide Lebanon with the
resources needed to expand access to education and health care
for the hundreds of thousands of Syrian children there, and as
I have mentioned many times in this subcommittee, I applaud the
humanitarian efforts of the United States and I implore the
department, Ambassador Feierstein, to remind our allies and
friends around the world that they must meet this crisis head
on. Contributing to the humanitarian crisis also contributes to
security.
Madam Chairman, like all of us, the people of Lebanon
deserve to live in peace and security free from the grip of
terrorism. Lebanon is a tinderbox and U.S. policy must focus on
continuing to prevent it from sparking.
Again, I thank the witnesses for appearing today and look
forward to a productive discussion.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Congressman Deutch.
And now I would like to recognize members for their opening
statements and we will begin with Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair, and as far as I'm
concerned Lebanon is one of the key countries--one of the most
important countries in the Middle East.
Regional powers have a long history of fighting for
influence in Lebanon and unfortunately it continues to be the
subject of coercive forces outside its borders. I'm deeply
concerned that the tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia may
further exacerbate the looming instability in Lebanon.
This is particularly troubling considering the Lebanese
economy is facing serious strains caused by, among other
things, hosting over 1 million Syrian refugees which now make
up about a quarter of the population in Lebanon.
And while Lebanon has made some positive democratic shifts
over the years, the fact remains there are still armed nonstate
groups in Lebanon and this is reason enough to pay special
attention to the situation there.
A long-term breakdown in leadership and governance in
Lebanon would leave it susceptible to the same chaos that we've
seen elsewhere in the region and that absolutely must not
happen.
Finally, not only is Hezbollah hostile toward our
traditional ally, Israel, but we are now hearing some argue
that Hezbollah's political participation in the Lebanese
Government is resulting in even greater strain of tensions
between Lebanon and the other Arab nations.
And further breakdowns in diplomatic relations in the
region could have a significant negative impact. So we
appreciate the witnesses and look forward to hearing them today
and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen and Ranking
Member Deutch, for calling this hearing on U.S. policy toward
Lebanon and thank you to our witnesses.
I look forward to hearing from you about the geostrategic
importance of Lebanon, particularly in the context of the
ongoing Syrian conflict and its related refugee crisis, the
undue influence of Hezbollah and the threat of ISIL and other
terrorist groups in the region and beyond.
Given sustained U.S. interests and support to Lebanon over
the years, our strategic objective of supporting a viable,
independent, sovereign and democratic Lebanon that is at peace
with its neighbors is more important than ever.
It's imperative that we continue to support these goals and
I want to ensure that U.S. resources are applied in the best
and most effective way possible.
We cannot afford to let Lebanon slide into further disarray
and Lebanon must help itself by providing good governance and
security for its people.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony today and to
working with the administration and my colleagues to further
strengthen our important relationship with Lebanon.
And I thank you, Madam Chair, and yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
And Mr. Meadows of North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you for your
vision and your undying, unyielding effort to make sure that we
address this issue.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The gentleman can have 2 more minutes.
Mr. Meadows. I want to thank the witnesses for being here.
For me, this is one that is not only a complex question but
certainly one that we need to show resolve and make sure that
those that are our friends, and by that I mean the Lebanese
people, that they understand clearly what we stand for and what
we won't stand for, and by addressing Hezbollah in a meaningful
way through the tools that have been given the Department of
Treasury and other areas.
We need to make sure that we do that. I think there are
times that we are ambiguous about that, and having a
communications director who is part Lebanese, having someone
who cuts my hair every 4 weeks who is full Lebanese, I can
assure you I'm going to follow up on it.
And with that, I'll yield back, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. More information than
we cared for. And I'll turn to another sharing kind of guy, Mr.
Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Madam Chair, if you could just tell the
time--I just want to remind you I gave you chocolate.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. You did, and dark chocolate--the best.
Mr. Connolly. And secondly, I didn't realize Dr. Exum gives
haircuts. At any rate, thank you, Madam Chairman, and, you
know, I first went to Lebanon with my friend, who's in the
room, and it was a really revealing kind of trip that Graham
exposed to me and I just got to say we can talk about Hezbollah
as if it somehow was created sui generis within Lebanon--who
knows how or why.
But the dysfunction within Lebanon is what created
Hezbollah, created a receptive climate for Hezbollah. And, you
know, I'm a local government kind of guy.
When you can't even pick up the trash for 8 months it leads
to mass riots. It leads to mass disaffection with the
government and I think that, plus the government legislative
paralysis, the inability to elect a President and so forth, I
think has persuaded most Lebanese that it's terminally
dysfunctional as a country. And that ought to concern us as
well as the fact that we got 1.1 million refugees, the
equivalent of 25 percent of the population. I think that would
be, like, 70 million here in the United States, comparable.
So those two things are destabilizing in the extreme and I
think we cannot afford to ignore them.
Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
And seeing no further requests for time, I am pleased to
introduce our excellent panel of experts.
First, it's our pleasure to welcome back Ambassador Gerald
Feierstein, who is the principal deputy assistant secretary for
the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs.
Previously, he served as our Ambassador to Yemen--yikes--
from 2010 to 2013, has served in several different postings
throughout the world including deputy chief of mission in
Islamabad--another yikes--and deputy council general in
Jerusalem--yeah. Thank you for your service. We look forward to
your testimony, and as Mr. Deutch had pointed out, for those
members who were not here, this is two special banner days for
Ambassador Feierstein.
Number one, it's his birthday and, as Ted pointed out, he
can think of no funner way for him to celebrate his birthday
than to appear before a congressional panel, and number two, it
is his last testimony in his position because he's going to
retire in 4 weeks. So we wish you nothing but the best,
Ambassador.
And next, we welcome for the first time Dr. Andrew Exum,
deputy assistant secretary of defense for Middle East policy.
He is the principal advisor to the secretary of defense and
under secretary of defense for policy on international security
strategy and policy for the Middle East.
In addition to his current service with the Defense
Department, Dr. Exum has served our nation with distinction in
both Afghanistan and Iraq as an officer in the U.S. Army. We
thank you for your service there as well, and what is that
lapel pin of service?
Mr. Exum. This would be the Combat Scroll of the 1st Ranger
Battalion.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Not bad. All right.
Thank you. We welcome both of you and Mr. Ambassador, we
will begin with you, sir.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GERALD M. FEIERSTEIN, PRINCIPAL
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman
and Ranking Member Deutch, and before I say anything else let
me just say, if this is indeed the last time that I come up
here, at least in this capacity, I want to thank all of you--
all of the members of the committee for the many opportunities
that we've had, as well as with your staff, to come up and
discuss these issues, and to say that I've always found my
experiences here to be rewarding and enjoyable even.
So thank you, and thank you for inviting me to discuss U.S.
policy toward Lebanon today. I would like to request that my
full opening statement----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Ambassador Feierstein [continuing]. Be submitted for the
record.
Promoting a Lebanon that is independent, sovereign, stable,
prosperous and religiously diverse is crucial to advancing a
range of U.S. interests in the Middle East.
Lebanon today faces three critical challenges. First are
the spillover effects of the ongoing Syrian conflict, second
are the activities of Hezbollah and third is the political
crisis that has nearly paralyzed government decision making for
nearly 2 years.
We are grateful to the Congress for passing the Hezbollah
International Financing Prevention Act signed into law last
December. This law provides us with critical new tools to
dismantle Hezbollah's global financial network.
Our strategy for helping Lebanon address these three
challenges is simple. To ensure that the Lebanese security
forces have the tools that they need to prevent ISIL from
destabilizing the country while helping build legitimate state
institutions in order to deny Hezbollah what it seeks to
avoid--a strong central government capable of providing
services for the entire country.
The conflict in Syria has severely tested Lebanon's
resilience. Our assistance to refugees from Syria and to the
Lebanese communities that have graciously hosted them for
nearly 5 years has helped alleviate the economic burden on the
Lebanese people.
Lebanon faces a real threat from ISIL and the Nusra Front.
This is why we support Lebanon's legitimate state security
institutions and particularly the Lebanese Armed Forces and see
that as a down payment on a long-term investment in regional
stability.
Just today an LAF raid in the town of Arsal in Lebanon
resulted in the death of a key ISIL operative. My Pentagon
colleague, Dr. Exum, will discuss our relationship with
Lebanon's security institutions in greater depth.
Our cooperation is not limited to counter terrorism.
Combating trafficking in persons is one of our highest
priorities. Lebanon has made important gains in targeting human
traffickers, the slave traders of today.
In late March, the internal security forces raided a human
trafficking ring, arresting 16 traffickers and rescuing 75
victims.
On the second challenge that threatens Lebanon and one I
know that this committee tracks closely, Hezbollah. When
Hezbollah first intervened in the Syrian civil war to prop up
the Assad regime, the group showed its true colors to anyone
who still doubted that Hezbollah put its own interests and
those of its foreign backers ahead of those of the Lebanese
people. When Hezbollah conducts terrorist activities abroad or
drags Lebanon into the war in neighboring Syria, it is ordinary
Lebanese people who are paying the price.
The U.S. Government is actively implementing the Hezbollah
International Financing Prevention Act. The Department of
Treasury's Office of Foreign Asset Control issued new HIFPA
regulations on April 15th. We will use our full authority under
HIFPA to target foreign financial institutions that knowingly
facilitate significant transactions or engage in money
laundering activities or other activities related to Hezbollah.
When we have evidence we will build a case and we will take
action. Before the passage of HIFPA we were already targeting
the nodes of Hezbollah's international financing by designating
over 100 Hezbollah-affiliated individuals and entities.
The third major challenge Lebanon faces is restoring
effective government. We commend Prime Minister Tammam Salam
for his courage and perseverance in addressing Lebanon's most
pressing challenges. But he cannot do the job alone.
Next month will mark 2 years the Lebanese people have been
without a President. Lebanon's leaders, particularly those who
are blocking a quorum from convening in Parliament, must put
the interests of the Lebanese people first by electing a
President and restoring a fully functioning government.
Madam Chairman, in these and many other ways we are
contributing to the stability, independence and security of
Lebanon, which is as much a U.S. interest as it is a Lebanese
one.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee. I welcome the opportunity to answer your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Feierstein follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.
Dr. Exum.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW EXUM, PH.D, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR MIDDLE EAST POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Exum. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to discuss U.S. policy toward Lebanon.
I have taken note of the questions that the various members
asked in their opening statements and I've also made a note for
my staff about the dark chocolate. I will be better prepared
for the next subcommittee appearance.
Ambassador Feierstein highlighted the array of interlocking
challenges that Lebanon confronts and gave an overview of our
comprehensive strategy in Lebanon. My own experience in Lebanon
is personal as well as professional. I lived in Lebanon for 2
years while attending the American University of Beirut, of
which I'm a proud graduate, and I returned to Lebanon for
another 8 months in 2008 to conduct research for my doctoral
dissertation.
If you had told me 5 years ago that Lebanon would be
flooded with over 1 million refugees from a brutal sectarian
civil war in Syria but would somehow remain an oasis of
relative calm in the Middle East, I would not have believed
you.
I would have explained probably with some academic
condescension that I was an expert on Lebanon and that what you
were describing to me was impossible given Lebanon's own
difficult history of sectarian conflict.
Yet, I would have been wrong. So, so much for all that grad
school. I would have undervalued the drivers of stability in
Lebanon, choosing to focus on the more obvious drivers of
instability, and I would have, most importantly, underestimated
the role the Lebanese Armed Forces has played in keeping
Lebanon cohesive and at peace with its neighbors and itself.
I'll focus my comments on our military cooperation with the
LAF, which is the core pillar of our policy in Lebanon and
something that we can all, from our taxpayers to our special
operations soldiers to our policy makers, be proud of.
Amidst all the challenges that Lebanon confronts, the LAF
remains the country's only highly functioning national
institution. Our support has enabled the LAF to beat back the
advances of the Islamic State and other extremist groups such
as the Nusra Front, although not without some high degree of
sacrifice from our Lebanese partners.
Strengthening the LAF also advances a range of U.S.
interests in the Middle East and that includes not only
countering the spread of ISIL and other violent extremists but
also stemming the influence of Iran and Hezbollah in the
region.
Since 2006, the United States has provided Lebanon more
than $1.2 billion in military assistance that aims to build a
LAF that, one, is capable of maintaining internal stability and
security, two, is capable of securing Lebanon's borders and
preventing ISIL and other foreign extremists from destabilizing
the country, and three, is the preeminent military force in
Lebanon, undermining the claims of Hezbollah and other militias
from maintaining their arms as well as the claim of Hezbollah
to be acting in the defense of Lebanon's interests.
In October, the President announced that the United States
would intensify its security assistance to Lebanon as part of
the campaign to counter ISIL.
To execute the President's guidance, Lebanon will likely
continue to be one of the Department of Defense's priority
countries for our counter terrorism partnership funding in
Fiscal Year 2016 to continue to bolster the LAF capability to
counter ISIL and other extremists.
This week, I had the opportunity to meet with a delegation
of senior general officers from the LAF during the DoD's annual
U.S.-Lebanon Joint Staff talks.
Some of these general officers I've known for years, dating
back to when I served as the desk officer for Lebanon at DoD
and they are among our closest partners in the region.
But don't take my word for it. Ask any one of the hundreds
of special operators who have served in Lebanon over the past 5
years. They will tell you the Lebanese are among the best
partners we have in the region to work with. They train hard
and they fight hard. We couldn't ask for more in a partner.
The LAF has taken a variety of bold measures to maintain
stability in Lebanon and counter the destabilizing effects of
the Syrian conflict. The LAF has increased its operational
tempo and reinforced Lebanon's borders with additional border
and special operations forces.
These forces have been highly active, engaging militants on
a weekly basis by launching artillery and air strikes, by
executing clearing operations in extremist-associated
neighborhoods and conducting raids and arrests.
High-profile arrests by the LAF and other security services
include the apprehension of radical Salafist cleric Ahmed al-
Asir, ISIL operative Omar Miqati and the 1996 Khobar Towers
bombing suspect Ahmed al-Mughassil.
The effectiveness of U.S. assistance and the LAF's
willingness to exercise its role as the sole legitimate defense
force in Lebanon was further underscored in March when the LAF
executed the daring operation in Ras Baalbek that killed over a
dozen ISIL fighters and destroyed ISIL vehicles, a command post
and a safe house.
And as Ambassador Feierstein noted just today, an ISIL
operative was killed in Arsal, the emir Abou Fouz was killed by
Lebanese special operations forces just today.
In the face of these rising challenges the LAF has
demonstrated considerable unity, fortitude and professionalism.
The LAF has organized itself effectively to maintain a
tremendously high operational tempo for many of its units and
has demonstrated the ability to make appropriate requests for
and use of the equipment we've given it as well as unity and
professionalism in numerous operations.
Although the LAF has prevented ISIL from destabilizing the
country to date, the stakes for LAF's failure are extremely
high.
If the LAF falters in its fight against extremists,
Hezbollah or even long-demilitarized Christian militias could
decide to seek or take direct military actions to protect their
communities, resulting in an outbreak of sectarian fighting
that could undermine the stability of Lebanon.
A LAF defeat, combined with a Hezbollah victory over
extremists forces, risks strengthening Hezbollah and Iran
inside of Lebanon and therefore undermining U.S. policy efforts
to bolster Lebanese state institutions' ability to exert
sovereign authority throughout Lebanon.
As the United States faces a strategic environment in the
Middle East that is the most unstable it's been in 40 years,
our positive relationship with and continued support to Lebanon
and the LAF are more important than ever.
The LAF remains a critical pillar of Lebanon's stability
and its commitment to curtailing sectarian fighting and
terrorism has been a significant factor in preventing Lebanon
from descending into greater violence and instability.
Madam Chairman and Representative Deutch, I thank you and
other distinguished members of the subcommittee for calling
this hearing and drawing attention to Lebanon's security
challenges and the U.S. security interests in supporting
Lebanon during this critical time.
With that, I'm open to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Exum follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Job well done. Thank you so much. In the
interest of time, because we will have votes shortly, I would
like to give my time to Congressman Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Earlier this week, we heard that Hassan Nasrallah and a
handful of senior members of Hezbollah met with both Iran's
Vice President and Iran's Ambassador to Lebanon.
How concerned is the administration over Iran's influence
in Lebanon? I have a very important part of my district that
has the same name--it's Lebanon. We love you both. So how
concerned is the administration about Iranian influence and
what efforts are being made to counter Iran's influence there?
Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
I would say, of course, we're extremely concerned for a
variety of reasons. The most specific, currently, is the extent
to which Iran is encouraging and pressing Hezbollah to
interfere in the election of a new President and effectively to
paralyze the Government of Lebanon.
And so this has been an issue and a concern for us for, in
fact, many years that Iran has supported Hezbollah to the
detriment, in our view, of the overall security and stability
of the country.
In order to address it, of course, we have been extremely,
heavily engaged in a variety of activities that we have laid
out. So everything from trying to help counter Iranian
influence and ensure that there is an election and ensure that
the Government of Lebanon can function and can perform its
duties and provide services to its people.
The support that we're providing to the LAF and the
internal security forces in order to allow the security forces
to maintain control over Lebanon's borders as well as the
sovereignty of its territory--all of these are factors in
pushing back against Iranian exploitation of the
vulnerabilities in that society.
And, of course, the other part is what we're trying to do
in order to build a broad international coalition of support
for all of the activities that we are talking about, whether
it's refugees, humanitarian relief or these other political and
economic areas that we're working in. All of them will limit
Iran's influence in Lebanon.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Mr. Ambassador, according to the Hezbollah International
Financing Prevention Act of 2015, the President is due to
provide Congress with a number of reports including reports on
countries that support Hezbollah, an assessment of whether a
country's government is taking adequate measures to disrupt
Hezbollah's networks and activities within that country, and
methods that Hezbollah utilizes to raise or transfer funds. As
of today, I don't believe we've received those reports. Can you
please update us on the status of those reports and when we can
expect to receive them?
Ambassador Feierstein. Yes, Mr. Chabot. I'm pleased to say
that the State Department did submit the required reports
several weeks ago. The other reports are in the hands of ODNI
and I'll be happy to go back and seek from them some further
information about when they might be prepared to submit those
reports.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Dr. Exum, let me go to you. We
always--as I know you're well aware--I've met with the Lebanese
Armed Forces generals over the years, and they're always making
obvious requests for funding and the support they need and I'm
inclined to support them. That being said, I, and I think a lot
of my colleagues in Congress, are always concerned that some of
those dollars don't end up in the hands of Hezbollah in some
manner. Would you, once again, and I know you mentioned before
the good things the LAF has been doing--could you make us
more--tell me why I can be satisfied that that money isn't
going where it shouldn't be going?
Mr. Exum. Thank you for the opportunity to answer that
question. I feel very proud to announce that the Lebanese Armed
Forces--as you know when we provide weapons, especially when
they're sensitive weapons, like night vision goggles and things
like that, we have end use monitoring requirements. And the
Lebanese Armed Forces have consistently had the best end use
monitoring reporting of any military that we work with. Meaning
that the equipment that we provide to the Lebanese Armed
Forces, we can account for it at any given time. We have a
pretty large OMC in the Embassy in the Lebanon as well as a
forward presence there. So we feel pretty confident--we feel
highly confident--given their end use monitoring rate that we
can account for the equipment, Congressman.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Madam Chairman. I'd like to talk about
the end of the Syrian conflict in light of the news reports
just today, it's impossible right now to imagine. But, we spend
a lot of time talking about what role, if any, Assad will play,
but I'd like you both to focus on what results might lead to a
weakening of Hezbollah that would in turn potentially lead to a
strengthening of the government in Lebanon.
Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you Mr. Deutch. And of course
all of this is highly speculative because we can't really see
the shape of an outcome that would bring peace to Syria. But if
we were able to achieve that in a way that provided for a
political transition that brought in all of the elements of
Syrian society that gave the Sunnis and the other minority
groups inside of Syria full voice, that we believe, in and of
itself, would weaken Hezbollah and certainly weaken the
linkages between Iran, Syria, Hezbollah, and Lebanon. And so
the kind of discussions--negotiations--that are going on now to
fulfill the commitments that were made at Geneva I to allow for
political transition would be in fact the end game, the end
state that we believe achieve our broader regional objectives.
Mr. Deutch. Dr. Exum do you have thoughts on that?
Mr. Exum. Congressman I think I'd approach this a couple of
different ways. First off, you raised the interesting question
about how this conflict in Syria has affected Hezbollah and in
a different format and perhaps in a closed hearing of this
subcommittee we could talk about the effect that conflict in
Syria has had on Hezbollah for the positive and negative ways.
I think what this conflict has done in the positive way, it has
allowed the Lebanese Armed Forces to prove itself to the
population and has certainly allowed the Lebanese Armed Forces
to prove that it can defend Lebanon and that there is less of a
need for these other armed groups. If you remember, Hezbollah
was allowed to keep its arms under the Taif accords that ended
the Lebanese Civil War. But that was based on, you know, a
threat against Israel.
I think that the Lebanese Armed Forces has been able to
show that it's been quite effective in terms of fighting these
nonstate actors and it has given us more time to build up these
forces.
I think the question I have, Congressman, and I'll speak
quite bluntly, is what happens when Hezbollah comes home--how
do they see their role in Lebanon. Do they want to turn their
attentions toward the instability of--or toward conflict with
Israel?
My biggest fear, for all that we've accomplished in
Lebanon, is that Hezbollah drags Lebanon and Israel into
another war that's not in the interests of the Lebanese people,
the Israeli people, or certainly the United States either.
Mr. Deutch. And just continuing that thought, what are the
practical implications of the LAF without Saudi funding and is
it going to be made up elsewhere? What does it mean?
Mr. Exum. And thanks for raising that because I was just in
the Gulf with Secretary Carter last week. He met with all the
Gulf's defense ministers.
I also had the opportunity to meet bilaterally with
Mohammad bin Salman and in Saudi Arabia Mohammed bin Zayed. I
think there are two levels that this affects us. There's the
pragmatic kind of immediate acquisitions level. This means that
the Lebanese Armed Forces likely won't be able to acquire some
of the weapons systems that we feel are necessary for them to
me more effective against groups like Daesh and Nusra.
These include close air support platforms as well as kind
of protected mobility, so advanced, you know, armored personnel
carriers. That's the practical aspect.
The political aspect, and this is something that Secretary
Carter--well, this is something that our department has
certainly--I don't want to speak for him, but certainly our
department has advanced is that, you know, in places like
Baghdad and places like Beirut we need our Gulf partners to be
on the ground with us. We need them to be engaged because when
they're not engaged it cedes the ground to Iran.
So I think I worry that with the withdrawal--the apparent
withdrawal of Saudi Arabia from Lebanon--I hope this is just a
monetary thing because, quite frankly, we need our Gulf
partners to be there. Otherwise, I fear that it only increases
Iranian influence in Beirut just as the absence of a Gulf
engagement in Baghdad increases Iranian influence there.
Mr. Deutch. Great. Thank you very much, Dr. Exum and
Ambassador Feierstein. I just want to also add my best wishes
for a peaceful and enjoyable retirement and thank you for your
service.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Not in Yemen, not in Islamabad but
Jerusalem maybe.
Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Ambassador, let me add my word of congratulations too
but I must caution you that they say that retirement is not all
that it's cracked up to be. The hours are long and the pay is
low. So congratulations to you.
Dr. Exum, you said that the withdrawal of other--in regard
to Congressman Deutch's question about the withdrawal of the
Saudis--you said that we needed our other Gulf partners. Such
as who?
Mr. Exum. Such as the United Arab Emirates, in particular.
On the one hand, we applaud the GCC countries for their strong
stand against Hezbollah. It's aligned with ours. The
designation of Hezbollah as a foreign terrorist organization--
that's directly in line with us.
However, as we've just laid out, our strategy for Lebanon--
our policy--is based around strengthening Lebanese national
institutions and we need the Saudis, we need the Emiratis and
the Kuwaitis to be with us in those efforts.
Mr. Weber. Is there any indication that the Emiratis--well,
the Saudis, obviously--or the Kuwaitis and others, are they
going to withdraw their support?
Ambassador Feierstein. Mr. Weber, if I may, first of all,
let me just say that we understand and appreciate the concerns
that the Saudis had that led them to make this decision, that
the Government of Lebanon, unlike nearly every other country in
the international community including our own, was unwilling to
condemn a purposeless attack on Saudi diplomatic facilities in
Iran. So we don't want to suggest that we disagree or that we
don't appreciate the rationale behind the Saudi position.
Having said that, we agree entirely with the view--the
perception that Dr. Exum outlined--and that is that we all need
to be working together in order to support Lebanese
institutions, including more specifically the LAF, in order to
stabilize the country and provide security.
When Secretary Kerry was in Hafr al Batin a few weeks ago,
he did have conversations also with the Saudis and urged them
to limit the extent of their actions against the Government of
Lebanon and to look for ways to move back into a position where
they would be more solidly supportive and be more consistent
with the approach that we've taken and I believe that we've
heard from the Saudi leadership that they are prepared to do
that.
Mr. Weber. Well, there's three really interesting things
here--well, more than three but three that I'll ask about. In
our notes here, in one of the comments, it says most of the
Syrian refugees are housed actually in Lebanese neighborhoods.
How do they do that?
Ambassador Feierstein. This is actually true throughout the
region. It's true in Jordan and in Turkey as well and that is
that most of the Syrians, when they came across, were able to
find apartments.
Many of them, of course, have relatives who live in Lebanon
and they were able to simply move in with their relatives. Many
of the refugees when they first came across had savings and
other kinds of financial ability.
Mr. Weber. That makes sense. And then Dr. Exum, you said,
you know, what was it, 3 years ago maybe--I forget your
timing--that if someone had said this would be happening in
Lebanon you'd puff up your academic chest, as it were, and say
no way.
And our notes say that there are drivers of stability. What
are those drivers of stability, in your opinion?
Mr. Exum. So Congressman, I think, like I said, first and
foremost the Lebanese Armed Forces. I'm very proud----
Mr. Weber. But let me--let me give you my third question
then because it ties in with this. And Doctor, pardon the
interruption but----
Mr. Exum. No, no.
Mr. Weber [continuing]. One of our notes says that we had a
witness in HFAC in March 2016, I think it was, who actually
said that there are so many Hezbollah now in LAF that LAF has
become an extension of the Hezbollah movement. I don't know if
you're aware of that. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Exum. I would not agree with that assessment. I think
that the relationship between the Lebanese Armed Forces and
Hezbollah is one that, obviously, we carefully study.
I believe Madam Chairman described it as a partnership or
synergy. I think we'd describe it as deconfliction.
If there was ever a partnership or even cooperation between
the two organizations that would be highly problematic, of
course, for this department, especially since we have U.S.
personnel who are working with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
Mr. Weber. You said that the Lebanese Armed Forces are the
number-one stabilizing influence in Lebanon.
Mr. Exum. I think that would be the first among several
drivers of stability. Others, Congressman, is bear in mind that
for better or for worse much of Lebanon's political class lived
through and were leaders during the Lebanese civil war.
So they remember what the abyss looks like and I think at
times when we've seen sectarian tensions almost spiral out of
control there's been a conscious step back and I think that has
to do with, unfortunately, the difficult memories of Lebanon's
own civil war.
Mr. Weber. I got you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
Thank you again for your testimony. I'm particularly
interested to know whether the Arab League's recent designation
of Hezbollah as a terrorist group is impacting Hezbollah's
ability to operate in the region and as a follow-on,
considering Hezbollah's exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis
and the significant loss of life, is there any sense that you
have that there's growing support within the European community
to fully designate Hezbollah as a terrorist organization?
Ambassador Feierstein. Mr. Cicilline, in regard to your
first question, we do believe that the designation by the GCC
and by the Arab League of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization
is an important step in the right direction and we are moving
to try to help build practical steps on the basis of that
designation to increase the cooperation that we have.
So for example, Department of State, Treasury and Justice
recently held a law enforcement coordination group meeting in
Bahrain to try to increase the way that we can work together to
limit Hezbollah's capacity to operate in the region.
We think that this is an important step and we'll continue
to move forward on that. As for the Europeans, we believe that
the level of cooperation that we're getting from Europe is very
good, that in fact, the designation by the EU of the military
wing of Hezbollah in 2013 was an important step in the right
direction.
We are working with Europol and with others, again, in very
close coordination to try to address the Hezbollah threat as it
applies globally.
Mr. Cicilline. And do the Gulf countries have the
capabilities to enforce this designation and the willingness?
Ambassador Feierstein. We believe that GCC capabilities
have grown over time. We are working with them as part of the
President's Camp David summit with GCC leaders last year. We
agreed that we are going to increase our cooperation and
coordination with them on issues like terror finance,
specifically applying to Hezbollah, and to look at other areas
where we could increase our cooperation.
So the trend line is positive. Their capabilities are
growing and we'll continue to work with them very closely to
try to increase that.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Ambassador. I too wish you well
on your retirement and thank you for your extraordinary service
to our country.
Dr. Exum, you mentioned the apparent withdrawal of Saudi
Arabia from its military assistance to Lebanon. So I'm, first,
interested to know why you used the word apparent and whether
or not it's more than it appears to us.
And also, the United States, obviously the U.K., the
European Union and France have reaffirmed and in many cases
increased their defense cooperation with Lebanon.
At the same time, Iran has also offered to fill in the
funding gap and my question is really how has the Lebanese
Government responded to this--what do you think the long-term
effect of that is and if you could just discuss kind of the
apparent withdrawal.
Mr. Exum. Right. Congressman, first off, the donation
itself was always somewhat ambiguous. It had been announced
quite some time ago and maybe Mr. Ambassador----
Ambassador Feierstein. We're talking about the Saudis, not
the Iranians.
Mr. Exum. Exactly, the Saudi--right.
Ambassador Feierstein. You know, of course we have been
working very closely with the Saudis and they were cooperating
with us on the purchase of some U.S. articles, also with the
French on the purchase of French articles.
That financing has been withdrawn. But we certainly do hope
that the Saudis over time will restore much of that and will be
able to continue.
Mr. Exum. While we were in the discussions about that for
that donation--it was ambiguous as far as where we stood in
terms of that money actually landing in a bank account where it
could be used.
So now that the announcement has been made we hope to
continue to engage with our Saudi partners to reinvest in the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
With respect to the--to any potential Iranian investment--I
would defer to my State Department colleagues. But I will say
that our British colleagues have been quite good partners,
especially with Lebanon's border security program and we've
partnered quite closely in terms of the border and regiments
that we have trained and in terms of the checkpoints that we
have created along Lebanon's border with Syria, and in terms of
individual fighting positions that we've constructed. So the
British have been tremendous partners for us in Lebanon.
Ambassador Feierstein. Right. And as for the Iranian offer,
I think that the Government of Lebanon saw it for exactly what
it was, which was a propaganda play and they said that they had
no interest.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. Thank you so much. I yield back,
Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Cicilline.
Dr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Gentlemen, I appreciate you being here. What is the current
assessment of rockets and missiles in Lebanon, Dr. Exum?
Mr. Exum. Are you referring to Hezbollah's arsenal?
Mr. Yoho. Yes.
Mr. Exum. I think I could say that in this hearing that
they have reconstituted at the very least their rocket arsenal
from 2006. I think to go into greater detail I'd be happy to
arrange for a briefing from one of our intelligence----
Mr. Yoho. Yes, I'd like to get that because I have here in
my notes that it says the Israelis' current assessment is
150,000 missiles and rockets. I would be curious to see where
we are from there.
And then we've also heard with the Iran nuclear deal that
Iran has said they were going to help retrofit these with smart
bomb technology.
Do we have any indication that that's going on?
Mr. Exum. Again, I will refer those----
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Exum [continuing]. The specific questions to our
intelligence community. Let me just say, though, Congressman,
that as you know we have partnered with the Israelis I think
over the past 5 years. The Department of Defense has spent an
average of $500 million over the past 5 years alone--an average
annually--of $500 million to partner with the Israelis on their
missile defense technology and we've had several key successes
both with the development of the Arrow 2 and Arrow 3 systems,
the David sling system--these are for more long-range ballistic
missiles--but most importantly, the Iron Dome program that the
United States has co-developed with Israel has saved countless
Israeli lives. This has all been since 2006.
Mr. Yoho. No, and that's great.
Mr. Exum. So we take this threat very seriously,
Congressman.
Mr. Yoho. Well, and let me ask both of you. With the--
again, trying to assess the aftermath of the Iran nuclear
deal--do you see Iran inserting and influencing that region
more, getting more hegemony in that area and taking, you know,
just more leadership in that area? Are we seeing that more
since the Iran nuclear deal or since some of the sanctions have
been released or money been released?
Ambassador Feierstein. Mr. Yoho, this is, of course,
something that we watch very carefully and was a subject of
most of the conversation that the President had with the GCC
leadership when he was in Riyadh just 2 weeks ago.
We do believe that in the period since the JCPOA was signed
that the Government of Iran has tried to expand its influence,
its presence in the region--that they are going to continue to
try to at least portray an image of an Iran that is becoming
more and more active, more and more powerful in the region.
Some of this is, of course, overstated and is designed
really to create a certain image of Iran of perhaps more than
is real.
But there are also elements of it that are well worth
watching and therefore, the strategy that we are pursuing,
which is to build up the capabilities of our allies and
partners in the region--the GCC, Government of Israel--to
confront these Iranian efforts. Also as Dr. Exum said, whether
you're looking at Baghdad or at Beirut or at Sana'a to increase
the ability of those societies to resist Iranian expansion, to
resist Iranian exploitation of vulnerabilities, to work with
our Gulf allies to do that.
Mr. Yoho. And that's--the important thing that we want to
do is make sure that the unintended consequences doesn't
embolden Iran that has more of a destabilizing effect, if
that's possible, in that region.
Ambassador Feierstein. Absolutely.
Mr. Yoho. That we want to make sure that if they are having
an influence it's a positive influence, which time will tell on
that.
As far as Russia's involvement in Syria, along the Israeli
border with Syria, are we seeing any influence with Russia's
presence there as far as a stabilizing in that area or have you
assessed anything? Is it a positive effect or negative or no
change at all?
Ambassador Feierstein. In terms of the Israeli-Syrian
border?
Mr. Yoho. Yes.
Ambassador Feierstein. Well, I think that if you look at
the evidence, there's a dialogue going on between the Israelis
and the Russians in order to try to deconflict and, of course,
the Government of Israel has said that they had an
understanding with the Russians that they would continue to
carry out their defensive operations inside of Syria in order
to ensure that the Iranians or others couldn't exploit the
political chaos in that region. So that part has been positive.
But overall, the Russian presence has not contributed to
stability on the border.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. I'm out of time and I thank you----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Dr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho [continuing]. For your time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and Mr.
Feierstein, I want to be real clear. You hold an appointment in
this administration and I want to make very clear what you did
or did not say to Mr. Yoho on the record.
Is there any evidence that because of JCPOA, or related to
it in some fashion, Iran has changed or expanded its activity
with respect to Hezbollah in Lebanon specifically and in other
places in the region because of the free-up of funds?
Ambassador Feierstein. No, sir. There is no direct evidence
linking the two.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Right. And in fact, the evidence is,
despite all of this PR about the funds, almost all of those
funds have been used, in fact, for domestic investment because
they ran down their reserves and they've got some serious
reinvestment they need to make in order to pump up the oil
production as well. Is that a fair statement?
Ambassador Feierstein. This is absolutely the assessment
that we made.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Just want to clear that up for the
record.
You know, when my friend, Graham Beneman, who's here
today--by the way, he worked for the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. All the good people came.
Mr. Connolly. You know, we're everywhere. We're everywhere,
still.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Congressman Deutch, do you remember that?
Mr. Connolly. But we went to Lebanon well over 30 years ago
and, you know, there were problems about Lebanese stability
then and it only got worse in the '80s when we were there,
right, because the civil war had ended--we thought that was the
worst.
But certainly U.S. suffered terrible losses and, by the
way, Democrats didn't exploit those problems of Ronald Reagan.
So the Embassy got blown up not once but twice. The MAU--the
Marine amphibious unit--at the Beirut Airport was blown up by
terrorists and we lost 240 young men--240--241, thank you.
Graham and I lost a friend, Bill McIntyre, in the first
bombing of the Embassy. He worked for USAID at that time. And
we had a series of assassinations of Lebanese leaders, most of
it attributed to Syrian activity and because Syria wanted to
keep control over Lebanon and certainly had, as I recall,
troops in the Beqaa.
But now when we look at Lebanon, and this is the question I
want to ask you, are we looking now really at a fundamentally
failed state and can we ever find the formula to sort of put
Humpty Dumpty back together again and, I mean, and not
necessarily with the status quo ante but with something more
democratic, more reflective of the demographics--the actual
demographics--and a state that's going to function and work and
provide services and security for its citizens and to make sure
it has secure borders with its neighbors like Israel. Go for
it.
Ambassador Feierstein. Mr. Connolly, we would absolutely
not suggest that Lebanon is a failed state or anything close to
being a failed state.
As Dr. Exum said, there are drivers of stability there,
that there is a resilience that has been demonstrated over
these past years that in many ways is quite remarkable.
The fact that Lebanon has been able to absorb over a third
of its population in the form of refugees without creating huge
social or political disintegration or dysfunction is a
remarkable achievement on their part.
The performance of the LAF and the internal security forces
in holding the security together and addressing some fairly
serious challenges both externally from spillover from the
Syrian conflict into the Beqaa Valley but also in terms of
preventing the rise of extremism from within Syria and the
performance within Lebanon, the performance of the ISF and the
OAF, for example, in Tripoli in maintaining stability there
even though there were extremist forces operating.
So all of these things are very positive. There are
challenges. There are serious challenges on the political
front, the need to resolve this 2-year vacancy in the
presidency and to allow the government to function--the
challenge of Hezbollah----
Mr. Connolly. Close to as bad as leaving a Supreme Court
seat vacant for 9 months.
Ambassador Feierstein. Yes, sir. All of these things are
challenges. But I don't think that we have ever been at a point
where we were not confident that the Lebanese would be able to
pull this together and create a strong and stable society.
Mr. Exum. No, I would just concur with that. I think that
we have seen examples where we have been able build up
effective national institutions and I would concur. I think,
you know, again, like I said at the beginning, if I were to go
back 5 years and think that Lebanon would somehow be relatively
stable I would not have believed it.
But I think Lebanon has proven a lot of us wrong the past
several years, given the resiliency of not only its people but
also the institutions it does have either at the national or
communal level.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of questions. We have a vote.
So just the Lebanese Armed Forces, for both of you, is--
what percentage of their force is made up of the Shi'a
population?
Mr. Exum. Yes, I have the precise demographics here. It's,
roughly, it's about a third Christian, a third Sunni Muslim and
about a third Shi'a Muslim with about 6 percent Druze
population in there. I can go into greater detail if you'd
like, sir.
Mr. Higgins. Does the Lebanese Armed Forces--are they
viewed as being more effective than Hezbollah as a fighting
force?
Mr. Exum. They're not, I would say. I would think that the
Lebanese Armed Forces are still a work in progress and it's
largely uneven.
We've done some great work with the Lebanese special
operations forces. I think everybody, to include the Lebanese
Armed Forces and our own military, believes that we've got a
lot more work to do with the so-called conventional units
within the Lebanese Armed Forces--the intervention brigades,
the border regiment forces--and I think there is still a
perception, which we are working to counter quite actively,
that Hezbollah is a more effective actor on the battlefield.
Mr. Higgins. Externally, with the Saudi pull back of $4
billion to support the Lebanese Armed Forces, is there a
concern that--internally in the country--that the Lebanese
Armed Forces loses its street cred, if you will, among the
Shi'a population as the institution that is in place to protect
all of Lebanon?
Mr. Exum. So and here, Congressman, I've taken off my DoD
hat. I've got my analyst hat on now and I've never really
worried about the credibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces
within the Shi'a population or within the Christian population.
It's in large part the Sunni population that I've worried
about in part because so many of the operations that the
Lebanese Armed Forces carry out are against Sunni extremists,
against--and often they operate in largely Sunni communities
like Arsal, like Tripoli in the north, like Sidon in the south.
And I worry that there's a perception among some in Lebanon's
Sunni community, which I believe has been increasingly
radicalized, in places, due to the conflict in Syria and
broader waves of sectarianism that have swept the region over
the past 10 years, I worry about not their credibility but the
way they are perceived within that specific community.
I will say, overall, the Lebanese Armed Forces have never
been more popular and never been more respected within Lebanon
overall and that's highly encouraging, Congressman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. I'm sorry. Okay.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And Mr. Higgins, we really do have 3
minutes to get to our vote. But thank you so much and I'm
sorry.
Mr. Higgins. It's okay.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And with that, our subcommittee is
adjourned.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you to the audience.
[Whereupon, at 4:36 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
