- OVERSIGHT OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT AND AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT FUNDING PRIORITIES FOR THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT AND
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FUNDING PRIORITIES FOR THE
WESTERN HEMISPHERE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-27

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-912PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Roberta S. Jacobson, Assistant Secretary, Bureau
for Western Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Department of State.......     4
Ms. Elizabeth Hogan, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean, U.S. Agency for International
Development....................................................    11

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Roberta S. Jacobson: Prepared statement............     6
Ms. Elizabeth Hogan: Prepared statement..........................    13

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    34
Hearing minutes..................................................    35

OVERSIGHT OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT
AND AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT FUNDING PRIORITIES
FOR THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 o'clock a.m.,
in room 2255 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (acting chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
Chairman Duncan is attending to a family emergency and has
asked me to chair today's meeting in his place. We wish him and
his family well.
After recognizing myself and my good friend, Ranking Member
Sires, for 5 minutes, each for our opening statements, I will
then recognize other members who might seek recognition for 1
minute. We will then hear from our witnesses.
Thank you ladies for being here. Without objection, the
witnesses' prepared statements will be made a part of the
record. Members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules. The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
As we scrutinize the Fiscal Year 2016 budget proposals for
the Western Hemisphere, we must fully analyze how we are
advancing U.S. interests in the region. While the
administration may condemn human rights violations, attacks on
the press, and biased judicial systems, it still continues to
placate to rogue regimes in the Hemisphere who face zero
consequences.
In Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega is running for a third term
after pushing through constitutional changes to allow
consecutive re-elections in violation of the Nicaraguan
constitution. Ortega is using the facade of the Canal Project
to be able to fund money to his own pockets and possibly
expropriate lands along the canal. In December, the Nicaraguan
people who live along the canal protested the project and were
met with repression and violence at the hands of the Ortega
regime. Ecuador's Rafael Correa and Bolivia's Evo Morales are
already in their third terms after manipulating the
legislatures and rewriting the constitution and election laws
in their countries for their own political agenda. At the same
time, Correa and Morales have kicked out USAID in their
countries causing USAID to be timid in closed societies
throughout the Hemisphere and hurting its mission.
Argentina's Cristina Kirchner is currently being
investigated for her possible involvement in covering up Iran's
role in the 1994 AMIA bombing even as more questions arise
surrounding the murder of Alberto Nisman.
And in Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro has run the economy almost
completely into the ground while quashing dissent, violating
the human rights of the Venezuela people on a daily basis.
Although Maduro and his thugs have finally been sanctioned by
the administration, it only occurred because this committee and
Congress strongly pushed for those punitive actions to be
taken.
The common theme in all of these countries, other than the
greed, corruption, and thirst for power, is the manner in which
these leaders have stayed in control and suppressed civil
society. It is a playbook learned from Cuba, the same Cuba with
which the President has reversed decades of U.S. policy and has
given away almost all of our leverage in return for nothing.
Dictators in the region have learned from and studied the
methods of the Castro brothers. They have learned how to
control the media, silence the opposition, and they have
learned how to impose their will by instilling fear in people.
They have learned the elections, even corrupt and illegitimate
elections, are often enough to appease the international
community and for critics to look the other way, knowing that
once they are in power they can just change the rules of the
game without consequences.
They know that the Organization of American States despite
its inter-American democratic charter will do nothing to hold
them accountable. And they know that the Obama administration
will continue trying to appease and engage, hoping that if they
keep playing nice then maybe these tyrants will stop taking
advantage of them.
People in Latin America are crying out for the United
States to finally stand up and say loudly and clearly that we
know that leaders are manipulating the democratic process and
are repressing fundamental human rights, and they want us to do
everything in our power to hold those leaders accountable.
As we examine the budget, I am concerned that it does not
reflect those priorities. Democracy and governance programs in
Latin America are always on the chopping block when funds are
needed at State and USAID and this is unacceptable.
In Central America I question whether or not our Embassies
and host countries are prepared to handle such a large increase
in funding from one fiscal year to another. In Cuba, I am
concerned that the $20 million requested by the administration
will be undermined by the misguided normalization talks, and
the implementation of these democracy programs may be in
jeopardy due to the demands from Havana.
In Venezuela that is desperately and increasingly in need
of assistance, I am concerned that the administration has not
requested more resources to help civil society. In Haiti with
elections around the corner, I do not understand why we cut
INCLE funds in half when so much assistance is needed for the
Haitian National Police as we gear up for the upcoming
elections.
We must ensure that we are funding priorities and
addressing the root causes of problems throughout the
Hemisphere on the governance and security fronts. Drug
trafficking is a key piece of terrorist financing and we must
have reliable partners with whom we can work to disrupt
narcoterror networks and transnational criminal groups.
The administration must work harder to hold bad actors
responsible, whether that is through increased pressure at
international organizations, through bilateral relations or
additional sanctions and blocking of assets. And we should be
stepping up our democracy and governance programs in response
to regional challenges rather than withdrawing when the going
gets tough.
And with that, I am pleased to yield to my good friend from
New Jersey, the ranking member Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for being here to talk
about the administration's Fiscal Year 2016 requests for Latin
America and the Caribbean. Today's hearing occurs at a time of
complex foreign policy challenges in a region that has evolved
to become increasingly less reliant on the United States.
While I do not believe that the U.S. is implicitly
attempting to disengage from the Western Hemisphere, years of
focus elsewhere have come at the expense of our policy toward
the Americas. However, recent turmoil throughout the region,
including growing instability in the Northern Triangle and the
Venezuelan Government's hostile and violent actions toward its
own civilians, has prompted us to take a closer look at our own
backyard. I am pleased that the administration's Fiscal Year
2016 request of nearly $2 billion represents a 35-percent
increase over the Fiscal Year 2014 level.
It is imperative that we strike a balance between citizen
security initiatives and traditional development programs that
can ensure peace and economic prosperity. Drug trafficking and
organized crime that plagues the Northern Triangle of Central
America is wreaking havoc in the region and poses security
threats for the entire Hemisphere, especially the U.S.
Disparity is abundant with nearly 30 percent of the
region's population living in poverty. Each year hundreds die
along the southern border in their aspiration for a better life
crossing into the U.S. while others remain threatened by cartel
violence. With the exception of Cuba, democracy in the
Hemisphere has progressed but is still threatened by organized
crime and leaders that have abused executive powers.
Every day in Venezuela, anti-government demonstrators
continue to express their frustrations with the deteriorating
economic, political, and security conditions in their country.
Venezuela continues unabashedly to respond with a heavy hand,
backtracking from any progress they had made as to
strengthening its democratic institution. We must work together
in a bipartisan fashion to ensure that increased budget
requests are used efficiently with proper oversight and address
root causes of violence and the dysfunction in this region. And
I thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
And so now we would like to welcome our witnesses. We are
so proud of our witnesses today. We welcome back a good friend
of all of us in the Foreign Affairs Committee and especially
this subcommittee, Assistant Secretary of State for Western
Hemisphere Affairs Roberta Jacobson. Assistant Secretary
Jacobson previously served as Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs, senior coordinator
for the Citizen Security Initiatives in the Western Hemisphere,
and Deputy Assistant Secretary for Canada, Mexico and NAFTA
issues for the Bureau. Welcome, Roberta.
We also want to welcome another good friend, Acting
Assistant Administrator Elizabeth Hogan with USAID's Latin
America and Caribbean Bureau. Ms. Hogan is also serving as
Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator for the region and has
previously served as director of the Haiti Task Team. Welcome
back.
So Ms. Jacobson, we will begin with you. Madam Ambassador.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ROBERTA S. JACOBSON, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU FOR WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Jacobson. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you very
much for this opportunity to testify on the Fiscal Year 2016
request for U.S. assistance to the Western Hemisphere. Madam
Chair, I know that you and members of this subcommittee are as
pleased as I am that by almost every available metric the
United States remains an influential actor and vital partner in
the region because we all recognize the importance of this
Hemisphere to our national interest.
The Obama administration's policy aims to forge equal
partnerships with the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean that build on the promising destiny of this
Hemisphere based first and foremost on shared values.
I would like to submit my written testimony for the record
and not take up much of your time to get to your questions.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Ambassador Jacobson. Our top priorities in the region, jobs
and prosperity, education and innovation, energy cooperation,
and promoting democratic values have a direct impact on the
daily lives of Americans. We are focused on improving citizen
security with more comprehensive policies that better the lives
of our citizens with lessons learned at home and in Latin
America and the Caribbean, whether it is in Silicon Valley on
innovation or Colombia on citizen security. Thus, the
administration's 2016 foreign assistance request for the
Western Hemisphere is a 34.7-percent increase from 2014.
We realize that in areas of the Americas there were needed
additional sustained attention if they were to achieve some of
the remarkable growth and social progress we have seen
elsewhere. Just over half the total request supports the U.S.
strategy for engagement in Central America. Last summer's spike
in migration was a clear signal that serious and longstanding
challenges in Central America remain and may be worsening. To
change this trend we must address the underlying factors
driving migration or be prepared for this tragedy to repeat
itself ad infinitum with ultimately higher impact and cost to
the United States.
Over the past years of implementing our Central America
Regional Security Initiative, we have learned a great deal
about what works and what doesn't work on security in Central
America, and our $1 billion assistance request for Central
America builds on all of that knowledge. It represents a
significant increase from previous years, but what we know for
certain is that the cost of investing now in Central America's
security and prosperity pales in comparison to the cost of
addressing migration challenges here at home.
Beyond Central America it would be shortsighted even in
tough budget times not to maintain investments in priority
programs that are working. For Mexico, the request includes
$119 million to continue support for the Merida Initiative.
Mexico was a critical partner last summer in the effort to stem
the flow of migration to the United States and nearly every
week it captures important drug traffickers, but serious
security challenges have persisted and therefore our request
advances Mexico's efforts to strengthen the rule of law, combat
corruption and protect human rights.
In Colombia, all eyes are on whether the peace process can
bring an end to Latin America's longest running conflict but we
can't take our eye off the ball, and so our request includes
$288.7 million to support Colombia's efforts to secure the rule
of law and support sustainable development.
We must continue our efforts in the Caribbean or our third
border. Our request includes $241.6 million for Haiti and
$53\1/2\ million for the Caribbean Basin Initiative to reduce
rates of crime and violence which threaten both the U.S. and
Caribbean security.
Peru is now the world's largest producer of cocaine, and
the government will need our help to change that trajectory.
Last year I visited coca fields being eradicated and
alternative development projects where a decade ago when I
served in Peru no American could venture due to the danger of
leftist violence. And I know that we have an unusual
opportunity of government political will, a model proven to
work and local populations eager for our help.
This request maintains important support for freedom of the
press, human rights and democracy in the Hemisphere, including
in those states in which we have seen the greatest backsliding.
U.S. assistance that supports our policy makes a direct
difference in the lives of citizens throughout the Hemisphere
and benefits the national interests of the United States. And I
look forward to your questions, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Jacobson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MS. ELIZABETH HOGAN, ACTING ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Hogan. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman, Ranking
Member Sires, and Congresswoman Kelly. Thank you for the
invitation to testify before you today and thank you for the
committee's continuing support for USAID's work in Latin
America and the Caribbean.
As Acting Administrator Lenhardt testified before you last
week, USAID's mission across the globe is to partner to end
extreme poverty and promote resilient democratic societies.
USAID assistance has helped many countries of the region
achieve these goals. However, despite major progress in some
countries, social development and economic growth have been
stymied by the dramatic rise in crime and violence in the
Northern Triangle countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras. This increase in violent crime is rooted in deep-
seated social and economic inequality. It has been fueled by
increases in gang violence and transnational crime.
In order to help Central American governments reverse these
trends, the U.S. Government has developed an interagency
strategy for the region that advances three interrelated
objectives--prosperity, security and governance. The
President's $1 billion request reflects our shared belief that
the United States and Central America need a deeper partnership
to tackle insecurity, endemic poverty, and weak governance that
impacts our own national security.
First, we must increase support for broad based economic
growth. This support includes improving the enabling
environment for businesses to invest and grow, advancing trade
and regional integration, increasing financing for small and
medium enterprises, and connecting small scale farmers to the
markets. It also includes a focus on employment programs for
disadvantaged youth. Last year I heard from youth in the region
about how USAID programs are increasing their security,
expanding employment opportunities, and giving them an
alternative to gang life or illegal migration.
But beyond these anecdotal testimonies we know that our
citizen security programs are working. An independent
evaluation concluded that fewer robberies, murders, and
extortions are reported in the neighborhoods where USAID is
working compared to the control group of similar communities
where we are not. We now need to help governments and the
private sector take these programs to scale in order to achieve
longstanding national impact and national ownership.
At the national level we will provide assistance to
strengthen the effectiveness, transparency, and accountability
of the institutions that are charged with growing the economy,
generating revenue, creating jobs, delivering basic services,
ensuring justice and public safety, and protecting human
rights. While the challenges ahead are great, we believe the
time is right as governments of the Northern Triangle commit
themselves to specific time bound policy changes that are
needed to justify this increased investment.
Democracy, human rights, and good governance continues to
be a high priority for USAID particularly in those countries
where basic civil rights are repressed. Our programs in these
closed political spaces support and empower civil society and
media organizations to build their networks, advocate for
citizen-led reforms, and push for greater government
transparency, accountability, and effectiveness.
Another continued priority is our work to help the Haitian
people build a more prosperous and secure future. We can report
that in spite of a very difficult political environment,
meaningful progress in Haiti is indeed occurring especially in
the areas of health, agriculture, and small business
development. For example, 70,000 farmers have increased yields
and incomes as a result of USAID assistance.
Finally, we will continue to prioritize, mitigating the
economic and social challenges that derive from the harmful
effects of climate change. Droughts in Central America and
extreme weather events in the Caribbean are linked to rising
levels of food insecurity and deeper levels of poverty due to
the loss of crops, infrastructure, and income. By adapting and
mitigating the negative impacts of climate change, communities
will become more resilient and better able to protect their
investment.
There is also a very positive trend in the region as the
private sector is starting to see that development is good for
business. In the past 2 years, USAID has leveraged over $350
million in private sector resources to complement our
investments in development. Partnerships with U.S. companies
like Chevron, Hanes, Cisco, Intel, and Microsoft all play a
vital role in our citizen security work providing education,
training, and employment opportunities for at-risk youth.
Increased evidence of political will coupled with proven
strategies for success make a compelling case for increased
investment that will improve the security and prosperity of the
region and at home. Thank you for your time and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hogan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Thank you to both of
our witnesses for being here and for your testimony and your
written remarks.
Before I begin my question, on behalf of Chairman Duncan I
would like to state that the State Department and U.S. Agency
for International Development, USAID, did not provide this
committee, for the Fiscal Year 2015, country and regional
funding estimates for Western Hemisphere countries nor updates
on allocated funds or disbursed funds, even though the
committee staff requested multiple times that your agencies
provide this information. If you could please make a note of
that.
The subcommittee is also requesting the remaining funds in
the pipeline for major programs such as the Mexico Merida
Initiative, the Central America Regional Security Initiative,
and the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative. We would like to
reiterate publicly those requests for this information, if you
could get it to the subcommittee promptly.
I would also like to add that at last week's full committee
hearing I asked USAID to provide the committee with a breakdown
of how much foreign aid in the Western Hemisphere is going
directly, specifically, toward democracy and governance
program. So thank you, both of you ladies, for heeding those
requests.
I have some questions on Cuba, on Venezuela, and closed
societies. Assistant Secretary Jacobson, as you know, one of
the three laws with which the Secretary of State designates a
state sponsor of terrorism is the Export Administration Act. It
defines a state sponsor of terrorism as one which has
``repeatedly provided support for acts of international
terrorism'' to include ``the recurring use of any part of the
territory of the country as a sanctuary for terrorists or
terrorist organizations.''
So I ask you, does the Cuban regime provide a sanctuary for
the FARC and ETA?
Ambassador Jacobson. Thank you, Madam Chair. We certainly
have said that they have in the past, and we are undertaking
the review now as to whether that has continued.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. What would lead you to believe that it
has not continued?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I think one of the things that
we would be looking at is what the situation is right now, and
certainly we would be consulting as well as looking at our own
information with the governments from which those groups come,
the Governments of Colombia and of Spain from which those
organizations come, and as well as looking at our own
information. But we have to look at all of the information that
we can gather on whether or not sanctuary is provided to
terrorist organizations.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Do we consider FARC to be a terrorist
organization?
Ambassador Jacobson. I believe they remain on the terrorist
list, but as you know they are also involved in peace talks
with the Colombian Government.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And do we consider ETA to be a terrorism
organization?
Ambassador Jacobson. I honestly haven't checked whether
they are still on the terrorist list. They may well be. They
also have given up military operations and there have been some
dialogues with the Cuban Government by the Spanish Government.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And has Spain requested some of those
individuals who have been involved in activities against their
government to be sent back to Spain to stand trial?
Ambassador Jacobson. It is my understanding that there have
been some requests for extradition.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And probably that request is because
Spain considers them to be terrorists.
Ambassador Jacobson. There are judicial actions against
some members of that----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Right. I would say that the Cuban regime
provides sanctuary for FARC and ETA, and I don't know how else
that could be classified. But we look forward to getting that
review from you.
Is the Cuban regime providing safe haven and granting
political asylum to U.S. fugitives like JoAnne Chesimard who is
on the Most Wanted Terrorist list of the United States?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, it is my understanding that
JoAnne Chesimard has been in Cuba for many years, and they
certainly have provided her--she has been living there for a
long time. I don't know exactly what her status is there but--
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. But the U.S. does consider her, she is
placed on the Most Wanted Terrorist list.
Ambassador Jacobson. She is on the FBI's Most Wanted list.
I am sorry, but you will have to ask the FBI or the Justice
Department whether that is per classification there. She is
wanted for homicide, I know, certainly. I am certainly familiar
with the case and we have raised it with the Cubans every time
we see them. We will continue to----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And was the Cuban regime caught red-
handed sending weapons to North Korea in a North Korea frigate
in violation of U.N. international sanctions?
Ambassador Jacobson. Certainly with that incident we
certainly have, that incident did occur with a North Korean
freighter that was carrying weapons. It was carrying weapons
from, and arms and defense materials from Cuba.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. In violation of international, U.N.
international----
Ambassador Jacobson. U.N. Sanctions Committee did say that
that was a violation of the sanctions regime and sanctioned the
company and the ship.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. So it is hard to not conclude, because
the definition in our law as a state sponsor of terrorism, one
which has repeatedly provided support for acts of international
terrorism to include the recurring use of any part of the
territory of the country as a sanctuary for terrorists or
terrorist organizations, and it seems like those are very good
examples of how Cuba does fall into that category. Where are
you in your analysis of Cuba's inclusion on the state sponsor
of terrorism list?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I think at this time all I can
say is that we are continuing that review. We expect to
complete that in the next couple of months. The President, as
you know, asked the Secretary to do that review and complete it
within 6 months of when the President made his announcement in
December, and so we are undertaking that with very due
diligence and thoroughness. As you know and you have cited, the
law is fairly specific. And so we are in the middle of that
review.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. So because the law is very specific, I
would think that the administration plans to sidestep these key
parts of the law in order to lift Cuba from the list. In other
words, we are going to say FARC is not a terrorist
organization; JoAnne Chesimard, Most Wanted Terrorist list,
that is the list she is on; Cuba violated international
sanctions, so we are going to re-look at those and classify
them in a different way in order to justify----
Ambassador Jacobson. We certainly plan to complete the
review, and whatever decision is made it will fully comply with
the law.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Not the law as it is written, just as the
way that we are now looking at those very groups that before
were terrorists and now are part of a peace deal, so no longer
terrorists, for example, in the case of the FARC.
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I don't know that I would
qualify them as terrorists or not terrorists. They are still on
the foreign terrorist organization list, but they are also
engaged in a peace process. So I think that that has to be
taken into consideration in a consultation, obviously with the
Colombian Government. But as I say, the review is undertaken
and will be completed, and any report that is done pro or con
in terms of the list will be done in compliance with the law.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. I have other
questions, but I want to turn to Mr. Sires and then we will do
a second round. Mr. Sires is recognized.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Madam Chair. Since I have been in
Congress I have been an advocate for the Western Hemisphere. I
have felt that we have kind of ignored this Hemisphere over the
years. And as I sit here and I hear how we are developing
democratic principles in these countries and the progress we
are making, and all these things that I hear that are great
coming from both of you, I look, in my perspective I look at
Venezuela. I mean you can't call that a democracy anymore.
Ms. Hogan. No.
Mr. Sires. I look what is happening in Ecuador. He wants to
run. I look at what is happening in Nicaragua. It is a mess.
Ortega was a big defender of the farmers and now he is beating
the farmers up because he wants to take their land away from
them. I look at what is going on in Brazil, demonstrations
everywhere.
So I guess my question to you is where is all the positive
stuff that you are talking about? I mean all these leaders,
they just want to perpetuate themselves and they take over the
courts; they put their own people in. I mean it is like a
textbook effort, you go from one country to the other. And the
one I have to give credit to is Uribe. I mean he ran his two
terms, he did his job well, and then he did not insist on
running a third term. He turned it over democratically. So I
give Colombia a great deal of credit. I mean they are an
example for the rest of the countries in South America, Central
America. But the rest, it is a mess.
Ambassador Jacobson. Can I just make----
Mr. Sires. Yes, absolutely. You can----
Ambassador Jacobson. I am sorry. I will be quick. But I
would argue even the last example you used, Congressman. And I
really do want to thank you and all the members of this
committee and the chairwoman for the support you have given to
the region and the attention you have given it.
But in Brazil they are going through enormously difficult
times and the Petrobras scandal has been hugely difficult, let
us just say. But the protests----
Mr. Sires. It is huge.
Ambassador Jacobson. And huge. But the protests you have
seen in many ways are a reaffirmation of democracy. And the
response in terms of anti-corruption legislation are a response
to the voices of people in the streets. The Pacific Alliance
and the countries of Mexico, Peru, Colombia and Chile moving
forward on free trade, opening their economies even further
engaging with the rest of the world, I think, is an extremely
positive story.
So I think there are still very positive stories in the
Hemisphere, quite a few of them both on the political side and
on the economic side, even while many of the examples that you
listed you are absolutely right on.
Mr. Sires. And I look at what is happening between Haiti
and the Dominican Republic. This issue of whether you are
Dominican or not and you go back, to me that is--they were in
my office the other day trying to explain to me that this is
necessary because of what is happening between the borders. I
worry. And I have to say, and I don't want to get away from
Nicaragua, but I had a group of civil groups in my office just
this past week. They are telling me that things are getting so
bad in Nicaragua they are concerned about the election that is
coming up in 3 years. They are telling me that people are
taking up to arms on the hills already. Have you any
confirmation of that? They are telling me that some groups are
already in the jungles. Is that accurate?
Ambassador Jacobson. I have not heard that. But I can tell
you that the concerns of citizens over the process that has
been undertaken whether it is for the canal and land concerns,
environmental concerns as well as concerns on elections at the
local and national level are very, very serious. And these are
concerns that we are watching as well as concerns of neighbors
about Nicaruaga.
Mr. Sires. And obviously my last question I will bring you
back to Cuba. We have $20 million for more democracy in Cuba.
How much pressure are you getting to stop those programs in
Cuba in these negotiations that you are going through?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I don't think it is any surprise
that Cuba doesn't like those programs, so I wouldn't say we are
under enormous pressure.
Mr. Sires. Are we making concessions on those programs?
Ambassador Jacobson. We have said from the beginning that
those programs are not, we are not going to be ending those
programs, so we are moving ahead.
Mr. Sires. All right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Congresswoman Kelly, my good friend from Illinois.
Ms. Kelly of Illinois. Thank you. I had a couple of
questions. You talked about, even though I know there is a lot
of work to do, but you talked about where you have been
successful as far as stopping or slowing down gang violence,
and economic growth and those kind of things. I was just
curious. Do you have a certain playbook that you follow or
guidelines and things like that?
And the reason I ask that question is because of some parts
of the Chicago-land area that I cover and some of the very
problems you are talking about we have every day in Chicago.
And I believe it was today, or maybe yesterday, I read eight
shot, four dead. You know the story, I am sure. So I was just
interested in seeing your playbook and what you do, because we
need some of that. I am not saying stop it there, but we need
it in some parts of where I cover also.
Ambassador Jacobson. I think that in the end there are
lessons learned that go both ways. And I am going to turn this
over to Beth who has the experience of the AID programs, but
from my experience working both on the INL programs, the
narcotics and law enforcement programs, and with AID, there are
a couple of things that we know work quite well.
Quite honestly, the biggest overall focus has to be getting
into the communities, not staying in police headquarters and in
the cities and the central government. We know that model
police precincts work. When we go into the communities putting
in 24-hour courts and police precincts in the communities and
getting their buy-in, we know that crime rates have gone down
in those places.
We know that borrowing solutions from U.S. cities where
things have worked--anti-gang programs in L.A., some in areas
of Chicago, in Boston, have worked. These are some of the same
gangs and some of the same solutions. But we also know that
buy-in from the communities on community centers and training
for young people and anti-gang programs that focus on women can
work because these are often female-headed households. So some
of those models that have worked on a small level have to be
scaled up, and that is where we are focusing.
Ms. Kelly of Illinois. Okay.
Ms. Hogan. Yes, I would like to add to that. In terms of a
playbook we really do think we have a model that can be taken
to scale, and that model as Roberta just suggested was
developed in concert with those cities whereby we have seen
gang violence actually go down. In fact we are using the tools
from the L.A. government, state government, in terms of
focusing in on who are the young people in these communities
that are most at risk for joining gangs. Rather than having
sort of a broad based plan, we are trying to single and narrow
in on those who don't have mentors, don't have parents at home,
are idle, are out of school. I mean there is a whole series of
criteria that helps us get at the ones that are the most
vulnerable.
Secondly, we have also learned that a place based strategy
is the most effective way to go, and by that I mean we go in
along with INL, together, and we look at a community, not just
at the community level but really block by block in terms of
understanding where is the most serious crime happening and
then how do we engage the community in developing crime
reduction strategies? How do we engage the religious community,
the business community, municipal governance community, and
parents? And they have come up with these security plans for
their communities that create safe spaces. Simple things like
lighting and painting. A community center can really help quite
a bit.
And so that is why we have seen that when we apply these
tools to these communities and compare it against very similar
communities where we are not working we see great reductions in
the crime levels in those communities. So this is a model that
works and we are very eager to take it to scale.
Ms. Kelly of Illinois. And I support you greatly.
I just wanted to ask a question about Haiti as it pertains
to health efforts, health, literacy and educating the most
vulnerable populations in Haiti on health resources and
wellness options. What do you feel are the greatest barriers
you are seeing on the health front?
Ms. Hogan. Actually we are seeing great progress in the
health sector in Haiti and we are very encouraged by it. Every
5 years they conduct a demographic health survey, and we have
seen just last year the latest survey has revealed that
malnutrition for children under five is going down. Infant
mortality is going down. Vaccination rates are going up. We
have the advantage of a very strong Minister of Health in
Haiti.
And so along with the World Bank, we are trying to help
them develop their systems in such a way that we can get out of
the direct service delivery role that we have been in in Haiti,
forever, and channel our resources through that Ministry. But
we are going to do it very carefully, very cautiously, but we
think that that is the way that we can create the kind of
sustainability that Haitian institutions need. And I say we are
starting in the Health Ministry because that is where we see
the greatest potential.
Ms. Kelly of Illinois. Are there any investments we should
specifically be making? Is there any----
Ms. Hogan. Yes, in fact we run, we pay for 168 clinics
across the country and through those clinics we reach up to 50
percent of the population. That is what we want to turn over.
Also we are working in the Ministry to improve their health
information systems, their procurement systems, and their
hiring systems so that they can become a modern, transparent,
and accountable Ministry. And as I say, we are blessed in all
of the changes that have happened in Haiti with the cabinet
membership changing almost on a 6-month basis, we have had the
same Minister of Health over the last 5 years and we are very,
very happy about that.
Ms. Kelly of Illinois. Thank you. And thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Ms. Kelly.
And I am always proud to say my good friend Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for you
all's testimony today. Between 2011 and 2014, foreign aid, U.S.
foreign aid to Latin America and the Western Hemisphere went
down by $400 million. The President has proposed increasing aid
to Central America this year by $1.14 billion. And as I
mentioned last year, I think that drop in $400 million, well, I
don't blame the administration. I think it is also Congress,
but we were essentially robbing Peter to pay Paul.
And so let me ask you a question I have asked before about
Central America. I want to ask about Mexico. What are we doing
to help Mexico combat all of the tragedies that are going on
there now? There is a caravan going through the United States
right now for the 43 students who were murdered in a small town
there, and over the last several years hundreds of Americans
have gone into Mexico and have been killed. My colleague
Filemon Vela from Brownsville who represents Texas/Mexico
border region has been on a crusade to get the United States
Government to take a stronger part in doing something about
this. So please.
Ambassador Jacobson. Thank you very much, Congressman. And
I think this is an incredibly important subject having worked
on the Merida Initiative for a number of years now. I think we
and the Mexican Government really thought in some ways that our
engagement, our initiative with them would be shorter lived
than it was; that some of the problems we needed to tackle
would be overcome more quickly. But it is clear that the
problems they are tackling are very deep and embedded. And the
43 students in Iguala, I think, and the tragedy of their
disappearance are a tragedy in and of themselves, but they are
also a broader tragedy and that is why they had such resonance
in Mexico for a system that still has not delivered justice to
people.
So we see, I think, a response by the Mexican Government in
terms of changes in whether it is the attorney general, changes
in moving forward more aggressively on the transformation of
the judicial system, which we are deeply involved in working
with them on from an inquisitorial system to an oral
adversarial system which is much more transparent, much
quicker, fewer cases go to trial and that is very important
because not everything must go to trial in terms of minor
offenses, and fewer people being held in pretrial detention. As
my colleague knows, in the states where USAID has worked on
this kind of a transformation, Chihuahua and Nuevo Leon, the
conviction rates have gone up and the pretrial detention rates
have gone down.
So those are the kinds of things we need to continue to do,
but it is a very, very difficult problem. And I think it is
important that we remain engaged, and that is what the request
level does. It focuses on moving on the Federal efforts that we
have made to state levels which are critical. As you know,
Mexico is a Federal system as we are, and while there may be
40,000 or so Federal police, there are over 400,000 state and
local police in Mexico. And unless we work with the Mexicans on
those levels as well, we can't really get at some of the
problems going on there. And we feel that the Mexican
Government is really ready for us to help in that level too.
Mr. Castro. What does the budget do with respect to Mexico?
Ambassador Jacobson. $119 million for this year is on the
Merida Initiative alone.
Mr. Castro. Is that an increase or a decrease from the last
few----
Ambassador Jacobson. I believe it is a decrease this year.
But we also know that Mexico is coming in over 10 times. It is
usually about 13 times the amount that we put into the security
area. So we believe that it will be sufficient to do the things
we want to do, remembering also that we don't do sort of big
ticket equipment items with Mexico. It is training and its
personnel and things of that nature which we get a fair amount
of bang for our buck in those funds.
Mr. Castro. Sure. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. We will go to a second
round of questions for anyone who has them.
Assistant Secretary Jacobson, although I have questions on
Venezuela and closed society I wanted to ask you about
something that just happened. The Treasury Department, their
Office of Foreign Assets Control, OFAC, has just inexplicably
removed approximately 60 Cuba related individuals and entities
from its Specially Designated Nationals List. Why were these
individuals and entities removed from that list?
Ambassador Jacobson. In the first instance I would really
have to direct the question to the Treasury Department since I
am not sure exactly what you are referring to. I know that over
periods of time Treasury does review its Specially Designated
Nationals List for people who may have been deceased or
otherwise no longer be active or eligible for that. They may
have left Cuba, they may be deceased. There may be reasons that
people fall off that list, but I just don't know in this case.
I am sorry. We will have to check with Treasury.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes. This says Agencia de Viajes Guama
Bal Harbour Shopping Center that is in Miami-Dade County, my
area; another tour company from Bal Harbour; another tour
company Bal Harbour; Kol, K-O-L, Investments Inc., Miami,
Florida; Travel Services, Inc., Hialeah, Florida, in my
congressional district.
And what I get the feeling is that as in the first round of
questions that I had posed to you that we have ordered this
review of whether Cuba should be included or not, keep, and the
state sponsor of terrorism, and it is a foregone conclusion
that review is whether--I know we are still going through it.
The conclusion is let us remove Cuba from the list and how do
we go about it?
Well, gosh darn it, we have all these laws, so what we do
is we no longer consider FARC to be a terrorist organization.
We no longer consider JoAnne Chesimard a wanted terrorist no
matter what the FBI says. We have to change all of these
classifications because we get the verdict first and then the
trial. The verdict is Cuba is off the state sponsor of
terrorism list so how do we gain this up, how do we gain this
up to make it happen?
Here is just yet another example of how we do it. Companies
that were in the Specially Designated Nationals List, 60 of
them, just got wiped out. No explanation needed because know
whoever is in front of us will say, ask the other guys. And
then when we get that guy they will say, I don't know, ask
someone else.
But the dominoes are lined up and you just have to flick
one and you will see it happening. We already know what the
verdict is. It is just a matter of when will we announce it. Do
you suspect that the announcement will be made when we sing
Kumbaya in the April summit in Panama?
Ambassador Jacobson. I don't know when any decision on the
state sponsor of terrorism list will be made because obviously
that is a decision, a recommendation that will go from the
Secretary of State to the President. So I don't know exactly
when that will be made. We are now about 2 weeks from the
Summit of the Americas, so I am not sure exactly when that will
be done and whether we are not conducting the review
necessarily with that calendar sort of affecting us. Obviously
we are taking the time we need to get it done properly.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Sure. The problem is you don't have a
partner in that because Cuba is making it exceedingly difficult
for you to label them with the good housekeeping seal of
approval.
There was just another shipment, and we talked about the
North Korea shipment. But there was another one as you know
that was, the last one was under sugar, this one was cereal,
and you name it and it was in that shipment. But nothing ever
seems to matter. It doesn't matter what Cuba does, they will
get that stamp.
But anyway moving on to Venezuela, many of us were relieved
that finally the administration sanctioned eight Venezuelan
officials for human rights violations based on the law that we
passed, and we thank Senators Rubio and Menendez for their
work, and Mr. Cruz, on the Senate side. However, given the fact
that the Obama administration has given a lifeline to the
Castro regime, should we prepare for the administration to take
the same approach and provide a lifeline to Maduro? His economy
is spiraling downward.
I don't know what Cuba merited, I don't know how it merited
to get this olive branch other than free a totally innocent man
who they held illegally for 5 years. So should we prepare that
maybe the administration will be easing off on Maduro?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I think, Madam Chair, I would
say that from some of the commentary I have seen around the
Hemisphere, some people think we just gave Maduro a lifeline,
since the reaction to the sanctions has been fairly negative,
and allowed him unfortunately to proliferate his narrative that
this is about the U.S. and Venezuela. And it is not.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And before we sanctioned it what was his
narrative?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, it has always been that.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Correct.
Ambassador Jacobson. You are exactly right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay, so it doesn't matter what we do.
Ambassador Jacobson. And he uses any excuse.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Right.
Ambassador Jacobson. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. So then we should not do the right thing
because it will----
Ambassador Jacobson. No, no. Absolutely. And that is our
argument with many of our allies and colleagues around the
Hemisphere that we in fact are not the problem. The problem is
Venezuelans need to talk to Venezuelans.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I am banned from going to Nicaragua. What
did I do to Nicaragua? Nothing. We found the pull against the
Venezuelan human rights violators. Bad guys don't need an
excuse, so we should continue to do the right thing.
Ambassador Jacobson. So I don't think at this point--what
we have always said is that we are prepared to have a dialogue
with Venezuela. We obviously continue to have diplomatic
relations with them, but we also have made very clear that
there was a dialogue with the opposition last year, there were
some agreements that were reached on things the government
needed to do and the government didn't complete its side of the
bargain. Instead, Leopoldo Lopez is still in jail, Antonio
Ledezma has now been put in jail, elections are coming up.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Just like in Cuba, dissidents are still
in jail, but in Cuba it is a different approach. I just want to
make sure that we shouldn't prepare for any changes in U.S.
policy. Cuba did not change. U.S. has changed. But Cuba still
continues to repress its citizens and jail opposition leaders,
wouldn't you say? Catch and release.
Ambassador Jacobson. Certainly there has been in continued
short term detentions, yes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay.
And Ms. Hogan, as the situation further deteriorates in
Venezuela the people there need our help more than ever, but
the administration's request for Venezuela for next year and
years past has remained virtually the same. How can we justify
it, sort of a flatline request for democracy and governance in
Venezuela as the situation deteriorates yet the request remains
the same?
Ms. Hogan. Right. Well, of course as you know what we are
requesting is resources to support civil society organizations.
There is a limited number of those organizations, but we will
continue to provide the kind of support that allows them to
document human rights abuses, to report them, to press for
protection of civil society leaders.
We are also working to break the information blockade, if
you will, and help these organizations get access to
independent media and also to publicize what is happening in
Venezuela, and then finally to press for citizen-led reforms
and strengthening their ability to do that. We think that the
amount of resources that we have available is about right to
continue to support their efforts, and there are very brave
people that are doing very important work under very difficult
circumstances.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Indeed, thank you. And thank you to the
committee members for their indulgence. And just one more area.
On closed societies, USAID has been kicked out of closed
societies in Latin America, Bolivia, and Ecuador, for example,
and has now become so concerned that it will be expelled from a
country that it has become timid. Do you worry about that?
I met with Nicaraguan civil society activists that Mr.
Sires referred to, last week, and they told us that USAID is so
worried about being kicked out of Nicaragua that programs have
been curtailed and some are being used to actually support the
Sandinista regime according to them. So what is the point of
this Latin America and Caribbean Bureau at USAID if we do not
want to fulfill the democracy and governance obligation? Is
USAID getting too timid to perform its duties? Should we
channel that money to NED or DRL, groups that are not afraid of
working in closed societies?
Ms. Hogan. Thank you for that question. In fact we are
increasing our request for democracy and governance resources
in Nicaragua as well as in Central America. But in Ecuador,
even though we no longer have a presence in Ecuador, we have
asked for and received resources so that we can continue to
support civil society organizations. And we are also supporting
municipal level leadership and the engagement between municipal
leaders and the civil society actors who are now learning and
practicing democratic principles at the local level.
So I would say quite the contrary. We stand with civil
society in closing political spaces. We will continue to do so.
And our resource request as you will see is for more resources
to do that kind of thing.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Thank you to both, and
thanks to the members for their time. Mr. Sires is recognized.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have to agree with my colleague. I think this is a
foregone conclusion that Cuba is going to be removed from the
terrorist list, otherwise I don't see how you are going to be
able to negotiate anything. Because they haven't changed. They
haven't stopped doing anything. I mean the ship that they just
caught off Cartagena, Colombia, it is just amazing to me that
they just continue doing the same thing without any
consequences.
And I am concerned also, the Caribbean Basin Securities
Initiative was cut, right, on this budget? That was part of it.
The Merida Initiative was cut. The Colombia Strategic
Development Initiative was cut. I am concerned. Are they still
insisting on you giving up Guantanamo with all the cuts that we
are making over here?
Ambassador Jacobson. We haven't discussed Guantanamo.
Mr. Sires. We haven't.
Ambassador Jacobson. No.
Mr. Sires. Are we discussing any monetary assistance to
Cuba, currently?
Ambassador Jacobson. No.
Mr. Sires. To the Cuban Government in terms of your
negotiations with Cuba?
Ambassador Jacobson. No.
Mr. Sires. Because I know they wanted money because they
said the embargo hurt them.
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, no. I mean what I should say is
obviously at some point in the future we will have to have a
conversation about claims, on claims that have been filed
against the Cuban Government, judgments on terrorism. They have
said that when we sit down to talk about claims they are
probably going to raise their lawsuits that they have tried to
pursue for damages vis-a-vis the embargo. So I expect they will
raise those things, but we haven't had those conversations yet.
We haven't had them about claims yet, set up a process for that
nor had them raise anything on the damages issue.
Mr. Sires. How close is the FARC in Colombia to getting an
agreement?
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, I think that the Colombians and
the FARC continue to have rounds of peace talks. They have made
significant progress on the five areas that are under
discussion, but there are really hard issues yet to go. I think
President Santos continues to remain very much engaged and very
committed to moving forward with that. I think he believes that
the FARC also is interested and he hopes, understands that this
is the way out. That it is time to come to peace but there are
still tough issues to be concluded.
Mr. Sires. When Secretary Kerry was before us I raised the
concern that we have an observer, supposedly, in the
negotiations.
Ambassador Jacobson. We have a Special Envoy now in the
process.
Mr. Sires. A Special Envoy.
Ambassador Jacobson. Right.
Mr. Sires. I get concerned that we have an envoy and that
if things don't work out they could actually blame the person
that we put there and say, look, the Americans again are being
obstructionists and trying to interfere in our sovereignty. And
I worry about that. I don't see why we have to put, I mean this
is between the FARC and Colombia.
Ambassador Jacobson. It is true.
Mr. Sires. And I don't see why we have to meddle into this.
Ambassador Jacobson. But we did that at the express request
of President Santos.
Mr. Sires. Well, he may wanted to see if the negotiations
fail he may have alternative reason to----
Ambassador Jacobson. I think we took him at his word that
he felt that it would be of use to him in our support for the
Colombian Government to have somebody there to support him and
to help the process.
Mr. Sires. Well, we have been supporting Colombia, making
them strong, training them.
Ambassador Jacobson. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Sires. So I don't think our support has wavered.
Ambassador Jacobson. No, that is correct.
Mr. Sires. So I mean to have somebody in there, to me that
is just typical what happened in history. People will always
say Americans are always trying to meddle into our sovereignty.
And, well, I guess they know better than I do, but I just don't
see it as a positive.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Sires.
And thank you, Mr. DeSantis, and you are recognized for as
much time as you would like to consume.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you.
Secretary Jacobson, in your opinion have human rights
abuses in Cuba increased since the President announced his
change in policy in December?
Ambassador Jacobson. In my opinion they have continued. The
number of short term detentions has been fairly high. And I
don't know whether there has been an increased number of those
detentions over the last 3 months, but it has been high over
the last year.
Mr. DeSantis. The Cuban dissidents and people promoting
democracy in Cuba, they believe that it has increased. Are you
familiar with some of the statements that they have made?
Ambassador Jacobson. I am. There has also been some
indication, although not enough to really give us a full set of
data that there have been more people engaging in some of the
activities of peaceful protest or dissidents.
Mr. DeSantis. I think the fear from the dissidents is that
because of this new posture between the United States and the
Castro Government, that it provides additional legitimacy that
the government actually undercuts their ability to fight for a
democratic future for Cuba, and I think a lot of them believe
that very passionately. So what is your response to them?
Ambassador Jacobson. Certainly my response to them would be
that that is no way the intention nor will we, well, we will
speak out every time there are such detentions. We have spoken
out. It is our goal to support the Cuban people with this
policy including those human rights figures and dissidents. We
don't believe that over time this will be something that will
result in increased repression against the dissidents, and the
human rights dialogue is part of what we are going to be having
with the Cuban Government.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, I think if it does fortify the regime
which is a fear of many of us, then I think that it will lead
to continued repression. I guess part of the frustration, this
goes beyond your portfolio, but I think we have seen in other
areas, so for example with Iran and the desire to kind of have
this rapprochement with Iran and so we don't bring up the
terrorism. We don't really want to talk about some of these
things.
Ayatollah Khomeini said death to America, indeed, the other
day, and that was just viewed by the White House as oh, that is
just domestic political, don't worry about that. Well, when
Prime Minister Netanyahu said something about the infeasibility
of two states given the environment that was viewed as a
hanging offense.
And so I just worry that when there is a desire to kind of
have some type of an agreement or change direction that that
change kind of takes precedent over speaking out for people who
are fighting for democracy. I think we made a big mistake in
2009 when we had a chance to support people in Iran. And I know
it is tricky because when the United States, as you mentioned
they can use that against us, but I do think that that is
something that is concerning.
Let me ask you this. With the new change in policy, if
somebody travels to Cuba and stays in a hotel that had been a
private hotel that had been seized by the government after the
Cuban Revolution, are they allowed to use a credit card to stay
there and pay for that?
Ambassador Jacobson. To the best of my knowledge, the
change in the use of credit cards is under the authorized
categories, the 12 categories, and I would have to check on the
regulations in terms of Americans using credit cards. Obviously
the credit card companies are allowed to operate, but I have to
check on the exact restrictions of whether people are allowed
to use credit cards on American banks, for example, in Cuba.
Mr. DeSantis. Because I think current statutory law
prevents any type of financing arrangements involving property
that had been seized.
Ambassador Jacobson. Well, certainly, and that is why I
need to check on this----
Mr. DeSantis. Whether a credit card qualifies to finance a
stay and----
Ambassador Jacobson. Right, which is Treasury's specifics
and OFAC's, but I can certainly check that for you.
Mr. DeSantis. Let me just echo my colleague from Florida
about our response in Venezuela. Look, we are going to be the
bad guy no matter what with Maduro. That is the game he has
played. That is the game that Chavez played. We need to stand
up for these people who are fighting repression and we have to
be unambiguous about that. We have to have moral clarity. And I
would like to see a stronger response. I know my colleague has
wanted a stronger response, and I know that we had worked on
legislation and by the time that passed I know that we didn't
think that that was as good as we needed to be. But I would
just say stand with those people. They are fighting the good
fight and we need to stand with them.
I notice just in the request that there is a request for
$75.5 million for foreign climate change programs. And if you
go down, the budget justification for that describes Mexico as
a ``global leader'' in combating global climate change, but
then it proposes to spend $6 million on helping Mexico fund the
enhancing capacity for low emissions development strategies and
$6.5 million to support policy for the prevention of
deforestation and degradation to address climate change.
But my question is if Mexico is such a global leader, then
why would this assistance be necessary? Couldn't that money be
spent better doing something else? If a country is doing as
well as is said in the justification, then why should the
taxpayer have to subsidize it?
Ms. Hogan. Thank you for that question. Indeed we do have a
program on climate change in Mexico to do the kinds of things
that you have talked about, because Mexico is not only an
emitter of greenhouse gases, I think it is the 12th in the
world, it also is emerging as a leader to show the rest of the
developing world what is possible in terms of changing their
economies to a point where they can invest in clean energy.
So one of the things that we partner with them on is, for
example, a clean energy tech challenge whereby we provide seed
funding to entrepreneurs who come up with marketable ideas for
growing a green business. For example, one such company is a
company that is taking agricultural waste and turning that into
briquettes that can then be used as a low-cost renewable fuel.
So those are the kinds of things that we are trying to
encourage. Those are the kind of models that we think other
countries can adopt and we support that leadership role that
Mexico is taking in doing just that.
Mr. DeSantis. So you think the funding is justified because
you have seen positive results in some of the resources that we
have provided to them?
Ms. Hogan. That is correct.
Mr. DeSantis. So are these ideas, are they then, once we
provide money are they used to where it is a self-sustaining
business that no longer requires any subsidies?
Ms. Hogan. That is correct.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Because we have done some of these
subsidies here domestically and there were some big problems
with some of those companies.
Well, I appreciate you guys coming to testify, and I yield
back to my friend.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. DeSantis. And we
thank our witnesses for being here. And if I could reiterate
the subcommittee chairman's request and our request as well for
the documentation, thank you. And with that the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:10 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
Notice deg.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
