- THREATS TO PRESS FREEDOM IN THE AMERICAS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THREATS TO PRESS FREEDOM IN THE AMERICAS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-83

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-696PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida
ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 6/2/15 deg.
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Carlos Ponce, Ph.D., director of the Latin America Program,
Freedom House..................................................     5
Mr. Carlos Lauria, senior Americas program coordinator, Committee
to Protect Journalists.........................................    17
Mr. Claudio Paolillo, chairman, Freedom of the Press and
Information Committee, Inter-American Press Association........    26
Mr. Nicolas Perez Lapentti, co-director, El Universo in Ecuador..    53
Mr. Alfredo Corchado, Mexico bureau chief, The Dallas Morning
News...........................................................    75

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Carlos Ponce, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..........................     8
Mr. Carlos Lauria: Prepared statement............................    20
Mr. Claudio Paolillo: Prepared statement.........................    28
Mr. Nicolas Perez Lapentti: Prepared statement...................    55
Mr. Alfredo Corchado: Prepared statement.........................    78

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    98
Hearing minutes..................................................    99
The Honorable Jeff Duncan, a Representative in Congress from the
State of South Carolina, and chairman, Subcommittee on the
Western Hemisphere: Material submitted for the record..........   100

THREATS TO PRESS FREEDOM IN THE AMERICAS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 29, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:42 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Duncan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Duncan. A quorum being present, the subcommittee will
come to order.
I would now like to recognize myself for an opening
statement.
In 1776, the Second Continental Congress of the thirteen
United States of America declared: We hold these truths be
self-evident, that all men are created equal, and they are
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that
among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
In 1791, the United States of America adopted the Bill of
Rights, which among other things, affirmed the American
citizens' freedom of speech, the press, and the right of people
to peacefully assemble, the ability to speak openly without
censure or fear of reprisal as a hallmark of free peoples
everywhere. And the freedom of press is critical to sustaining
democracy and the rule of law and enabling people to remain
free from state and in some cases, nonstate control or
oppression.
Journalists provide needed accountability for governments
by challenging conventional thinking; reporting on different
and often opposing viewpoints; and offering people information
that informs their understanding of the issues. Unfortunately,
in our hemisphere, a trend of conditioning and even curtailing
press freedoms in several countries is deeply disturbing.
From severe government repression and outright targeting of
journalists by Cuba, Venezuela, and Ecuador to organized crime,
corruption, and impunity in other countries in Latin America,
journalists have very difficult jobs, often risking their very
lives and their loved ones to bring information and the truth
to their fellow citizens.
Although the purpose of this hearing is to highlight some
of the more concerning trends of threats to press freedoms in
the Americas, I do want to note that there are some bright
spots in the region with Canada and most of the Caribbean
having relatively open media environments in comparison to
other countries in the region.
In recent years, several international press rights
monitoring organizations have expressed growing concerns about
the deterioration of press freedoms in Latin America. Groups,
like Freedom House, Reporters Without Borders, the Committee to
Protect Journalists, and the Inter-American Press Association,
all report on threats to freedoms of the press in the Western
Hemisphere. And we are fortunate to have key experts from some
of these groups represented here today to testify about their
work.
I also want to commend the efforts of the Organization of
American States Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression,
who has done some important work on threats to freedom of the
press through highlighting progress and problems within
specific countries in the Americas through the comprehensive
annual reports. These reports are excellent tools for providing
transparency and accountability to countries in the region.
In addition, I also want to congratulate the Special
Rapporteur for his efforts to bring to public awareness the
issue of government surveillance programs that have threatened
journalists' rights of privacy and freedom of expression.
According to the Reporters Without Borders' 2015 World
Press Freedom Index, only three countries in the Western
Hemisphere managed to score in the top 20 of 180 countries
documented: Canada, Jamaica, and Costa Rica. Notoriously,
Mexico and Cuba were among the worst offenders in the Western
Hemisphere listed in that report.
When it comes to violence against the media, Mexico exists
as one of the most dangerous countries for media, with
journalists often receiving extortion and kidnapping threats
from government officials, criminal groups, and other
transnational gangs. In fact, Mexico accounts for more than a
third of all of the killing of media workers and journalists in
the hemisphere since 2009.
In addition, Cuba ranks worst in the region, according to
Freedom House, and among the 10 most censored countries in the
world according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
Furthermore, Cuba and Venezuela have been singled out
frequently and consistently for having repressive media
environments and for often targeting peaceful protesters and
political dissidents.
In these countries, independent journalists and bloggers
are often subject to government sanction, harassment, and
detention. Just last year, we saw Venezuelan security forces
opening fire on journalists during student demonstrations that
ultimately turned deadly. These conditions have led to more
than 400 Venezuelan journalists living in exile today.
In addition to these countries, Ecuador, Honduras, and Peru
all received their worst press freedom scores in over a decade
from Freedom House. A controversial 2013 communications law in
Ecuador has led to chilling environment, self-censorship, and
intimidation for press organizations. Honduras passed a new
secrecy law and has limited critical reporting of the
government. Peru has seen an increase in threats against
journalists and ongoing impunity and a lack of willingness to
address past crimes against journalists.
More over, Brazil has seen at least 16 journalists killed
in direct response for their work since President Rousseff took
office in January 2011. In Nicaragua, complete state control of
the media has occurred through a monopoly, with the single
exception of one single independent television channel. Other
concerns about general deterioration of press freedoms in Latin
America include the governmental abuse of libel and defamation
laws, a general lack of support for the protection of
journalists, reporters, and media workers, and in some places
an outright attempt to eliminate an independent media
altogether.
So, in conclusion, threats to the press freedoms and the
Americas are ongoing and increasing. Abraham Lincoln once
stated that ``No man is good enough to govern another man
without that other's consent.''. Today, in the Western
Hemisphere, there are some people who are seeking to do just
that: Control populations; prevent freedom of thought and
expression; and eliminate avenues for questioning; state
control by silencing the voice of those who are most able to
speak truth to power.
Our witnesses today are uniquely positioned to share their
research and personal experiences in various countries of
oppression, and I look forward to considering how the U.S. can
better engage in the region to more effectively partner with
other countries to promote the freedom of press.
With that, I will turn to the ranking member, Mr. Sires,
for an opening statement he may have.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, and thank you to our witnesses for being
here today. And especially Alfredo Corchado and Nicolas Perez,
who traveled a long way to be here. We certainly appreciate you
being here.
Freedom of expression is a keystone that holds any
democracy together. Being able to speak without censorship is a
right that should never be stifled. Furthermore, it is the
number one mechanism to hold people in government accountable
for their actions. In recent years, many organizations
dedicated to freedom of speech and advancing civil societies
have been trying to bring attention to the deterioration of
press freedom in Latin America.
Cuba has consistently been characterized as having one of
the most repressive media environments in the world, with the
Castro regime controlling all aspects of the print and
electronic media. Venezuela and Ecuador have made deliberate
attempts to eliminate their dissenters and inhibit free speech.
They have harassed and fined the media; shut down their
operations; and even physically attacked journalists who are
trying to expose the state-sponsored crackdown against
peaceful, political dissenters.
Ecuador's 2013 law forces media organizations to print
government-mandated edits, and corrections have led to the
country's wide censorship. This institutionalized tactic to
censor the Ecuadorian population is unacceptable. In other
countries, such as Mexico and Honduras, an increase in drug-
related violence and worsening security situation have created
a culture of impunity, allowing the violence against
journalists and press institutions to go unpunished.
Mexico has unfortunately become one of the most dangerous
places on Earth for journalists, with journalists regularly
targeted for reporting organized crime or corrupt government
officials. Mexico accounts for more than one-third of the
killings of members of the media in Latin America in 2009. In
Honduras, 8 million members have already lost their lives this
year. Even in Colombia, journalists are under constant threat
from paramilitary groups.
As a child in Cuba, I witnessed the deterioration of
democracy as the Castro regime took over the islands and
systemically destroyed all aspects of freedom of speech and
expression. There is strong connection between countries'
Democratic values and freedoms afforded to the press. Working
to preserve freedom of speech and pushing back against those
who seek to quiet their dissenters should be a top priority
when engaging with our neighbors in the region.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists to hear their
assessment of the hemisphere's state of affairs when it comes
to the freedom of speech.
Mr. Duncan. I want to thank the ranking member.
And before we get started, I just want to enter into the
record an article from the New York Times. I know we are
talking about freedom of the press, but it is an example of
government really restricting things.
Peru's Government on Monday ordered that telecommunications
companies grant police warrantless access to cell phone users,
locations, and other call data in realtime and store that data
for 3 years. This is really alarming to me because the metadata
will cover where you are making a call, the time, and who you
are talking to. There has been a lot of discussion in Congress
about this sort of thing with NSA, but I want to enter this
into the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
So any other members that may have an opening statement?
Mr. DeSantis, do you have an opening statement?
Mr. DeSantis. No, thanks.
Mr. Duncan. Okay.
Ms. Kelly. I want to thank the chair and ranking member and
our witnesses for holding this important hearing on press
freedom in Latin America.
We are truly fortunate to live in and be Representatives of
a Nation that recognizes and respects free press. The basis of
our Government is to be for and by the people. And in that
spirit, the opinion of the people matters. In many ways, the
press are guardians of the people's opinion here in America.
That is why I am concerned by reports that our neighbors in
Mexico, Venezuela, Honduras, and Ecuador have experienced a
deterioration of press freedom. Whether it be politically
motivated or the result of criminal activity, this erosion of
press freedom in these areas that are valued and respected by
our Nation cannot continue.
I look forward to our thoughtful discussion here today
about free speech and that threat in our hemisphere. It is
critical to the progress and prosperity of our Nation. I want
to thank you again.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
And so the bios are in the information provided. I won't
read those today. We will go ahead and get started.
There will be a lighting system in front of you. Five
minutes is what you will be recognized for. When it gets to 1
minute left, it will go to yellow, and at the expiration, it
will turn red. If you could try to wrap up around that time. I
won't be hard on that, but I will start tapping the gavel when
we get a little close.
So the first witness is Dr. Carlos Ponce, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARLOS PONCE, PH.D., DIRECTOR OF THE LATIN AMERICA
PROGRAM, FREEDOM HOUSE

Mr. Ponce. Thank you very much.
Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member Sires, DeSantis, Kelly,
distinguished members of the committee, it is an honor to
testify before you on the state of the press freedom in Latin
America. I ask that my full testimony be submitted to the
record.
I will briefly summarize the work of Freedom House; the
current landscape for press freedom in Latin America, which
today faces a more severe and diverse set of challenges than at
any point in the previous years. They rank--the intimidation,
the downward trajectory in the region is terrible at this time,
and we can summarize what is going on in the region with a
simple word, ``impunity.''
The work of Freedom House has been extended in the whole
region. Since mid-1941, Freedom House has been working for
fundamental freedoms in the world and has been working the
previous years in several countries in the region: Mexico,
Ecuador, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Honduras. And in an annual
Freedom of the Press Report, the situation in the region is
more than sad. Only 43 percent of the region is free. The rest
is not free or partially free.
Freedom House has been training also journalists in Mexico
in digital security: 1,300 journalists trained in Mexico. We
have been helping also the Mexican Government with the Federal
Protection Mechanism for Journalists.
In Venezuela and in Ecuador, we have been helping several
organizations that works with journalists or support
journalists or train journalists.
We have assisted 120 requests for protection from at-risk
journalists in Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Honduras, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Peru, and Haiti. This is a huge challenge right now
in the region: Extortion, persecution, the use of the judicial
system against the journalists. One of three countries in Latin
America, 15 percent, are rated free only. The rest, just 2
percent of the population live in free media environment.
We see the same situation from Mexico to Argentina, each
one of the countries. If we record each one of the countries,
we see the situation in Mexico, in Honduras, in Guatemala. The
situation is getting worse. And the problem is the allocation
of resources to go against the journalists. We see lack of
access to information; lack of resources for the independent
journalists and the investigative journalists; persecution
directly against journalists; impunity against the attacks
against the journalists; lack of protection; the monopoly of
the media ownership, and the use of the power of the state to
buy directly or indirectly the media outlets in each one of the
countries. Abuse for each one of the countries in the region.
In Argentina, since 2008, journalists and media owners have
been demonized, persecuted, and threatened. And the
relationship between the government and the critical press, it
is really critical against all the media outlets. Total control
of the use of the power of the state to buy media or to buy
publicity in each one of the media and to persecute directly
journalists.
Juan Pablo Suarez, editor of the online daily Ultima Hora,
was charged with inciting collective violence and terrorizing
the population. So it is the use of the judiciary ones and over
to persecute each one of the journalists.
We can say that is the same situation in Colombia, a weak
police justice system that doesn't work to protect the
journalists so the journalists keep facing the same impunity
and persecution.
In Cuba, the situation is getting worse. With the
normalizations, the diplomatic situations have been improving
in Cuba. But every Sunday, we can see the Ladies in White.
Every Sunday, we see the persecution against the civil society.
We see the persecution not only in Cuba. When the Cubans are
trying to leave the country, they also have problems in Panama,
El Salvador. They have persecution also by the regime in trying
to infuse the long arm of the regime.
We see the persecution in every independent journalist in
Cuba. All the organizations that try to bring information
outside Cuba have been persecuted. Even bloggers have been
persecuted in Cuba. Cubanet has been playing definitely a good
role in Cuba, but it has been persecuted all the time.
In the case of the Ecuador, not only is it about
journalists, it is about cartoonists, like Bonilla, persecuted
by the government directly. The government simply persecuted
also organizations for civil society like Fundamedios. Ecuador
experienced the second largest decline in the world, the
freedom of the press from 2008 to 2013. It is going downward in
the last year; 180 cases of persecution in Ecuador, and
recently, the hacking team against all the organizations in
Ecuador.
Honduras is the most deadliest country for journalists.
Guatemala, 72 organizations reported 177 during this
administration of--the current administration in Guatemala. The
aggression against journalists, the persecution, killing
against the journalists.
Mexico. Mexico has been going downward in terms of the
protection of the journalists, and it is not free since 2011,
according to Freedom House.
In Venezuela, 1,773 aggressions against journalists
documented so far in just 10 years, from 2005 to 2015. And the
government control of all the media in Venezuela and now
persecution even the Web pages that operate in Venezuela. Seven
journalists killed since 2005. There is no independent media in
Venezuela.
It is the same situation in Mexico.
Nicaragua, government ownership of all the media in
Nicaragua and the persecution of anyone who wants to simply
express the right to go and ask independent election in
Nicaragua, persecuted by the police, persecuted by the regime
now. And we can see that this is a pattern around the region.
Mr. Duncan. Dr. Ponce, if you can start wrapping up.
Mr. Ponce. Yeah. Yeah.
Now, just a recommendation. We need to publicly express
concerns about the situation of the attacks of the journalists,
bloggers, citizen reporters, and activists. And we need to also
support the independent and alternative media programs in the
region; support establishment and strengthen and well fund an
efficient program to support mechanisms, protection mechanisms
in each one of the countries.
One of the positive things is Honduras has a mechanism.
Mexico has a mechanism. Colombia has a mechanism. But they need
economic support. Provide support to the Inter-American
Commission of Human Rights and the Offices of the Special
Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression. And pass the Global
Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act right now.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ponce follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
Dr. Carlos Lauria, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. CARLOS LAURIA, SENIOR AMERICAS PROGRAM
COORDINATOR, COMMITTEE TO PROTECT JOURNALISTS

Mr. Lauria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to commend Chairman Duncan and members of the
House Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere for holding this
important hearing and for providing the Committee to Protect
Journalists the opportunity to testify before you. CPJ is an
independent, nonprofit organization dedicated to promote
freedom of press worldwide and defend the rights of
journalists. It is an honor to speak to you today.
What I have experienced in more than a decade at CPJ is
that while Latin American media are certainly freer and more
vibrant now than during previous decades, journalists in the
region continue to face serious challenges on different fronts.
The regional press continues to hold governments accountable,
exposing corruption and human rights abuses in the face of
ongoing threats by organized crime and officials in their
attempt to thwart freedom of expression.
Despite the strong tradition of independent, investigative,
and critical media in many countries of the region, journalists
are increasingly vulnerable to both violence and government
harassment. More than 30 years of democratization in the
region, transnational criminal networks have extended their
sway and spread a wave of unprecedented violence across Latin
America. Scores of journalists have been killed and
disappeared. Media outlets have been bombed and forced into
silence. The consequences are devastating: Many regional
democracies have deteriorated due to political instability and
weakened institutions.
Violence tied to drug trafficking has made Mexico one of
the dangerous countries in the world for the press, according
to CPJ research. More than 50 journalists have been killed or
disappeared since 2007. Compounding the problem of violence is
a climate of pervasive impunity. Crimes against the press are
never solved, not only as a result of negligence and
incompetence but also because of widespread corruption among
law enforcement officials, particularly at the state level.
Breaking the cycle of impunities surrounding crimes against
the press is Mexico's greatest challenge. Legal changes,
although necessary, will be clearly insufficient without strong
political will for President Enrique Pena Nieto's
administration.
Amid the violence and volatility caused by organized crime
and corruption in Central America, Honduras and Guatemala have
also experienced an alarming increase in the numbers of attacks
against the press. Nearly complete impunity for these crimes
means the cases go mostly unresolved and the motives
unexplained, a CPJ report published in September found.
Despite Brazil's image as an international political and
economic leader and its position as the host of next year's
summer Olympics, the country has become one of the most
dangerous in the world for the press. According to CPJ
research, at least 16 journalists have been killed in direct
reprisal for their work since January 2011, while six others
were murdered in unclear circumstances.
In the lead up to the 2016 summer Olympics, President Dilma
Rousseff will have to grapple with many problems, including a
sluggish economy, the unfolding corruption scandal within the
state oil company, and the prospect of renewed protests, like
those that erupted around the 2014 FIFA World Cup. Precisely at
those times, Brazil needs a vibrant, independent press that can
freely report on these matters and carry out its work without
fear of reprisal.
In the next year, the world's fourth largest democracy will
receive a flood of tourists and find itself under the spotlight
for international media attention. Before that occurs, the
Brazilian Government needs to go beyond rhetoric and make good
on the promise to protect the press and combat impunity.
While security in Colombia has improved in recent years and
the number of killed journalists have dramatically decreased in
the last decade, impunity is entrenched and threats and
violence against journalists continue. Problems, such as
overloaded prosecutors and mishandling of evidence, have
delayed criminal investigations for years.
Besides the issue of violence, the second most persistent
problem facing the Latin American press is the series of
judicial, legislative, and regulatory restrictions placed on
the press by democratically elected governments that seek to
control the flow of information and stifle the dissent. Showing
disdain for the institutions of democracy, several governments
are seeking to suppress dissent, limit critical voices, and
censor the news that undermines their public positions.
Describing critical journalists as the unelected opposition,
these governments have become increasingly intolerant to media
criticism.
Venezuela provides the most blatant example of intolerance
toward views and different opinions. The Government of
Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro, has employed an array of tactics to
weaken the press, and few remaining critical media still
standing in Venezuela, according to CPJ research.
Nearly all of Venezuela's strategies and tactics to rein in
and isolate critical journalists have been emulated by
sympathetic governments across the region, from Nicaragua to
Ecuador. But nobody has a been better apprentice than
Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa, whose policies have
transformed the country into one of the hemisphere's most
restrictive nations for the press.
Lastly, as I testify before Congress today, I must also
mention the climate for press freedom in the United States has
deteriorated in recent years. Decisions by the Department of
Justice in seizing journalists' phone records and emails, the
aggressive prosecutions of whistleblowers who leak classified
information to the press, and the massive surveillance of
communications send an unequivocal chilling message to
journalists and their sources, particularly on issues of
national security that are of vital information to the public.
At the same time, just as troubling, these actions in the
United States set a terrible example for the rest of the world,
especially where governments routinely justify the intervention
in the media by citing national security.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lauria follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
Mr. Paolillo, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. CLAUDIO PAOLILLO, CHAIRMAN, FREEDOM OF THE
PRESS AND INFORMATION COMMITTEE, INTER-AMERICAN PRESS
ASSOCIATION

Mr. Paolillo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Claudio Paolillo. I am the chairman of the
Freedom of the Press and Information Committee, Inter-American
Press Association. On behalf of the Inter-American Press
Association, I want to thank this subcommittee for this
invitation to participate in this important hearing. We have
already submitted to the subcommittee a written and detailed
report with some recommendations.
Freedom of the press and of expression in the hemisphere
underwent a marked deterioration in recent months due to a
significant increase in direct and indirect censorship and
physical attacks on journalists. Violence carried out by
organized crime, drug traffic hit men, and police-style groups
on the orders of several governments in the region left on
balance, more than 20 journalists murdered during the past 12
months in Honduras, Paraguay, Mexico, El Salvador, Colombia,
and Peru.
But while the murders of journalists is terrible news for
press freedom in the region, let me focus on two types of
censorship which are of main concern to IAPA. Firstly,
censorship in the Cuban dictatorship. The Governments of the
United States and Cuba began a new relationship on July 20. Of
course, it is too early to make definitive evaluations, but the
reopening of Embassies in Washington and Havana did not produce
any improvement in the practice of journalism or people's
access to free information.
Nobody in Cuba is authorized to establish an independent
media external to the government, and the ones that exist are
those belonging to the regime. Internet access is virtually
impossible for ordinary citizens.
Now, recently, 15 independent journalists, bloggers, and
activists for freedom were arrested. After the resumption of
relations with the United States, practices of meetings,
arrests, intimidations, harassment, and vandalism against
openness and independent journalists persisted; three of them
are in jail now.
The government of Raul Castro has asserted repression,
using paramilitaries trying to avoid the traces of the regime
to be recorded. In 2014, there were 9,000 arrests for short
periods, which is the new repressive tactic of the Castro
brothers. Since IAPA's point of view, the resumption of
relations between the U.S. and Cuba will not be good news per
se unless there is good news for the return of freedom to the
Caribbean island.
The least we can expect after more than a half a century is
a kind of give and take, something like a barter with the Cuban
regime. The isolation policy applied during 15 years can be
discussed, but the price of defending freedom was valid during
this 15 years, and it is valid now.
Secondly, censorship in legal dictatorships. With varying
degrees, there are now legal dictatorships in Venezuela,
Nicaragua, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Argentina has followed similar
paths, but in that country, there still remains some liberties
that make it a unique case. This description of legal
dictatorships may sound a bit strong, but we would try to
explain it using the example of Ecuador.
Since January 2007, in Ecuador, President Rafael Correa
imposes a system which keeps in his fist the control of the
three branches. He has decided to perpetrate endlessly in
office to silence the independent and critical press, Correa
displaced an ongoing campaign against the media, journalists,
and citizens who have different opinions from his.
But unlike Cuba, where there is in place a dictatorship
that everyone recognizes as such, in Ecuador and the other
countries mentioned, there are constitutions and laws based on
which the freedoms of speech and press are attacked legally. In
Ecuador is in force since June 2013 the communications act, the
most perfect and effective gag law created in recent times in
Latin America. This law is imposed against any critical comment
by a team of 300 officials who are under the order of a censor
appointed and directed by President Correa.
To give you an idea, the gag law already enabled the
government to impose 37 types of sanctions against
nongovernment media outlets: Five verbal warnings, seven fines,
four orders of rectifications, four answers imposed by the
government, four orders to apologize, seven written warnings,
two suspensions of radio frequencies, and three forced answers
in specific radio programs.
In Ecuador and the other countries mentioned, one can say
that there are elected governments but not necessarily
democratic governments and much less republican governments.
Yes, there are elections, but there is no separation of powers.
There is no independent judiciary. There is no respect for
individual rights, and freedom of the press is constantly under
attack. Therefore, we speak about legal dictatorships.
Paradoxically, as they are elected, it is more difficult to
denounce them than the very Cuban dictatorship. Without a free
press, as our Declaration of Chapultepec says, democracy
doesn't exist, let alone free and legitimate elections. You
cannot say that people choose when they do not know what are
they going to choose.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Paolillo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much.
Mr. Perez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. NICOLAS PEREZ LAPENTTI, CO-DIRECTOR, EL
UNIVERSO IN ECUADOR

Mr. Perez. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, free
speech and the free press are under attack in Ecuador.
President Rafael Correa declared the independent press as his
number one enemy within his first year in office. In the last 8
years, journalists, opinion leaders, and media owners, have
been denigrated, harassed, and singled out by President Correa
and public officials on government-controlled media and on the
streets.
In 2012, El Universo, its opinion editor, and its three
directors, myself included, were sentenced to pay $40 million
in reparations to President Correa personally and to serve 3
years in prison for publishing an unflattering op-ed column
about the President. This situation forced the publisher to
seek asylum and the rest of us into exile. The Inter-American
Commission for Human Rights issued a precautionary measure
urging Ecuador's highest court to suspend the sentence on the
case.
The international community's reaction and support were
overwhelming. Leading media outlets, human rights
organizations, academics, professional organizations, and
international political figures, including President Jimmy
Carter, expressed their outrage about the grotesque nature of
this case.
In the end, President Correa granted us his personal
pardon, and this newspaper was spared from shutting down. Until
this day, the judicial precedent is still alive, and its
chilling effect on the Ecuadorian society is palpable. Now we
will look for justice beyond our borders. Our case against the
state of Ecuador is pending at the Inter-American Commission
for Human Rights.
Today, the Ecuadorian media faces a subtle yet more
threatening scenario. Censorship of free speech and the free
press has been sanctioned into law. President Correa's majority
in Congress passed the communications law 2 years ago. In the
eyes of this law, information is a public service and the media
is a public utility, no different than your local power and
light company. Therefore, it all has to be intensely regulated
by the government.
A special agency was created to uphold the lost mandate
that all information be verified, contrasted, timely, and
contextualized. And to enforce this law, a superintendent was
selected from a short list of three candidates nominated by
President Correa himself.
Since then, this agency has obliged media outlets to
rectify and apologize for publishing information inconvenient
for the government. Furthermore, imposing confiscatory fines
that start at 10 percent of revenues averaged in the last 3
months, these fines double each time the infraction recurs in a
6-month period. As an example, the first fine El Universo faces
is approximately $350,000; the second fine would be $700,000;
the third, $1.4 million; and so on.
This new law enables the government to silence the press by
imposing progressive fines that could bankrupt any media
outlet. This outrageous situation is unique in the region. No
other country has a law that enables censorship of the printed
press by the highest levels of government.
For 94 years, through four generations, El Universo has
endured through all forms of hostile political power, yet we
are certain that this is the free press' darkest hour in
Ecuador. Freedom of expression in all its forms is a
fundamental right essential to democracy. These United States
and Ecuador have a long history of shared democratic values
included on several human rights treaties which our nations are
signatories of.
This is why we respectfully urge this House not to remain a
silent witness to these attacks on the cherished, fundamental
rights. Therefore, we recommend, first, that you state your
concern about the current state of freedom of expression in
Ecuador and condemn the policies and practices that seek to
silence the free press; second, to initiate a direct dialogue
on these crucial issues of freedom of expression with Ecuador's
legislative branch; third, stand by the Inter-American
Commission of Human Rights through this challenging time when
it has been the target of attacks by the Ecuadorian Government;
fourth, support and strengthen the Commission's Office of the
Special Rapporteur for freedom of expression, which is the last
line of defense for dissenting voices in the region; and,
finally, place freedom of expression as a top priority on the
United States' foreign policy agenda toward Ecuador and other
countries facing the same challenges. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Perez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
And, Mr. Corchado, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. ALFREDO CORCHADO, MEXICO BUREAU CHIEF, THE
DALLAS MORNING NEWS

Mr. Corchado. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Alfredo Corchado, and I am the Mexico bureau
chief for the Dallas Morning News, based in Mexico City. On
behalf of my colleagues in Mexico, I thank you for the
opportunity to talk about such a critical issue, freedom of
expression.
I would also like to commend Chairman Duncan, Ranking
Member Sires, and members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
for this important hearing.
I live in, work in, call home a country where in recent
months every 26 hours a reporter is attacked, most of them by
either the government or criminal gangs. Too many journalists
in my homeland of Mexico have paid the ultimate price. This
afternoon, I hope to honor their memory.
Mexico, as many have mentioned, is one of the most
dangerous places to be a journalist. Every day, I walk in the
shadow of more than 120,000 people killed or disappeared in
just over 8 years, among them dozens of Mexican journalists,
colleagues who were more vulnerable and face a more dangerous
and precarious situation than I do.
Drug traffickers and corrupt government officials bully
reporters, harassing them if they are lucky or silencing them
for good if they are not. Today, I speak to you in the memory
of more than 50, or as many as 120, journalists who have either
been killed or disappeared since Mexico's political transition
began in 2000.
Today, there are regions in Mexico where reporters have
elected to sensor themselves. In other words, see nothing, say
nothing. These are known as regions of silence. And who can
question the logic of my Mexican colleagues? The vast majority
of those cases remain unsolved. Mexico's rule of law remains
so, so weak. Institutions are virtually nonexistent. Crimes go
unpunished.
As my Mexican colleague Javier Garza, who collaborates on a
project called ``Journalists at Risk'' that documents attacks
against the press, says, ``The most worrying aspect of this
growing trend of violence is that Mexico is going backwards.''
This is a sad irony because, even with the advances in
elections, government transparency, and media competition in
the last 15 years, press freedom in Mexico is smaller, not
bigger.
Mexico's inability to protect its journalists and defenders
of freedom of expression against criminals is beyond shameful.
It is both shocking and offensive to those who believe that
journalism is a powerful tool to shine the light and to hold
the powerful accountable.
Just as outrageous, my Mexican colleagues say, in Mexico
they still kill you twice--once with the bullet, a blow to the
head, or in a barrel of acid, and then they kill you again
through character assassination, by spreading rumors about you,
or even pressing criminal charges, as we have repeatedly seen
with other journalists, especially those working in rural
communities across Mexico, whether Veracruz, Oaxaca,
Tamaulipas, Zacatecas, Michoacan, and so on.
Even in Mexico City, where we thought journalists like
Carmen Aristegui were untouchable, it appears now that we were
wrong. One of the most influential journalists in Mexico,
Aristegui and her team uncovered, among other big stories, that
the President and his wife had purchased a $7.1 million home
from a government contractor--clearly a conflict of interest.
Aristegui and other journalists organized a Web site for
whistleblowers. In any democratic country, such acts of courage
in journalism would be awarded. In Mexico, Aristegui and her
team were fired. Whatever, whoever is behind the firing, one
thing is certain: Freedom of expression in Mexico is threatened
even further.
I was born in Mexico and grew up in the United States,
earning along the way a blue U.S. passport. Today, I am a
binational citizen, holding both U.S. and Mexican citizenship.
Yet I believe that being an American is the reason I report on
stories that many of my colleagues don't live long enough to
tell. Those are stories about the very same people who now hold
pockets of the country hostage.
In July 2007, I got a call from a U.S. trusted source
asking me, where are you? In Mexico City, in my neighborhood of
La Condesa, I replied; why? We have information that the Zetas,
a criminal paramilitary group, plan to kill an American
journalist within 24 hours, and I think it's you. Get out.
I felt the ground under me collapse, my legs weaken, the
life in me sucked away. I felt betrayed. I had wanted to
believe that I was a son of Mexico, and now someone wanted to
kill me. I was a mess.
I had once asked the same source about the likelihood that
an American journalist would be targeted by a cartel. He said,
I have good news and bad news. The good news: A Mexican cartel
does not want to harm an American journalist. It would bring
too much attention to their estimated $30 billion, $40 billion
industry. The consequences could be too messy for them. The bad
news: You don't look American, bro.
See, I tell you this story because I want to make something
very clear. I am by no means more courageous or braver than any
of my Mexican colleagues. I just want to believe that, if
something happens to me, someone, somewhere, someone in this
room, will seek justice. I won't be just another number, I
won't be a faceless victim. Because, as bad as my situation may
sound, the danger I face pales in comparison to what my Mexican
colleagues confront. Simply put, I have more protection.
In conclusion, in Mexico, Latin America, and across the
world, journalists will only be safe when the aggressors,
whether criminal groups or public authorities, are brought to
justice, when criminals pay a price.
Today in Mexico, attacks against journalists are rarely, if
ever, solved. Mexico's National Human Rights Commission
reported last year that nearly 90 percent of the attacks,
murders, and disappearance of journalists remain unpunished. As
we say in Mexico, ``La vida no vale nada.''
The Mexican Government has a method in place to protect
journalists, one that the U.S. Government supports. The
government also has a special prosecutor. But both the
mechanism and the prosecutor have been largely ineffective.
The U.S. Government needs to do more to continue pressuring
Mexico by raising concerns about attacks against freedom of
expression. Otherwise, as the Washington Office on Latin
America recently stated, freedom of expression will continue to
be limited in Mexico unless Mexican authorities conduct full
investigations and prosecutions of these crimes and implement
effective mechanisms to protect human rights defenders and
journalists at risk. We could not agree more.
Again, thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Corchado follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. I want to thank you.
I want to thank the witnesses, many of which have traveled
a long way to be here with us today, from Ecuador, from Uruguay
and Mexico. And I know all of you traveled a good bit, so thank
you very much.
And, Senor Paolillo, Montevideo is one of my favorite
places. I have traveled there personally and love it. The Rio
de la Plata is just beautiful. So I love your country.
I will say this. A question to you. You mentioned
Argentina. Was Argentina restricting freedom of the press prior
to President Kirchner, or are we seeing it trend that way and
landing on these lists during her tenure?
Mr. Paolillo. Well, as I already said, Argentina is not the
same as Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Nicaragua. There
remain a number of liberties that are under attack by the
Kirchners' government mainly. We have to take in account that
the Kirchners are now 12 years in office, first Nestor
Kirchner, then his wife.
But there are a score of denounces of journalist, freedom-
of-the-press organizations against Argentina. Because, for
example, the President used the national chain for channels and
radios to insult journalists, to expose the private lives of
journalists. And on media also, there is suppression,
absolutely illegitimate.
And there is managing money with discretionary political
differences. Millions of dollars of official advertisement that
goes for the media that is in favor of the government, that
doesn't go to the media that is critical or independent.
So, yes, in Argentina, it seems the Kirchner family took
power, the freedom of the press has lowered. But, in Argentina,
as we don't have in Ecuador or Venezuela and Nicaragua and
Bolivia, there still remain TV programs, for example, or
newspapers that can fight against this authoritarian regime but
not a totalitarian regime yet.
Mr. Duncan. I take a particular interest in Argentina just
because of Senor Alberto Nisman and the Iranian issue and
Hezbollah, tri-border region, and the attacks on the AMIA
Cultural Centers and whatnot back in the 1990s and the
investigation. So I wondered whether the Argentine people are
getting their right and the truth on that issue with Iran or
whether Mr. Nisman was telling the truth, and his unfortunate
death. So I am following that very closely.
I wanted to ask Dr. Ponce, is there a direct correlation
between the deterioration of press freedom and weak judicial
systems? And the reason I ask is we hear a lot about rule of
law, talked even today about rule of law in Latin America. And
so the judicial systems are very important. So is there a
direct correlation between deterioration of freedom of press or
press freedom and the judicial system?
Mr. Ponce. Yes. Thank you very much for your question.
Yes, it is a direct correlation. In all the countries where
we see the deterioration of the freedom of the press, freedom
of expression, we see that the institutions are not working or
that there is no independence.
The worst case is Cuba. Of course, you don't have any
judiciary in Cuba. Then you have Venezuela, in which the person
of the Congress or the Assembly directly control the judiciary
and ask for some people to take some people to jail. Or you
have the same situation in Mexico, in which you have impunity;
or in Honduras, in which the judiciary is weak; or Ecuador, in
which the government controls the judiciary.
As soon as the government begins to control the judiciary,
there is no independence, and there is actually impunity for
the crimes against----
Mr. Duncan. So the threats and the physical attacks and
other things on the media, on the journalists themselves, go
unpunished.
Mr. Ponce. Unpunished. And, in some cases, like in
Venezuela or in Cuba, you have the government directly
attacking the journalists.
Mr. Duncan. We saw that in Panama, not necessarily with
journalists but with demonstrators.
Mr. Ponce. It is not only in Panama. In El Salvador
directly, the Government of Cuba--well, allegedly, the
Government of Cuba and the Ministry of Security of El Salvador
tried to deport 11 Cubans just because they want to go to
participate in an international event in El Salvador. So it is
not only in their countries; they are trying to impose also
their regimes outside the country.
It is the same case with Venezuela, persecuting human
rights activists anytime that they travel to go to an Inter-
American Commission, to go to the U.N., they are persecuted by
the regime anytime they travel.
So it is not only the impunity for the case against the
journalists; it is the government directly persecuting
journalists in each one of these countries.
Mr. Duncan. Wow. So it would be your opinion that
journalists are being specifically targeted as a result of
their reporting?
Mr. Ponce. Oh, yes.
Mr. Duncan. They are not just victims of a broader
deterioration of the security conditions in the country. They
are actually being targeted because they are journalists and
their type of reporting.
Mr. Ponce. You can establish the link between the death of
the journalists in Guatemala or the death of the journalists in
Mexico with their investigative reporting. They have been
investigating a precise case of corruption or precise case of
abuses, and they got killed in each own country.
Right now, for example, in the case of Guatemala, you see
some journalists, they have been reporting about the campaign
and about the abuses in the campaign. And this one candidate,
Baldizon, threatened directly the journalists.
So the journalists has been under attack not only by the
government, not only by the people behind the power, also for
the people who wants to take control of the country. It is a
sad situation in the region.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Not supposed to happen in democratic
governments, right?
My time is up. I will turn to the ranking member for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, one of my disappointments is, every time we have
somebody from the State Department here, they tell us how in
the Western Hemisphere they are becoming more democratic and
they are having more elections, and I tell them that I disagree
with that assessment. Anytime you have these governments which
stifle freedom of speech, I don't think that is a democratic
pathway.
And I believe that there is almost like a domino theory.
You get one country that starts stifling the press. The other
country sees that this country is getting away with it. He
starts doing it. The other country sees that these two
countries have it, and they start doing it. I think that is
what is happening in the Western Hemisphere. It started with
Cuba, Venezuela. Then you have Ecuador, Bolivia, you know,
Guatemala, Honduras.
Is there anyplace in the Western Hemisphere where the press
is strongest? Anybody.
Mr. Lauria?
Mr. Lauria. I mean, I would say it is not all black and
white. There are examples of great investigative work in the
Americas, all around Latin America. I mean, in Brazil, for
example, you have great work by investigating journalists,
revealing, exposing corruption. And you can see the country
being hit by probably the most largest corruption scandal in
decades of a state-owned company and the press revealing some
of those corruption scandals.
Even in countries like Mexico, for example, where areas are
outside the control of the government and are virtually taken
by organized crime, you have great examples of courageous
journalists doing work, investigative work, on drug
trafficking, on corruption, on the collusion between
authorities and organized crime.
I will cite two examples in Mexico. The magazine Zeta, in
the city of Tijuana, that suffered the murder of two of its
editors in the past and continues to do great work
investigating the Arellano Felix cartels and drug trafficking
and corruption there. And another magazine in the state of
Sinaloa, where the famous druglord Chapo Guzman was born,
Riodoce, in a context of violence, they are still doing great,
great work.
And I can cite examples on different countries where
journalists, despite the threat of violence, the threat of
persecution, the threat of jail, are doing very courageous
work, even in Venezuela and in Cuba. You have a prominent
blogger, Yoani Sanchez, launching a magazine, 14ymedio, doing
remarkable work.
So I am encouraged, greatly encouraged, by those examples
of great work despite these challenges.
Thank you.
Mr. Paolillo. Yes, I would like to say that, first,
14ymedio is a great job of Yoani Sanchez, as you said. It's
okay. But no Cuban can read 14ymedio. We can read 14ymedio from
abroad but not from Cuba.
But I would like to underline, as to your question, that
there are some countries where freedom of the press is more or
less respected, or mainly respected. And that includes Costa
Rica. That includes my country, Uruguay, which is a leftist
government, but, nevertheless, there is respect for freedom of
the press.
Brazil, as Carlos said, is another example. Without the
freedom of the press in Brazil, the big cases of corruption
wouldn't have been known by the people and by the judiciary
after that.
Panama, who had--the press of Panama, who had a bad time
during the Martinelli period, they printed denounces about the
corruption of that government. And they had the freedom to do
it, and they did it. And now the former officers of the
Martinelli government are going to jail in Panama because of
the work and the job of the press.
Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Corchado?
Mr. Corchado. I would just echo what Carlos said. I mean,
there are many journalists in Mexico, who, in spite of the
dangers, in spite of the risks, continue to do great
investigative work.
But, as I said in my testimony, I mean, the consequences
are great. You have someone like Carmen Aristegui, who does an
incredible investigation, and the price she is paying. You have
other journalists, many who have sought political asylum in the
United States, paying a big price.
Yet, in spite of the dangers, there are many people who
still believe in journalism holding the powerful accountable.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair will recognize the former chairman of the
committee and the chairwoman of the Middle East and North
Africa Subcommittee, Ms. Ros-Lehtinen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Thank you, Chairman
Duncan and Ranking Member Sires, for convening this important
hearing on a topic that receives very little attention here in
the U.S. You have excellent panelists. I congratulate you for
selecting them.
Press freedom in Latin America is indeed under threat from
regimes that seek to squash any dissenting voices. The Inter
American Press Association noted at its 70th general assembly
in October that press freedoms and freedom of expression have
suffered a noticeable decline last year, in 2014.
Venezuela's law of 2004, la Ley de Responsabilidad Social
en Radio y Television, is designed to muzzle broadcast media
into submission, leaving journalists and editors with no choice
but to self-censor their own content. The Venezuela model has
been copied successfully, lamentably, in Argentina's 2009 law,
Ley de Servicios de Comunicacion, and Ecuador's Ley Organica de
Comunicacion. And, as we speak, the Bolivian Government
threatens to enact a similar law.
In Ecuador, we also see journalists being attacked and sued
by Correa, as all of you have pointed out, or media outlets
fined for running articles that are deemed to be in opposition
to the current regime in power.
In Nicaragua, Ortega continues to restrict press freedom by
harassing and seeking to censor media outlets or making it
difficult for them to operate in a free and open environment.
Equally concerning are the physical attacks that journalists
have suffered at the hands of police forces and armed thugs on
the orders of officials seeking to curtail coverage of events
that portray a negative image of their decadent regimes.
In my native homeland of Cuba, Freedom House ranks Cuba 193
out of 199 in their press freedom ratings. And despite the
Obama administration's best efforts to present to us a change
in Cuba, as the panelists have pointed out, the Castro regime
still considers clandestine printing as a crime against the
public order. And many of the digital media, as you have
pointed out, are available for outside of Cuba, but normal,
everyday Cubans have no access to it.
And, furthermore, any press outlet that tries to portray an
independent analysis of the reality of what occurs in Cuba,
such as the human rights violations and the continued attacks
against Las Damas de Blanco, the Ladies in White, they are
expelled from the country.
Yet, despite a decline in press freedom, nowhere does the
battle for freedom rage stronger than in the confines of
cyberspace. Latin America and all of its regimes are
increasingly challenged by digital vehicles such as social
media blogs, Internet news aggregators. It has become
impossible to hide its atrocities from being documented in
graphic, painstaking detail by social media, even if it is not
available in those countries, angering their perpetrators, who
have tried, in varying degrees of success, to ban these digital
vehicles.
So this is a key moment for the future of a free press in
Latin America. The United States must remain vigilant of
proposals to regulate or sensor the Internet in our hemisphere.
A free Internet is the key to fighting against the atrocities
in Latin America and the last bastion of freedom against the
scornful tyrannical regimes that plague our hemisphere today.
I want to ask Dr. Ponce about Venezuela.
December 6 is elections. Is it plausible for an election to
be considered fair if opposition candidates can only spread
their messages almost exclusively through the Internet?
One of the main concerns in Venezuela is the imposing size
of state-owned media. Critical outlets like El Universal and
Globovision, among many others, have been swallowed by the
hegemonic state apparatus. And now we have the elections coming
up; they no longer count on a vehicle to deliver their messages
to the general public.
How do you analyze the upcoming elections and the viability
of candidates without access to the state-owned media?
Mr. Ponce. As simple as ``no.'' No, the truth of Venezuela
is everything is manipulated in the election. From the
selection of their party to the electoral authorities, they
violate their own constitution to select the current members of
the electoral authorities. They have violated the law,
established new rules, changing the rules of the game. They did
that before, and they continue doing that.
Instead of electoral service, they are going to have a
scored service with UNASUR or whatever is there. They are not
going to allow the European Union, they are not going to allow
the OAS. Or, if they allow them, it is going to be at the last
minute.
This is the time for the European Union, the OAS, or any
serious institutions to begin monitoring the investment in the
campaign, the control in the media, the capacity of the
opposition to fight back. They have been criminalizing some
candidates, banning them for participating in the election.
They have been also persecuting bloggers, Web pages, LaPatilla.
Some of the owners of the media have been persecuted by the
regime.
There is actually an activity directly by the president of
the Parliament persecuting all the NGOs that work directly
monitoring the institutions, some of them monitoring the media.
There is no separation of power.
Even the international media, they have been kicking out
the international media, like NTN24. They have been also
restricting the access of CNN to Venezuela.
So it is impossible with just some blogs and Web page to
control what is going on in Venezuela, to monitor the situation
in Venezuela. It is going to be an uphill battle for a weak
opposition to win a battle against a criminal authoritarian
regime.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
And just one last note, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Sires. As we
know, in Cuba, the Castro regime expects all press, works of
literature, films, everything to meet an inflexible ideological
standard set by the Communist Party before its content is
disseminated to the masses. So we have a monopoly of the
Communist Party hindering the free flow of information. And
this impacts the work of pro-democracy activists and
journalists and entrepreneurs, and they really have very few
tools to get around this obstacle.
Thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Sires.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much. And I think the best answer
of the day was ``Cuba is Cuba.'' That is exactly right. It kind
of sums up your comments.
I am going to turn to the ranking member for a second round
of questions.
Mr. Sires. I was just wondering, Mr. Corchado, Mr. Perez,
are you concerned that these thugs have a long reach when you
are in this country? Are you concerned for your safety here?
When you do an article on corruption or when you do an article
exposing the government's abuses and you are here, do you have
concerns that these people have that long of a reach?
Mr. Corchado. I mean, as I said in the testimony, whatever
danger I face really pales in comparison to my colleagues in
Mexico. I mean, I want to believe that once I cross into the
U.S. I am safe.
I constantly feel like I have to remind people, especially
if I am on the Mexican side of the border, that I am an
American citizen. I carry my passport around with me. Every
year, I come to Congress here and I get my congressional ID as
a form of protection.
I don't put it past criminal groups--I mean, they are
definitely here in the United States. They are in many cities.
But I want to believe that there is a price to pay and that
they won't touch an American journalist. I mean, it is an
economic war. It is not a religious, it is not a political--it
is an economic battle. So I want to believe that the
consequences of the price will be too high.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Perez?
Mr. Perez. Well, I do--I certainly feel safe on American
soil. But, in my case, I still have my family and my enterprise
back in Ecuador. So, to answer your question, yes, maybe I
personally feel safer here, but anything that I might say here
might be taken, you know, back home and be taken in retaliation
to, you know, my family and my enterprise.
Mr. Sires. Anybody else?
Mr. Paolillo. Yes. About the reach of these----
Mr. Sires. Different groups.
Mr. Paolillo. Yes. This information we have already gave to
you here. I would like to talk about the U.S. and the U.S.
Government and U.S. Congress. Thank you for organizing this
panel and this hearing.
But it is my point of view, the United States Government is
not so involved in these problems as we would like the U.S.
Government to be. Of course, we are not asking for any
intervention, military intervention, nothing like that. But as
a suggestion, I have this one. The Congress of the United
States should persuade the executive branch to have a stronger
voice in body where America and Latin America interact; that is
the Organization of American States.
There is no news about legal dictatorships, as I call them,
in Latin America. In the past, Mr. Anastasio Somoza, who was
the dictator of Nicaragua for 40 years, used to say--used to
hold elections, and he said, don't worry, you can vote freely,
but the one who is going to count the vote is me, so don't
worry about that. And he remained in power for 40 years as a
dictator.
So this is happening now in our countries, in some of our
countries. In the countries I mentioned, there are legal
dictatorships.
And there is in place and was approved precisely in
September 11, 2001, a document in the Organization of American
States that is called the Inter-American Democratic Charter
that was approved by all the governments of the region and is
still in force.
I think, just as we ask to other governments of Latin
America, we ask the Government of the United States to urge
each members of governments of the inter-American community to
put in practice the principles that are in that charter that is
in place now, is in force now. That is the only thing.
Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Do you want to add something?
Mr. Lauria. Yeah. I mean, I would like to just reflect on
what the real problem for the public and democratic system of
censorship due to violence and censorship due to government
repression is creating. And I think that, you know, because of
violence, because of government repression, many journalists,
many media outlets across the hemisphere are not able to report
the news.
I think that this is leaving many people in many countries
unable to make informed decisions, and this is because of the
difficulties the press faces in its daily work. And I think
that an uninformed society is a less transparent and a less
democratic one.
So this is, I think, one of the biggest challenges these
threats against the press are creating in the hemisphere.
Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I want to thank you.
Mr. Corchado, I just have a quick question. And this isn't
in the prepared questions I had; something came to mind.
Do you think the Mexican people and the world got the full
story or have gotten the full story over the missing college
students, the 43 students? And was there any intimidation or
anything by the Mexican Government over that incident?
Mr. Corchado. I don't think anyone on either side of the
border really has the full story on that. I mean, a human
rights report just came out that talked about a lot of the
inconsistencies, a lot of the problems, a lot of the
challenges. So it remains in large part still a mystery, what
happened to the 43.
Mr. Duncan. Yeah. Well, my heart and prayers go out to the
families and Mexico in general. And maybe one day the whole
story will come out.
Mr. Perez, how would you assess Ecuador's implementation of
the 2013 communications law?
Mr. Perez. In our case, specifically, we have a long
history, as I detail in my written report, that it has affected
us, you know, personally, and the newspaper, our enterprise.
Now, in a general sense, just coming after our lawsuit, it
has definitely cemented this chilling effect that is centered
on the Ecuadorian society right after El Universo's sentencing.
And what it did is actually, you know, sanction into law
everything that--all of the precedents that came from the El
Universo case.
So the chilling effect that first came upon the Ecuadorian
society from El Universo's sentencing was sanctioned into law,
and today we do see self-censorship everywhere.
Now, in Mr. Lauria's intervention, he says--and I do
commend also, there are few journalists taking big risks
personally, because most of them are not belonging to media
outlets anymore. These people are by themselves blogging, and
they are taking big risks by freely opining about what is going
on in Ecuador. But there are a diminishing number.
Mr. Duncan. Are they having to blog anonymously, or are
they open with it?
Mr. Perez. They are open with it.
Mr. Duncan. Wow.
Mr. Perez. They are open with it. But there is still an
ever-fewer number of them. So we have a fewer number of
independent media outlets running in the country. One of them
shut down for financial and pressure reasons. El Comercio from
Quito has been bought out from an international investor. And
so what is left are, you know, the two newspapers in Guayaquil
and a TV broadcast station from Guayaquil.
So we do see an ever-diminishing number and a few
journalists taking risks, but most of them actually being
censored or silenced. You know, self-censorship is a reality in
our country.
Mr. Duncan. Well, let me ask you this. How active is social
media in Ecuador?
Mr. Perez. It is very active, and it is----
Mr. Duncan. So does that act as a check and balance on the
government to actually support journalists or to keep them
honest?
Mr. Perez. Yes and no. Social media has become more and
more used in Ecuador. It is even more popular than ever. But--
--
Mr. Duncan. Who does the public lean on more? Are they
trusting social media more than they are the traditional
journalist, or vice versa?
Mr. Perez. Well, when I say social media is being used
more, I mean not so much as, I guess, a reporting tool, more of
a, really, a popular expression tool.
Mr. Duncan. But not dissemination of information.
Mr. Perez. Well, it is used for that, too. But I guess, as
I said, there is a diminishing number of independent media
outlets and independent journalists using them. There is an
ever-greater number of just citizens actually concerned about,
you know, and discussing using social media. But as that number
of citizens grows, the presence of the government on social
media grows even faster.
Mr. Duncan. Wow.
Mr. Perez. So, you know, it has been documented, the troll
centers that the government runs and the number of trolls that,
you know, use social media to harass and poke at people that
are opining independently. And the same in just the present,
you know, harassing, you know, social media users. The famous
case of Crudo Ecuador, who was singled out in a weekly address
and, you know, harassed until he shut down his Web page.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Mr. Paolillo, in Uruguay, social media, is that very
active? Is it a check and balance on the--and what is your take
on social media throughout the region? I am curious about this
now.
Mr. Paolillo. About Uruguay, I can say that the press is
the main thing to the check and balances in that country,
because there is freedom of the press in the country. So social
media is very active, but the press is very active also. So
that is a very--the very best environment for freedom of
expression, one of the best environments in Latin America, I
think.
The rest of the region, I can see that citizens, regular
citizens, using more and more social media to protest against
authoritarian regimes. But the government still points out to
the traditional media to silence the information and the
reports or whatever. So, despite that social media is growing,
the activities of regular citizens in social media is growing,
the traditional media still has a lot of force in Latin
America.
And regular people are not doing investigative reporting,
checking facts or whatever. They are just denouncing
situations. But you cannot compare that with the traditional
media. There is no mistake of Mr. Correa and his colleagues
targeting the traditional media, because this is the one that
has the journalists paid for doing investigations, deep
investigations.
So I think, again, social media is very active throughout
the region, but the traditional media is also very important.
Mr. Duncan. I mean, that is interesting, it is reactive. We
saw that in Ferguson, Missouri, where social media propagated a
false narrative on what the events were, and the traditional
media picked up on that, and that became the narrative, but it
was later proven not to be the correct sequence of events and
what actually happened.
And so, you know, traditional media has to try to find a
sweet spot with social media's reactiveness, as you say, and
traditional reporting, which is investigative, it is
background, it is digging a little more. So I think everyone in
journalism is probably struggling with that to some degree.
Mr. Lauria, if you would like to chime in?
Mr. Lauria. Yes.
Social media in Mexico, we have found at CPJ, has become a
way for citizens to be informed, especially in areas where
organized crime are controlling territory and the media cannot
do any kind of reporting, not even massive shootouts in broad
daylight. Those reports are off-limits for journalists working
in print, in broadcast. And, you know, there are areas in
Mexico where citizens can only get information in social media
networks.
So, in that case, social media is filling a vacuum. There
is an information vacuum in many places in Mexico. People are
completely uninformed of what is going on in their communities
because the press has not fulfilled its role. It is completely
muzzled.
Mr. Duncan. Let me ask you this. Are bloggers invited to
press events by the government?
Mr. Lauria. If they are invited?
Mr. Duncan. Are they invited? Are they able to cover it?
You know----
Mr. Lauria. In some areas.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Mr. Lauria. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely.
Mr. Duncan. Here in America, I know, and in my State, for a
while bloggers were not treated as traditional journalists and
weren't invited. And I just wondered because----
Mr. Lauria. Yeah.
Mr. Duncan. So, Dr. Ponce, do you want to chime in? I think
this might be the last question of the day.
Mr. Ponce. Yes. The problem with social media only is that
social media is also open for the regimes. They have
established blogs. They have established their own Twitter
accounts. They persecute some of the people that tweet. For
example, a reporter who denounced the crime, the Nisman crime,
he had to flee the country.
So they persecute the users of Twitter. They persecute the
users of social media. But they also create their own media.
They create their own blogs, they create their own information.
They try to manipulate information. And, in some cases, there
are bloggers in every country who are producing information,
and it is impossible to substitute investigative journalists.
One of the things that is missing in the social media, in
the blogs and all the series of media that we have around, is
the investigative journalist and the access from this media to
the majority of the population.
In Cuba, it is through El Paquete that the people is
learning about what is going on outside, reading the newspaper
from Miami with El Paquete. It is not through the social media.
In Venezuela, it is not through the social media. They learn
from CNN, and they learn from some Twitters and some other
forms.
But it is really hard for these platforms to get to the
majority of the people or to pay for the investigative
journalists.
Mr. Duncan. Right. You know, think about the game-changer
that social media and access to the Internet would be in Cuba.
I think about that often.
Well, listen, I want to thank you all for being here and
taking time. I know we monkeyed with the time today to start
the hearing a little earlier, and then it became later due to
votes, but I want to thank you. And I look forward to following
up on this at a later date.
So, pursuant to Committee Rule 7, members of the
subcommittee are permitted to submit written statements to be
included in the official record. And, without objection, the
hearing record will remain open for 5 days to allow statements,
questions, extraneous materials for the record and subject to
the limitation rules.
With that, we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:06 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
