- THE PARIS ATTACKS: A STRATEGIC SHIFT BY ISIS?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PARIS ATTACKS:
A STRATEGIC SHIFT BY ISIS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 2, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-122

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-752PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade

TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
PAUL COOK, California                BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Max Boot, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick senior fellow for national
security studies, Council on Foreign Relations.................     5
Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, Ph.D., senior fellow, Foundation for
Defense of Democracies.........................................    13
Mr. Michael Weiss, co-author, ``ISIS: Inside the Army of Terror''    29
Mr. Thomas M. Sanderson, director and senior fellow,
Transnational Threats Project, Center for Strategic and
International Studies..........................................    44

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Max Boot: Prepared statement.................................     8
Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, Ph.D.: Prepared statement...............    15
Mr. Michael Weiss: Prepared statement............................    33
Mr. Thomas M. Sanderson: Prepared statement......................    47

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    78
Hearing minutes..................................................    79

THE PARIS ATTACKS:
A STRATEGIC SHIFT BY ISIS?

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:05 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Poe
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Poe. The subcommittee will come to order. Without
objection, all members will have 5 days to submit statements,
questions, and extraneous materials for the record, subject to
the length limitation in the rules.
I will give my opening statement, then I will yield to the
ranking member, Mr. Keating from Massachusetts, for his
statement.
At least 130 people were killed and hundreds more were
wounded on November the 13th in Paris as a result of the
terrorist rampage by ISIS. My condolences go out to all of
those who lost their loved ones, their family and their friends
on that day.
The shocking attack came in the context of a growing
international aggression on the part of ISIS. Just the day
before the Paris attacks, ISIS claimed credit for a twin
suicide bombing in Beirut that killed at least 42 people. Two
weeks before that, ISIS claimed to have downed a Russian
airliner over the Sinai Peninsula, killing all 224 people
onboard. ISIS has claimed the lives of more than 800 people
this year outside its so-called caliphate.
While the world has witnessed the strengthening of ISIS,
the President had a different interpretation. On the same day,
before the Paris attacks, the President said that ISIS was
``contained'' in Iraq and Syria.
'' deg. They may not
be expanding their caliphate, but ISIS does not look contained
to me.
American and European intelligence officials are now saying
that ISIS has dedicated cell planning more terrorist attacks
overseas. It is becoming clear that ISIS is not just a regional
threat in the Middle East and that its overseas campaign of
terror may have only just begun.
It has been over a year since the President promised to
``degrade and ultimately destroy'' ISIS. U.S. air strikes have
done little to reduce the number of ISIS fighters. Foreign
fighters are being replenished each day. There simply have not
been enough air strikes targeting vital ISIS locations.
Right after the Paris attacks, the French, God bless them,
didn't take them long to start hitting ISIS' strategic
locations in Syria guided by the U.S. Two weeks ago, we finally
started to bomb trucks transporting oil for ISIS. It did not
seem to happen earlier. The question is why.
ISIS made $100 million through oil trafficking in 2014. I
am curious why there has only been one air strike on the
group's oil operations since November.
And why don't we go after the oil fields that produced that
oil that is being sold on the black market? According to the
former CIA Director, there were environmental concerns about
blowing up oil fields. So now we are fighting an
environmentally correct war and trying to defeat ISIS. No
wonder there is no success.
The President himself was forced to cancel the train and
equip program that cost $\1/2\ billion after several false
starts. Apparently, we need a strategy. We are failing in our
efforts to counter foreign fighter travel. The majority of the
Paris attackers were EU citizens who had traveled back and
forth from fighting in Syria. The U.S. still does not have a
national strategy to combat fighter travel.
We also have yet to devise a real strategy to combat
terrorist use of social media. ISIS uses social media to
advertise its propaganda, radicalize and recruit people all
over the world. Right after the Paris attacks, ISIS supporters
took to social media to praise the terrorists. How revolting is
that? ISIS has released videos praising the attacks and calling
for now attacks in New York and Washington, DC.
The administration has promised a strategy to counter
online radicalization. That was in 2011. Four years later, we
are still waiting on the strategy.
Not only that, we need to find better ways to deprive ISIS
of their money. Their reign of terror is a result of having
money to kill folks. Last year alone, ISIS made over $1
billion. They get money from ransom, killing endangered species
in Africa, big dollar donors in the Middle East, taxing of
locals that they control, and of course blood oil.
We need to start implementing a winning strategy against
ISIS. Are we waiting to take the gloves off until ISIS commits
a crime in the United States? It appears to me that we are on
the defense, not the offense, when it comes to eliminating
ISIS.
The first step toward a better strategy is acknowledging
the one that we have now is really not enough. So we must be
honest with ourselves, and we must do everything possible.
The bottom line is, it is our obligation to protect the
American people. Continuing to believe in a policy that doesn't
fit the bill will continue to endanger us all. So what is the
plan? What is the road to defeating ISIS?
And I will now yield to the ranking member for his opening
comments.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing. I would like to thank our witnesses
for being here.
As we conduct today's hearing it is important to keep in
our minds first and foremost the victims and their families of
these attacks in all the countries. I am the cochair of the
French Caucus in the House. Just a few months ago, I was in
Paris talking to counterterrorism officials and other officials
who have worked very hard and were very aggressive in trying to
deal with terrorist issues there, and still it just shows once
again that these terrible events can occur despite how hard you
work to prevent them from occurring.
And the title of the hearing asks whether the attacks in
Paris represent a strategic shift in Daesh or ISIL. It clearly
does. I am interested in our witnesses' perspectives on this
question and hope that we will be able to have an informative
discussion.
Whether or not they signal a major strategic shift--I think
they do--however, the Paris attacks, together with the recent
bombings in Beirut and the bombing of the Russian Metrojet in
Egypt demonstrate an escalation of ISIL's or Daesh's terrorist
activities outside of its bases for power in Iraq and Syria.
This is a concerning development, to say the least, one
that has been met with a range of reactions from France and
Turkey and Russia and the United States. What remains clear is
that the United States and our international partners must work
and communicate on all fronts to defeat ISIL.
ISIL is a unique threat because it is a global terrorist
organization. Because it is, they have an apocalyptic view. And
certainly it is a concern because they are translating that
into significant territory. Its occupation provides substantial
revenue through theft, extortion, taxation, and attracts
foreign fighters drawn to the cause and supporting the supposed
caliphate.
To defeat ISIL, we need to continue to assist our allies
militarily to reverse the territorial gains made by ISIL, and
we are making progress in this area. However, while ISIL
suffers territorial losses in Iraq and Syria, it may ask to
increasingly lash out at its enemies outside of the immediate
region.
And in the longer term, however, according to its ideology,
ISIL needs to control its territory to justify its existence.
And ISIL, without significant territory, would be severely
weakened.
But it is important to keep in mind that countering ISIL
will require much more than military force. For example, we
must do more to cut off ISIL's supply of money and manpower by
more effectively countering terrorist recruitment, terrorist
travel, and terrorist financing. We also need to work to
counter ISIL's expanding influence beyond Iraq and Syria into
its so-called provinces of Egypt, Libya, Nigeria, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan, as well as other locations in Africa and Asia.
And it is critical that we enhance and share counterterrorism
intelligence and information with and among our international
partners, particularly our European allies who are
geographically closer to the Middle East and have seen greater
numbers of foreign fighters travel to Iraq and Syria.
Ultimately, we also need to identify and address the root
causes of why so many predominantly young adults are prepared
to kill themselves in support of such a savage and morally
bankrupt cause.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
this threat post-Paris and how the United States and its
partners can work together to mitigate and eventually overcome
this threat.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
I will now introduce the other cochair of the French
Caucus, the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Judge
Poe, for your leadership on what is so important, the attacks
in Paris.
And, indeed, this is bipartisan. I am grateful to work with
Congressman Keating as cochair of the French Caucus. And it is
personal to me. I am of French heritage and very grateful for
that. And we appreciate and have great sympathy for America's
first ally, France.
The Parisian attacks came just 1 day after the President
claimed that ISIL was contained, further showing that his
policy, I believe, to protect American families is a legacy of
failure.
What we have, sadly, ISIL, Daesh, is an ability to
effectively coordinate mass murders of civilians across the
world. We must never forget 9/11. It is clear that defeating
ISIL will require a much more coordinated effort comprised of a
broad coalition of America and its allies in Europe and the
Middle East. I look forward to the recommendations of the
distinguished panel here today and the insights on how we might
counter ISIL's strategy to commit atrocities worldwide.
Thank you.
Mr. Poe. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Colonel Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to be very, very brief. I just want to mention a
hearing that I had this morning. I am also on the House Armed
Services Committee, and we had an individual by the name of
David Ignatius. He is actually a reporter for The Washington
Post. And the subject was about ISIS. We talked about Paris,
obviously. I thought the focus was going to be primarily on the
military. But after listening to him, because he was talking
about the history and the origins and everything else, which
you really, really need to understand, where ISIS has been and
where it is going and objectives and some of the things which
the chair talked about.
It was an outstanding hearing. And I came away from it that
I said maybe sometimes we have got to actually have a
combination, like we did on that hearing that you had last week
with Homeland Security, and where sometimes in the House Armed
Services we are only focused on the military and we don't
understand a lot of the foreign policy implications, the
history, the religion, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera,
something that was talked about.
But, anyway, I recommend that in the future. Maybe if we
could do this. I was just shocked how at knowledgeable this
individual was. His father, by the way, was the former
Secretary of the Navy many years ago, probably when I was
coming into the Marine Corps as a second lieutenant. As I
remind everybody, the most dangerous weapon in the world is a
second lieutenant with a map and a compass.
But it was a great hearing. And I look forward to the
witnesses that we have today. The French, now more than ever,
are one of our strongest allies and we have to make sure we
stand with them.
Thank you.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Colonel Cook.
The other gentleman from California Representative, Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for letting me participate.
Two weeks ago I was in Paris, which was just a matter of
days after the massacre, and it was an honor for me, along with
Representative Gabbard, that we were able to place a crossed
American and French flag there at the sight of the slaughter
that took place and for us to meet with French officials at a
very high level to reassure them that Americans stand with
them.
We have had a special relationship with the French people
since their crucial support for American independence during
our struggle for our own freedom. Such a relationship and the
supporting relationship as we have had is going to be ever more
important in the years ahead, because we are entering into a
new era of history. The Cold War is over. The post-Cold War is
over. And this era may well be known as the era of Islamic
terrorism.
But whatever they call it, we need to be supportive of all
of those who are attacking and trying to defeat radical Islam,
and that is especially true of countries like France.
Thank you.
Mr. Poe. Does any other member wish to make an opening
statement?
If not, I will introduce the witnesses that we have. And
without objection, all the witnesses' prepared statements will
be made part of the record.
I ask that each witness please keep your presentation to no
more than 5 minutes. I will advise everyone that we are
supposed to have a series of votes in the next 20 to 30
minutes, but we will proceed with all of the statements of the
witnesses first.
Mr. Max Boot is the Jeane Kirkpatrick senior fellow for
national security studies at the Council on Foreign Relations.
He is a military historian and foreign policy analyst, who has
served as an adviser to the United States commanders in Iraq
and Afghanistan.
Dr. Daveed Gartenstein-Ross is a senior fellow at the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies. His work focuses on al-
Qaeda, the Islamic State, and other jihadist organizations with
transnational ambitions.
Mr. Michael Weiss is the co-author of ``ISIS: Inside the
Army of Terror.'' He also appears on on-air analysis for CNN
focusing on Syria, Iraq, ISIS, Russia, and Ukraine.
And Dr. Thomas Sanderson is the director and senior fellow
for the Transnational Threats Project at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies. He currently investigates
violent extremist activity across Africa and the Middle East.
I want to welcome all four of our experts this afternoon.
And we will start with Mr. Boot.

STATEMENT OF MR. MAX BOOT, JEANE J. KIRKPATRICK SENIOR FELLOW
FOR NATIONAL SECURITY STUDIES, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS

Mr. Boot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is a
privilege to be here to talk about such an important subject.
You know, I don't think that the President is being honest
about what our strategy against ISIS actually is, because the
President says we are out to degrade and defeat ISIS. In fact,
I think what we are really trying to do at the moment is to
contain it. We don't have a strategy to defeat and to destroy
ISIS. What we have is barely a strategy to contain it, which
has not been successful, as we have seen.
While it is true that the scope of ISIS' territorial
control in Iraq and Syria has been slightly decreased over the
course of the last 6 months or so, shrunk slightly at the
periphery, nevertheless, ISIS remains a potent threat. It
maintains its hold on Mosul, Raqqa, Ramadi, Palmyra, and a lot
of other territory. And it is not content to dominate this
Islamic State, so-called, in Iraq and Syria. It is expanding
rapidly to places like Libya. And as we have seen, of course,
in the case of Paris, it is also expanding its terror networks
abroad so that it can strike literally anywhere in the world.
I believe that we actually need a strategy to make good on
what the President said we must do, which is to destroy ISIS.
And what is that going to take? Well, it is going to take a lot
more than what we are doing at the moment, even notwithstanding
the slight escalation announced yesterday by Secretary Carter
when he said that a joint special operations task force was
going to join the fight. That is a good step, something I have
called for, for more than a year, but it is going to be
insufficient. We need an integrated military and political
strategy to destroy ISIS.
And it is not sufficient simply to focus on areas such as
countering ISIS finance or countering ISIS propaganda online.
Those are both things that we need to do, but in the end they
will not be decisive. As long as ISIS controls a state the size
of the United Kingdom, it will continue to have a potent appeal
for jihadists around the world.
The only way to break its appeal is to destroy its hold on
its territory. And how do we do that? Well, I think what we
need is more military action on the part of the United States
and our allies, but we also need a political strategy, and
those two have to be closely intertwined, something that is not
the case today.
In terms of military action, clearly, I think we need a
more intensive bombing campaign. I mean, it is literally
incomprehensible to me why 75 percent of U.S. attack sorties
are coming back to base without dropping their weapons. That
suggests that we are waging an extraordinarily restrained
campaign. As Mike Vickers, the former under secretary of
defense for intelligence, pointed out recently, in 2 months in
Afghanistan, in the fall of 2001, we have dropped more bombs
than we have in the case of Iraq and Syria in something like a
year and a half.
So clearly, we need to step up the bombing campaign. We
need to make that bombing campaign more effective by allowing
our joint tactical air controllers onto the battlefield where
they can actually call in strikes in an aggressive and precise
way while avoiding civilian collateral damage.
We need special operations teams on the battlefield. Again,
as I mentioned a second ago, the fact that we are putting JSOC
into the fight, I think, is a good step, but it is
insufficient. At the end of the day, I don't think that special
operators alone are going to be enough to win this battle. I
think we also need to put more conventional forces onto the
battlefield. And I would estimate something on the order of
20,000 to 30,000 troops will probably be required, which is
well beyond the current level of about 3,500, but still well
short of the 100,000-plus levels that we reached in Iraq at the
height of the Iraq war.
I think those troops are necessary in order to galvanize
and support a Sunni uprising against ISIS in both Iraq and
Syria. And this is really the way that we are going to defeat
this organization. We are going to turn its constituency
against it.
And what is that going to take? Well, in the first place,
we have to give the Sunnis some assurance that if they rise up,
that we will stand with them, that we will fight alongside of
them, that they will not simply be slaughtered by these
butchers in ISIS. And to give them any kind of assurance, we
need to have more troops who can work alongside of them and
protect them and enable them to be effective against ISIS.
But we also and crucially need a political strategy. We
need to assure them that if they get rid of ISIS, they are not
going to simply replace the tyranny of ISIS with the tyranny of
Iran. We need to push for Sunni autonomy within Iraq. We need
to push in Syria for the ouster of Bashar Assad, who has killed
far more people than ISIS ever has. We need to offer the Sunnis
a political end state that is worth fighting for. And if we do
that, and if we provide them with a slightly greater level of
support, I believe we can be more far successful against ISIS
than we have been to date.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Boot follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Boot.
Dr. Gartenstein-Ross, please, sir.

STATEMENT OF DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW,
FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Gartenstein-Ross. Chairman Poe, Ranking Member Keating,
and distinguished members, it is an honor to be here to testify
before you at this grave time. Apologies in advance for the
fact that I am somewhat losing my voice. An infant plague has
been running around my house, as many of you are familiar with.
On the specific question that the hearing asks, whether we
are seeing a strategic shift on ISIS' part, my answer is no. I
don't think this is the key question in the hearing. But I
would submit that, in general, when the argument has been that
a strategic shift is taking place, the presumption is that
previously ISIS was much more focused in their own box. They
were much more focus on building the caliphate and less so on
carrying out attacks externally.
I would argue that they have been interested from the
outset in carrying out external attacks. The best comprehensive
treatment of this is written by two of my colleagues, Nathaniel
Barr and Bridget Moreng, in Foreign Affairs recently. I have
cited it in my testimony and actually adapted part of my
testimony from their piece.
To quickly go over it, I think the rhetoric of ISIS has
always suggested they were interested in carrying out attacks
abroad.
Secondly, I think lone wolf attacks are very much
misunderstood. Some of the lone wolf attacks they have
engendered have indeed just been inspired by ISIS and had no
connect to the organization. But others have been lone wolf
attacks of individuals in Western societies who are actually
taking orders from ISIS centrally. This was the case for
several attackers in the United States who were inspired and
directed by Junaid Hussein. This was also the case for a cell
in Australia.
Finally, they previously attempted to carry out similar
urban warfare-style attacks in the West. There is the plot that
was broken up in Belgium back in January of this year, just
about a week after the Charlie Hebdo massacre, in which the
would-be attackers had grenades, small arms, and the kinds of
things that were used in the Paris attack. Indeed, Abaaoud, one
of the people who prepared the Paris attack, the ringleader of
the Paris attack, had been in Belgium. So I think that
previously they were trying to do this.
I do think that there are a couple of shifts we are likely
to see on ISIS' part. One is, as they lose territory in Iraq
and Syria, they are likely to devote more resources to carrying
out terrorist attacks abroad. They have a narrative of
strength. It is very important to them to demonstrate to their
constituency that they are strong, that they are winning. That
is one reason why their propaganda has always been so brutal.
And I think that to show that they are strong, they will devote
more resources to carrying out terrorist attacks abroad.
Secondly, I think that ISIS will show more of a focus on
its near abroad, not just Iraq and Syria, but if you look at
places like Libya in particular that they have expanded into,
they clearly--and it was reported recently in a major
publication--that ISIS is looking to make sure that they have
continuity, that if they lose enough ground in Iraq and Syria
that the caliphate is no longer viable there that they may
shift the locus of their caliphate over to Sirte, a city in
Libya that they currently control.
This is a very thorny problem set. Let's make no mistake
about that. This is difficult because of all the many players
that you have on the ground.
So a few things to consider. The first is that I do think
that defeating ISIS on the battlefield is key. They made a very
bold move when they declared a caliphate, and in declaring a
caliphate, they staked their legitimacy upon maintaining
territory. Territoriality is very important to them. And if
they no longer have a viable caliphate, that threatens upending
their legitimacy in a way that other jihadist groups are not
vulnerable to.
Secondly, I agree with the note about social media and its
importance to ISIS. Their narrative of strength is key. I
testified before the Senate on this issue earlier this year. I
cite to my Senate testimony in the written testimony you have
received. But I think that we have not done a good job of
puncturing this narrative of strength.
A lot of their so-called gains have often been very
exaggerated, and in fact they have experienced a number of
major losses, especially in Africa, over the course of this
year that are virtually unknown. There is a lot of opportunity
to puncture this narrative of invulnerability that they have
set up for themselves.
Another thing I would like to point to is Sirte. I
mentioned that, but right now we know that the Islamic State is
very strong there. We aren't taking any sort of action to
counter this other base that they have outside of Iraq and
Syria. I think that we should heavily consider what we should
do to counter their strength outside of their immediate theater
and in their near abroad.
As I said, this is a very thorny problem set. ISIS does
have vulnerabilities, and significant vulnerabilities, and I
think part of solving this problem set is not just looking at
their strengths, but also seeing how we can make their own
vulnerabilities work against them.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gartenstein-Ross follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you.
Mr. Weiss, statement, please.

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL WEISS, CO-AUTHOR, ``ISIS: INSIDE THE
ARMY OF TERROR''

Mr. Weiss. Thank you, Chairman Poe and Ranking Member
Keating. It is an honor and pleasure, while slightly depressing
to be here, given the circumstances of the mass murder in one
of the world's best and cosmopolitan cities 2 weeks ago.
Last month I was in Istanbul on assignment, interviewing a
defector from ISIS. Not just any defector, he had actually
served in what is called the amn al-dawleh, which is their
state security apparatus. This is the branch of their
intelligence wing, which has four main pillars, that Mohammed
Emwazi, also known as Jihadi John, had served in. They are
responsible for interrogation and detention. They are also
responsible for essentially creating a border guard. If you
leave their territory, you have to pass through checkpoints.
In some cases, they are responsible for training foreign
operatives. And the guy that I was interviewing, I gave him the
pseudonym Abu Khaled, told me--this was in mid-October, or late
October--that he remembers training two French fighters. And I
asked him, where did they go, where are they now? He said they
went back to France.
After the Paris attacks, I got in touch with him, and he
said, ``You know, I am more than 50 percent certain, if they
weren't one of the suicide bombers or one of the gunmen who
perpetrated the attacks, that they were involved in some way.''
He said to me, ``Michael, ISIS has got sleeper cells all over
the world.'' They have from the very beginning had a foreign
expeditionary wing and a foreign policy.
And one of the things that struck me by his relay of what
it was like in the 11 months he spent in this organization,
they are a state. They conceive of themselves as a state. I
know that the United States likes to downplay this and pretend
that, no, this is just a terrorist organization, it can and
will be defeated quite easily, but that is not how ISIS
portrays themselves. And more importantly, as some of the other
witnesses have said, that is not how the constituents of ISIS,
Sunni Arabs, particularly in the tribal regions of eastern
Syria and western-central Iraq see it.
If you are a member of ISIS, gentlemen, you have free
health care. And what do I mean by free health care? If you
could go to the eye doctor, if you have a toothache, that is
all paid for. If you have cancer, they will send you to Turkey
so you can get chemotherapy and put you up in a hotel.
You get a salary that beats the band, particularly in war-
torn Syria. If you have a wife, you get a subsidy for her. Your
rent is free. If you have children, you get subsidies for each
child. If you take care of your parents and your in-laws, you
get subsidies for them as well. It is like joining the
Communist Party in the decaying days of the Soviet Union. There
is a nomenklatura, a new class of jihadists.
And part of this ideological propaganda and exportation is
what I would call a jihadist internationale. There are main
planks to this. We have all heard about the messianic,
apocalyptic vision that they espouse. The end days will come in
Dabiq, the suburb of Aleppo, where the armies of Rome will meet
the armies of Islam, and Islam will be victorious.
But there is also a political project that underwrites
this. Let's not forget, the people who run this organization
standing behind Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, where did they come from?
A lot of them had served in Saddam Hussein's intelligence
service, in his military, in the Ba'ath Party. They had
training from the Soviet KGB and the Stasi. Abu Khaled, the
ISIS defector, told me, ``Now, ISIS doesn't fight so well on
the battlefield.'' And he would know, because he trained a lot
of the infantry soldiers who went like lemmings to their death
in Kobani. In fact, many of them defected or deserted and said,
``We don't want any part of this. We just get bombed the minute
we turn up in a house in that city.''
I said, ``So how did they manage to take all this
territory?'' He says, ``They have very good tradecraft.'' They
are great at spying. They infiltrate rival organizations. If it
is the Free Syrian Army, they send an agent into a brigade or
battalion of the FSA equipped with $200,000 to $300,000 cash to
essentially bribe his way to the top of that organization or
the top of that military unit, and all of a sudden he starts
manipulating and finessing the activities of the FSA. Some of
these groups are backed by the United States and the so-called
Friends of Syria.
ISIS takes over territory before the advancing columns of
tanks and Humvees and shock troops. They have already
cultivated a constituency. They spend a fortune.
Most of the money they are making, by the way--you talk a
lot about oil sales, you talk a lot about smuggling of
artifacts or human trafficking, that is not it. They have an
entire bureaucracy that levies fines and taxes and surcharge on
any violation that they deem to be abuse of their penal code or
their sharia law.
If you are caught smoking cigarettes, you have to sit for 3
days in a cage in the town al-Bab, if you are in al-Bab, and
Aleppo. You also have to pay a fine. If you flee from ISIS-held
territory, your house, your property, all of your assets are
confiscated. They have a very sophisticated repossession and
eminent domain policy. Okay?
This is the reason they want to terrain, because with
terrain comes people. They are ``governing,'' lording it over
millions of people. And those millions of people are duty bound
to pay taxes. I don't have to tell you what happens if they
don't or if they defy ISIS or they try to flee.
Like any totalitarian political organization, the likes of
which we have seen in the 20th century, there is a carrot-and-
stick approach. There is a social outreach program: Come to the
paradise of the caliphate, and you can have your Nutella, you
can have your video games, you can have your bride, we will
populate this land with the cubs and pearls of new generations
who will know only life under the true Islam as it should be
taught. And then, if you don't, or if you try to stand up or
resist ISIS, you will be slaughtered.
You all remember the Al Anbar awakening in the mid-2000
period in Iraq, which was essentially a pragmatic relationship
struck between the Sunni tribes and the U.S. military, not
because the U.S. military was seen as a liberating force, but
it was seen as a more credible alternative than al-Qaeda in
Iraq, the head loppers and butchers and rapists and
monopolists, the gangsters who stole money from these tribes.
There is no 101st Airborne. There is no 1st Armored
Division in Iraq. What there is today, we call it the Iraqi
Security Forces, but in reality it is a consortium of Shia
militias backed and trained and armed by the Revolutionary
Guard Corps of Iran. And many people in the Sunni heartland of
Iraq see them as worse occupiers and worse conquerors than
ISIS.
I know it is difficult to wrap your head around this. The
Western imagination is very limited in this respect. But
believe you me, in Syria we are paying a lot of attention to
the Kurds. And every time I go on television or I talk to
somebody, all of a sudden the Kurds are going to liberate all
of the Middle East.
I have a great deal of respect for the Kurds. I want an
independent State of Kurdistan. But I respect them so much that
I don't think they would be so foolhardy or stupid to march
into Raqqa city or their Deir Ezzor city, much less Palmyra,
much less Fallujah or Ramadi. That is just not their game. They
are not interested in that, because they know they will be
slaughtered.
This what I would call, this sort of strategic region, the
Euphrates River Valley, where they are still very much
entrenched--I mean, they have lost terrain in northern Syria,
they have lost Sinjar, their supply lines across Syria and Iraq
have been interdicted--but they are entrenched in the part of
those two countries that matters most to them. And the reason
is because nobody is coming and presenting a more credible
alternative to ISIS. This is the fundamental reality that needs
to be appreciated by the United States Government.
A final point. In 2003, when the U.S. invaded Iraq, Abu
Musab al-Zarqawi, the founder of the organization known as
ISIS, essentially made the case that the United States stupidly
blundered into this country and accidentally handed it to the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Today, ISIS isn't so sure it was an
accident. What they are saying is, actually, no, there is a new
coalition of the willing. It is the United States, Russia,
mobilized, of course, by the Jews, backed now by Iran, the Shia
militias and death squads of Syria and Iraq, Lebanese
Hezbollah, and all the apostate or tyrannical Arab regimes in
the Middle East and Turkey. There is what I would call a
caliphate contra mundum conspiracy theory that ISIS is putting
forward.
And the dangerous thing is, if you travel to the region,
and I do it a lot, and you talk to Sunnis, they have a hard
time telling where ISIS conspiracy theory ends and U.S. foreign
policy begins. On a bad day, so do I, frankly. You know, how is
that Russia has been allowed to establish a no-fly zone,
bombing not ISIS, as even ISIS says in its latest issue of
Dabiq, its propaganda magazine, but bombing Free Syrian Army
and rebel groups that are fighting both Assad--actually, Assad,
Hezbollah, the IRGC, ISIS, and Jabhat al-Nusra all at once, and
doing so with, on occasion, sophisticated weapons, but more
often than not AK-47s and hand grenades.
You know, this is the thing, geopolitics matters to ISIS.
They pay much closer attention to our policy debates and our
discussions--they may be watching us on C-SPAN for all I know--
than we do to what they are doing in their own terrain, in
their own territory.
And, look, if you look at the profiles of these foreign
fighters, if you look at the profiles of people who are
conducting these terror spectaculars or operations abroad, it
is almost out of central casting. They are not fanatical
Muslims by birth. In fact, they are first generation. Their
parents came to Europe. They made a good trade. They had a good
living. They sent their kids to good universities or good
finishing schools. And these kids become radicalized remotely.
They turn on the television. They see American warplanes
dropping bombs on Muslim babies. ISIS is exploiting that like
you wouldn't believe.
We look at their atrocities, the immolation of a Jordanian
airman. What we are not paying attention to is the other 20
minutes of the video where they are showing literally infants
being pulled from the rubble and saying this was courtesy of a
Jordanian or Saudi or American bomb. It is very compelling. It
is very compelling.
And you don't have to be even a Muslim, much less a pious
one or an Islamist, to find it so. And this is the pool of not
even hardcore ideologues and supporters, but what I would call
the fellow travelers of ISIS that they are drawing strength
from. And, indeed, I mean, you may not be interested in the
Middle East, but the Middle East is interested in you.
And this is the thing. The leitmotif of U.S. foreign policy
today is the more we absent ourselves, the more equilibrium
will rise. Qasem Soleimani can be the next David Petraeus. I
have got news for you: We are at a more dangerous period now
than we were immediately after 9/11, because right now the
level of anti-Americanism, it is actually--some of it is
grounded in fact. Some of it is grounded in a crushing reality.
Five years of attritional warfare, where Bashar Assad has
dropped chemical weapons, barrel bombs, you name it, everything
but biological and nuclear weapons on his own people, targeting
whom? The Sunnis, the exact people we are going to need to
fight and defeat ISIS.
And in Iraq, 5 years of tolerating the thuggish regime of
Nouri al-Maliki and now providing close air support to who?
IRGC-backed proxy groups and militias who are liberating Tikrit
only after U.S. F-16s come in. The Sunnis look at us like they
hope this is a conspiracy, because if it is incompetence, then
they absolutely have no faith in the United States.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weiss follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Weiss.
Mr. Sanderson.

STATEMENT OF MR. THOMAS M. SANDERSON, DIRECTOR AND SENIOR
FELLOW, TRANSNATIONAL THREATS PROJECT, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Sanderson. Thank you, Chairman Poe and Ranking Member
Keating and distinguished members of the subcommittee for the
honor and opportunity to testify before you today on the
challenge of ISIS following these recent attacks in Paris,
Beirut, and in the skies over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. I come
to you with a perspective of from field work on terrorism and
conflict across nearly 70 countries over the last 15 years.
This includes interviews this year with current and former ISIS
members who ply the border on Turkey's side quite freely.
The question before us today is whether these attacks
represent a strategic shift for ISIS, what policy options the
U.S. might have, and how those attacks are impacting our
understanding of ISIS.
First, the attacks. I do not believe that the three strikes
represent a fundamental shift for ISIS, but rather a logical
evolution for an organization that is under heavy pressure in
some areas, has always looked to strike its enemies, and one
which has designs on territory well beyond Syria and Iraq.
But just because these attacks may not be unsurprising does
not mean we should not be alarmed. ISIS has claimed three
strikes, two conducted by cells trained in Syria and one in
Egypt conducted by an ISIS affiliate, which signal that the
threat is growing, is very bold, technically adept with both
encrypted communications and bomb miniaturization, and that
expeditionary, out-of-area attacks are to be expected. We
should act aggressively and smartly in countering them.
ISIS has long called for strikes on states such as France,
a nation for which ISIS has tremendous hatred and disdain. ISIS
also counts hundreds, if not thousands of members who hail from
France, affording them plenty of French passport holders who
can maneuver in the country, across Europe, and into the United
States.
The attack in Lebanon was a bold move for ISIS and was
likely carried out in retaliation for Hezbollah's support to
the Syrian military. In Egypt, the ISIS affiliate, Sinai
Province, has battled with Egyptian forces for years. The group
is well aware of Russia's friendship with President Sisi of
Egypt and with President Assad of Syria and is certainly
mindful of Russia's disposition toward its own citizens who
have joined ISIS. And of course, it is likely that the attack
on the Russian airliner was as much targeted at Egypt's tourism
industry, and by extension the Sisi government in Cairo, as it
was on the Russians themselves.
It is important for us to look at statements from ISIS over
the past couple of years to understand how these attacks,
especially Paris, fit in with the ISIS strategy. The ISIS
strategy is focused on establishing and protecting its
territory along the Syria-Iraq border and to build influence
beyond that space. ISIS has reached out to Muslims the world
over calling them to help run, build, and defend the Muslim
caliphate. These calls often came with encouragement to attack
ISIS enemies and promises that one day they will conquer Rome,
shorthand for much of the West.
In the October 2014 issue of their English language
publication Dabiq, ISIS spoke of targeting the West and others
in the coalition. This included statements such as,

``At this point in the crusade against the Islamic
State, it is important that attacks take place in every
country that has entered into the alliance against the
Islamic State, especially the U.S., U.K., France,
Australia, and Germany. Every Muslim should get out of
his house, find a crusader and kill them, and the
Islamic State will remain until its banner flies over
Rome.''

It is also important to note that over the last 2 years
ISIS has accepted pledges of loyalty from fighters from around
the globe, including Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Nigeria, Russia, the
Philippines, Pakistan, and many others, further expanding the
ISIS footprint on the globe and reminding us that their base in
Syria and Iraq is not the extent of their ambition.
What should these attacks tell us about ISIS? Well, the
attacks signal that ISIS intends to strike where necessary and
when pressured. I fully expect them to target the United States
and other members of the anti-ISIS coalition, and of course
they have said that they are going to do that. For a group that
is so focused on imagery, as seen in the thousands of well-
choreographed messages, images, videos distributed every day,
this is a group that must be seen as making progress.
These three attacks also tell us that ISIS, its affiliates,
and supported cells, are able to strike successfully in hostile
territory. In Paris, ISIS executed multiple attacks with
several individuals moving between France, Syria, and Belgium,
and did so in the midst of very competent law enforcement and
intelligence agencies. In Lebanon, ISIS was able to operate
covertly in a denied area crawling with highly suspicious,
alert, and well-armed, well-trained Lebanese Hezbollah.
Finally, in Egypt, ISIS affiliate Sinai Province was able to
penetrate airport security and emplace a bomb that destroyed a
Russian airliner, killing 224 people.
These successful attacks are alarming for reasons far
beyond the skillful tradecraft that was put on display. The
impact is also felt in the recruiting realm. Given that ISIS
offers a sense of mission, purpose, adventure, and revenge for
young radicalized people, such attacks serve as a tremendous
stimulant for these potential recruits. The attacks also
demonstrate the possibilities for lone wolves or organized
cells and signal that ISIS can make them happen over distance,
in unfriendly spaces, and for little cost. From their perch on
the margins of society, potential ISIS members witnessed the
Paris, Beirut, and Sinai operations, and they want in on that
action.
Let's now consider the implications and possible responses.
The most recent ISIS attacks present troubling implications for
U.S. security and our anti-ISIS strategy. In Lebanon, ISIS has
struck the state that remains fragile and which borders Israel
and is home to 1 million Syrian refugees. The attack on the
Russian airliner demonstrates that commercial aviation remains
a very attractive, viable target for terrorists.
The Paris attack offers the most significant concern for
U.S. security. This long distance, sophisticated, high-risk
ISIS operation succeeded on all levels. A leading member of the
anti-ISIS coalition and close ally of the U.S. suffered a
dramatic blow.
With these examples and others in hand, it is not difficult
to envision ISIS supporting a cell or lone wolves in similar
operations inside the U.S. This would represent a bigger
challenge for ISIS, but I do not think it is impossible by any
means.
Our response must be well conceived, precise, forceful,
multidimensional, integrated, and enduring. But I will state
upfront, I do not have a lot of confidence that we will succeed
in many visible and tangible ways. Our country is not currently
in the right frame of mind to take on this challenge. Many of
our partners are incredibly problematic and the conditions and
factors at play are so numerous and immensely complicated that
I hardly know where to begin.
Let me suggest some of the key actions that are needed in a
campaign to gain some advantage in what will turn out to be an
evolution in the violence and not a clear-cut victory. The
Obama administration's objection to putting large forces on the
ground is well-founded, but we need a much more aggressive
posture in what we are doing now.
The most important things we can strive for are political
progress in both Syria and Iraq, ISIS leadership decapitation,
more targeted strikes from the air, more flexible ROE with
those strikes, territory denial, counterfinance and
countermessaging.
To make some progress in these areas we need to strengthen
efforts at diplomacy, intelligence, special operations, the air
strikes, training local forces, anticorruption,
counterradicalization, good governance, and by addressing
socioeconomic and political conditions where ISIS operates and,
importantly, where they recruit. That list is a very tall order
and it is not even exhaustive.
I realize that we have ongoing efforts in each of these
areas, but we clearly need to do more. We know what ISIS can do
and we know where else they want to take the battle. So it is
time to come together politically and to attack ISIS
aggressively and intelligently. And if we as Americans lead,
others will stand with us. Let's not wait for Washington to be
hit before doing what is right and what is possible.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sanderson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. I want to thank all of our experts for your
testimony. I found it fascinating and disturbing.
We are in the midst of votes at this time, and so we will
recess until approximately 1:30, and we will start questioning
at 1:30--or 2:30, 2:30. And we will start at 2:30, not 1:30. It
wasn't a trick.
Thank you very much. We are recessed till 2:30.
[Recess.]
Mr. Poe. Thank you once again.
Gentlemen, I have been in a lot of hearings, and I find
that this hearing has turned out to be one of the most
informative and disturbing of any hearing that I have
conducted. You have given us a lot of information. Most of the
information is alarming. And so I want to try to take the
information all four of you experts have given Members of
Congress on both sides about the threat of ISIS and try to
narrow down some proactive things that we ought to be doing.
It seems to me that our dealing with ISIS is reactionary.
They do something, we react. Sometimes we do. Sometimes we
don't react. But it is all reactionary. And being on the
defense, our bunker mentality is not going to solve the problem
of ISIS.
So the question is with all of these conflicts--and Mr.
Weiss made a flow chart to figure out all of the different
entities about whose side they are on today and whose side they
are on tomorrow and who these folks are--it is very
complicated. So what is our answer to this? What is something
we can do?
And I agree with you totally, it has got to be a political
answer. Long range, it has got to be a political answer. There
has to be a military answer, maybe a financial answer.
The United States doesn't have a real good track record, I
don't think, of going into a region, eliminating whoever is in
charge of the country, and then the result doesn't turn out too
well. And sometimes it is worse than the government we got rid
of or the regime or the dictator, whatever. So we destroy ISIS,
there is a vacuum there. What happens when we eliminate them?
First of all, what is the way we can policy-wise have a
plan to eliminate them? But on the political front, what should
we be doing as a replacement for all of those concerns that you
mentioned about the people in the region, who they are looking
to for leadership?
So that is the question. So if each one of you would weigh
in on some specifics, political results, military results, or
things that we ought to be doing, long-term, short-term, to
give us some guidance on America's role and ISIS.
I have one question that I just need a yes or no from all
of you on. Do you think that the United States should invoke
Article 5, make this a NATO operation? Just like 9/11, after 9/
11, that became a NATO operation because we were attacked.
Should this be a NATO operation or not? And then each one of
you weigh in on the previous question that I just mentioned to
you. So go down the row on the NATO operation.
Mr. Boot.
Mr. Boot. Mr. Chairman, I think there is some symbolic
value to invoking Article 5, although, from what I understand,
our French allies don't actually want to invoke it because they
are hoping to get Russia on board and they don't want the NATO
sponsorship to turn off Putin.
Now, I think that, frankly, President Hollande is smoking
something if he thinks that we are going to get President Putin
on board with our agenda in Syria and Iraq, because Putin has a
very different agenda. He is there to support Assad. He is not
there to destroy ISIS. So I think this is not going to amount
to anything.
But I think there is some symbolic value to invoking
Article 5 if we can get the French to go along with it. But I
don't necessarily think that we need to turn this into a very
complex NATO command structure, which we have had in the case
of Afghanistan and which, to my mind, has actually been in some
ways a small impediment to getting results because it becomes a
question of balancing and having different officers from
different nations who are put into this command structure for
largely political, not for reasons of military effectiveness.
And that is not necessarily the best way to go about business.
But for the symbolic value, I think there is something to
be said for that; and also, by the way, for passing a
declaration of war or a stripped-down AUMF, not like the one
the administration has submitted, but one that really gives the
President, as the Commander in Chief, a great deal of authority
to wage war and to destroy ISIS in any way he sees fit. I think
there is something to be said for that too for the symbolic
value that it has, even if at a practical level we can still do
most of what we need to do without it.
Mr. Poe. So would you recommend that Congress debate the
issue of an authorization to use military force in the box of
ISIS?
Mr. Boot. Absolutely. I think that would be a good thing. I
mean certainly the administration lawyers argue that they have
the authority they need from the 2001 AUMF. But at this point I
think anybody who is not in the administration understands that
they are stretching things a little bit to use this
authorization after 9/11 to attack ISIS, which is a group that
basically did not exist on 9/11. I think they can do it. I am
not saying that they can't. But I think it would be better if
there were a stripped-down AUMF, one that did not include all
the restrictions that the administration has put into their
version of it.
Now, on your other question, which I think is a very good
one, about what happens after--well, first off, how do you get
rid of ISIS and what happens after ISIS is gone. I think those
are very good questions. In my testimony, I tried to address
the question of how do you get rid of ISIS, which I think is a
political-military strategy that involves slightly more
commitment of forces on our part, but also a political
strategy, which is key, to give the Sunnis a reason to fight
against ISIS, which they really don't have at the moment
because they are afraid that if they get rid of ISIS, they are
simply going to trade the butchers of ISIS for the butchers of
the Quds Force and Hezbollah and all these other Iranian-backed
groups.
So I think what you have to do, as I suggested earlier, is
to offer Sunnis autonomy within Iraq in much the same way as we
have done with the Kurds. Remember that going back to 1991, we
have been protecting the Kurds. We have used our air power to
say, ``Okay, Saddam Hussein, you are not going to be able to
slaughter the Kurds.'' And out of that has grown up one of the
few success stories in the Middle East in the last couple of
decades, which is the Kurdish Regional Government which is,
when you go from the rest of Iraq to the KRG, it is like
leaving hell and winding up in heaven. I mean, they have done
tremendously well under American military protection for the
last couple of decades.
I think that is a good model to emulate with the Sunnis in
Iraq. I am not saying that we should give them a separate
country. I don't think that is practical. But we should
certainly create a Sunni Regional Government akin to the
Kurdish Regional Government. And ideally we would do that by
engineering a political deal in Baghdad, but that may not be
possible because of the Iranian domination of the Baghdad
regime. And if that is not possible, as I have argued before,
we can act unilaterally on our own, work with the Sunnis. We
can train and arm them in the KRG where there is already a huge
number of Sunni refugees. And we can basically create for the
Sunnis an autonomy within Iraq. We can train and arm the Sons
of Iraq, like the Peshmerga, that will guarantee their
autonomy. We can pledge to use American air power, if
necessary, to protect them from an onslaught from the Shiite
militias.
I think that is the way that we gain the support of the
Sunnis, and that is ultimately going to be, I think, the
lasting political structure within Iraq, which is a very loose
Federal structure and within it basically the Shiite, Kurdish,
and Sunni regions.
Now, in the case of Syria it is a much harder process
because Syria is much more fragmented right now than even Iraq
is. What I have suggested is that we need to have no-fly zones
and safe zones in Syria, which would have many benefits,
blunting the Assad killing machine, which has killed far more
people to date than ISIS has, but also creating a space where
you could actually train and arm the Free Syrian Army and,
crucially, where you could also give the Syrian opposition
movement, which we recognize as the rightful Government of
Syria, you could give them a chance to actually govern on some
territory so that eventually, once Assad is overthrown, there
is more of a hope that a more moderate government can extend
its way into ruling the entire country.
I think what might actually happen in the end is that when
we get to the point where ISIS and Assad are close to being
overthrown in Syria, and we are nowhere close to that right
now, once you get to that point, I think there is a case to be
made for a Dayton-like process where you would have an
international conference with an agreement to deploy
international peacekeeping forces that would, for example, give
some assurance to the Alawites that they are not going to be
slaughtered by the Sunnis that they, themselves, have been
slaughtering for so many years, give some assurances to the
Kurds, give some assurances to the different Sunni
communicates.
But we are nowhere close to that right now, and I think we
are not going to get there just by convening conferences in
Vienna or Geneva right now. The only way to get there is to
change the balance of power on the ground, and that means
creating a more viable, moderate opposition in Syria, enabled
by greater American aid, and allowing them to go after not only
ISIS, but also after Assad, and helping them by preventing
Assad's air force from bombing them and helping them by
creating these safe zones where refugees could stay there, the
Free Syrian Army could train there, the Syrian opposition could
begin to rule there. I think that is the beginning of a
solution to the nightmare that is Syria today.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Boot.
The Chair recognizes that he went over the 5-minute rule.
And I am going to use a word that I don't use very often: I
will be a little more liberal on the time for each of the other
members, including you.
Go ahead, Mr. Keating, from Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you. Maybe we can do other rounds
too. I will try and stay within that timeframe.
But, Mr. Weiss, the gentleman that you interviewed in
Istanbul that fled ISIS, you must have asked him why
specifically he left. Could you enlighten us with that story?
Mr. Weiss. Sure. So he spent 11 months with ISIS, and he
said within the first 2 he wanted to leave. So he essentially
spent 9 months plotting his escape. Because the irony is, when
you are a member of amn al-dawleh, you have trained up the very
people who will be manning the checkpoints and the border guard
to interdict you if you try to flee. And it was sort of out of
a le Carre novel, the way he described all the preparation, the
obtaining of the false----
Mr. Keating. But why did he make that choice after 2
months?
Mr. Weiss. So he chose because he said the pervasive
climate of paranoia and lies that had been inculcated. Again,
he was in a town called al-Bab. I was in al-Bab in 2012. I
embedded with the Free Syrian Army when it took this town from
the Assad regime and I saw the life and the sort of civic
exuberance that was being displayed. I mean, 40 years of
totalitarian rule and all of a sudden they are a free people,
cleaning up the streets at night, having all-night parties and
discussions in the cafes. All of that was put asunder by ISIS
when they came in about 5 to 6 months later.
He said to me the sort of turning point moment was what he
saw at the farm. What he was referring to is, there was a
farmer who came to him and said, ``Abu Khaled, I run this olive
farm just north of al-Bab, and it is full of bodies. Every time
I till the soil, I turn up an arm, a leg, a foot. And,
obviously, this is Daesh doing this. Can you intervene?''
So Abu Khaled went to the emir of al-Bab--who drives a BMW,
by the way, because, as he put it, ``Alhamdulillah, the Islamic
State is very rich,'' and the emir said, ``No, this isn't us,
we don't know anything about it.''
Abu Khaled, a few weeks before, had witnessed the execution
of a guy that ISIS said was a spy for the coalition. He had
been dropping GPS devices, they accused him of, in al-Bab, the
better that coalition warplanes could target positions on the
ground. This guy was, as you can imagine, beheaded, and his
head was stuck on the pike in the center of al-Bab. He was very
distinctive because he was wearing an Adidas track suit, black
and white, I think the colors were.
The next time Abu Khaled went to the farm, he saw the body
of this man. So he went back to the emir and he said, ``Come
on, this is you, this is your doing. This is your sort of
makeshift burial ground.'' A day later the emir comes back to
him and says, ``Ask the farmer how much he wants for his
farm.'' Abu Khaled said, ``If you open the Islamic State daily
newspaper, it is like reading Pravda or it is like reading
Syrian state media.''
Mr. Keating. Why did he initially join?
Mr. Weiss. He said because he thought that the United
States was behind Bashar al-Assad and Iran and Russia.
Essentially he bought into the ISIS geopolitical narrative,
there was this conspiracy.
Mr. Keating. Now, his story about why he left, do we have
enough people telling that story?
What do you think, Mr. Sanderson.
Mr. Sanderson. Congressman, I wanted to relate a story--to
answer your question very quickly, no, of course we do not have
enough people telling that story, certainly not in comparison
to the numbers within ISIS that are telling their story.
The 16-year-old that I interviewed on the Turkish-Syrian
border joined ISIS in January of this year. He was the youngest
of 21 children. His father died a year ago. He was in ISIS for
2 months. And the reason he left was because within 2 weeks of
entering the training program ISIS vectored these young
recruits against an attacking force that was coming to seize a
salt mine that ISIS controlled. ISIS made up a story about who
those attackers were, said they were bandits, criminals, et
cetera. It was the Nusra Front.
And this young man and his friend left because of the lies
that ISIS told about the Nusra Front, which is very popular
among many Syrians for its high content of Syrian leadership
and for its direct attacks again the Syrian Government. So he
left because of the lies that ISIS had told him and the other
young recruits who just after 2 weeks of training were put into
action against the Nusra Front.
Mr. Keating. So it is very difficult to get out.
Mr. Sanderson. Oh, yeah.
Mr. Keating. How common is it that they are killing--I know
they take people's passports usually right off the bat if they
are coming from----
Mr. Weiss. It is actually a recent phenomenon.
Mr. Keating. Do they kill a lot of these people if they try
to escape, make examples of them?
Mr. Weiss. Oh, yes. Well, there is the recent example of
two Bosnian girls from Vienna had gone over. One of them
recently tried to escape and they bludgeoned her to death. And
it is not because they care that they are losing members of the
caliphate. It is because they don't want these people to come
to the West or come out and essentially blow the whistle and
expose them for what they are.
There is another vulnerability that doesn't get enough
attention here, and actually there is precedent for it because
the same thing happened in Iraq. Zarqawi had always presented
the insurgency in Iraq, at least the al-Qaeda in Iraq
insurgency, as a national--well, essentially one made up of
native Iraqis. That wasn't true. Remember, the tip of the spear
for the insurgency, the bulk of it was Iraqi, but the tip of
the spear were foreigners, Jordanians, Saudis, whatever. He
attempted to Iraqize the franchise because he realized that
Iraqis were now seeing two forms of occupation, one by the
Americans and the coalition, the other by al-Qaeda in Iraq.
The same thing is happening today in Syria. ISIS is run by
Iraqis at the top, including, again, members from Saddam's
regime, and everybody who is being appointed to serve in the
amn'ni, or the amn'niate, which is their security apparatus,
they are all non-Syrians. So if you are a 60-year-old woman
living in al-Bab and you have lived there your whole life and
all of a sudden a 25-year-old Tunisian comes over and says,
``Cover your face, go to mosque, what are you doing outside the
house without a husband or an escort, go to mosque,'' this is
like having foreign rule, foreign occupation.
That is a, I hate the word ``narrative,'' but I am going to
use it anyway, that is a narrative that has not been
emphasized. Syrians are very nationalistic, especially the ones
that have zero Islamist or jihadist ideology, and they feel now
that they are chafing under the kind of occupation that,
frankly, is coming from people that they have never met and
have countries they have never even be to. We need to emphasize
that fact. It is a way to sort of increase the resistance.
Mr. Keating. Thank you very much. I will yield back to our
new chair.
Mr. Rohrabacher [presiding]. The new chair? I have
succeeded. There I am.
Listen, thank you to the witnesses. And I will proceed with
my questioning and then to Mr. Higgins.
Let me note that I spent a lot of time in the Reagan White
House in the 1980s. I was with him for 7\1/2\ years. I was a
speechwriter, but also a special assistant to the President.
And one thing I noted, that Ronald Reagan took a lot of
criticism during the time period, but he ended the Cold War. No
one gives that credit to Herbert Walker Bush. They give the
credit to Ronald Reagan and justifiably so, because Ronald
Reagan prioritized what he wanted to accomplish. He prioritized
what we are going to do is we are going to eliminate our major
threat. What is our major threat? The Soviet Union isn't the
ultimate threat to the United States and the world today.
Unfortunately, it seems like we cannot support people today
who are killing the people who want to kill us, the people who
are the great threat, the greatest threat to the security of
the people of the United States and other Western countries,
unlike Ronald Reagan--we did work with some unsavory
characters, and we brought down the Soviet Union, and that was
the goal--because those other unsavory characters maybe at a
smaller level were not good people, but they at least were not
threatening to injure the people of the United States or other
parts of the free world.
Mr. Boot, I am sorry, but I am appalled at the Council on
Foreign Relations and what has been happening with the option
of allowing the Russians to play a major role in defeating
radical Islam, which is the greatest threat to the security of
the people of the United States. Russia is no longer the Soviet
Union and it is being treated as if it is still the Soviet
Union. And it is appalling to me when I hear people going out
of their way to say what Putin is thinking. So you don't think
that Putin is not there to destroy ISIL. How many people were
killed in that Russian airliner? Do you think that had anything
to do with his judgment? You don't give Putin that credit?
Mr. Boot. Well, with all due respect, Congressman, Putin
was in Syria before that airliner was blown up. And if you
actually look at the pattern of Russian air strikes, very few
of them are hitting ISIS-held areas. Most of them are hitting
areas held around Aleppo and so forth, which are held by
moderate opposition groups backed by the United States.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Does anyone else have any information?
Because the information I read is that is not true.
Mr. Weiss. Well, Congressman, if ISIS believes that Russia
is not hitting ISIS, I would consider that pretty much evidence
against interest. If you look at their latest propaganda
magazine, Dabiq, they actually laugh, they mock the Russians
and they mock us, and they say that the drunken Russian bear is
bombing here, there, and everywhere, confusing think tankers
and journalists.
In fact, their intervention is targeting the America-backed
Sahwa forces. That is to say, Sunni rebel groups that are
fighting ISIS, that is who Russia has been bombing. Reuters
conducted an investigation a few weeks ago, an independent one,
no government sponsorship, found four-fifths of the sorties had
been going after non-ISIS targets.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You guys are better read than I am on
this. But let me just say----
Mr. Weiss. Well, there is another point that doesn't get
enough attention as well.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have talked to several people from the
region. However, let me move--it goes from what you are saying
here, and that is--and by the way, I appreciate, you gave me a
briefing once, it was excellent, I might add.
Assad being this horrible, evil regime, the people who were
rising up against the Assad regime within Syria, did they have
any outside support from any Sunni-based governments in the
region? Of course they did.
Now, tell me this. Of those other governments that happen
to be friendly to us, do you think that if there was an
uprising that was sponsored by, let's say, Assad or someone
that they didn't like, that those regimes--do you think Qatar,
for example, if there is an uprising among those many, many
more non-Qatar citizens, were uprising and they were being
supported by somebody like Assad, do you think that they would
be less likely to commit atrocities against those people?
I think that--I am just--I will just posture, because there
is no doubt in my mind, I note that the Qatar people, they are
good people, but the fact is, if there was some type of a
Shiite-backed uprising among the people who live in Qatar, you
would probably have just as many thousands, or proportionately,
murdered in order to maintain that government.
And Assad has been portrayed as something different and
Putin is portrayed as something different. The fact is that
they are flawed. And right now, neither Assad nor Putin
threaten to murder thousands of Americans if they get their
chance. If a bomb goes off, a nuclear bomb goes of in
Philadelphia or Los Angeles, it is going to be a radical
Islamicist bomb and it is not going to be Putin.
Putin is out there trying to at least come to grips. And by
the way, what does he have to do with fighting, why is it he is
not there to destroy ISIL? How many ISIL soldiers come from
Chechnya, Mr. Boot?
Mr. Boot. I don't know. Some do. But there is certainly
evidence that Putin has looked the other way as people from the
Russian Caucasus have gone to join ISIS.
But if I could make a longer point----
Mr. Rohrabacher. I will let you make your point. But let me
just note the reports that I heard, there have 3,000 and 5,000
Chechnyans in ISIL. Now, don't tell me that what is Putin doing
there. They blow up his planes. They have people who are
murdering--these Chechnyans who are murdering Russians in
Russia.
Yes, Putin may be there and he is a flawed guy, he is a
thug, as everybody says, but just like Ronald Reagan, we had to
deal--look, we made an alliance with China during the Cold War
in order to defeat the Soviet Union. We made a deal with the
Russians during World War II to defeat Hitler. That is great.
But right now, the Council on Foreign Relations and the people
who just can't get over the Cold War is over are basically
putting us at a great disadvantage to be working with somebody
who shares a common enemy.
Go right ahead and retort that, it is fine.
Mr. Boot. Congressman, if I thought that Putin was actually
going to intently fight ISIS, I would be all in favor of making
common cause with him. Unfortunately, what he is doing is he is
supporting Bashar Assad, who is the greatest recruiting tool
that ISIS ever had. As long as Bashar Assad is out there
dropping barrel bombs and killing people, what he is doing is
he is driving Sunnis into the arms of ISIS. That is why ISIS is
able to have a raison d'etre. That is why ISIS is able to
posture itself as the defender of the Sunnis in Syria against
the butchery committed by Assad, by Russia, by Iran, by
Lebanese Hezbollah, and all these other groups.
Mr. Rohrabacher. There was an uprising going on, and he was
very heavy-handed in trying to defeat that uprising, and there
is no doubt about it.
Mr. Boot. And he is still heavy-handed. And as long as he
continues slaughtering Sunnis, that gives ISIS a reason to
exist. There is a symbiotic relationship between the Iranian-
backed forces like Assad and the Sunni extremists on the other
side.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You expect the Saudis and the Qataris and
the others would be far more humane than what Assad was?
Mr. Boot. Well, they may not be. But they are not the ones
who are slaughtering 200,000 people at the moment.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right now. Right now they are. But you are
putting Assad in a different situation because he was
confronted with an uprising being sponsored by an outside
power.
Mr. Higgins, you may proceed.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Weiss, you were making a point during my colleague's
questioning that you said was important. Do you want to finish
it?
Mr. Weiss. You will have to remind me, Congressman, what
was the----
Mr. Higgins. You were talking about narrative and you were
talking about something that hadn't been talked a lot about.
Mr. Weiss. Oh, yes, the idea of foreign occupation, that
ISIS is essentially a new form of colonial rulership. That is
very powerful. A lot of Syrians, as I said, dislike being
governed and lorded over by people that come from other
countries.
If I may say, there is another element to this too. We have
done nothing, nothing substantive I should say, to really
demonstrate to Sunni Arabs that the United States has their
plight and their dispossession and ethnic cleansing and murder
to heart. A tweet by Samantha Power every now and then doesn't
cut it. This has to be backed by fire and steel. Max is 100
percent right.
I actually disagree with Max on one point, though. I think
Syria is exactly the place to start. Demographically speaking,
it is a Sunni-majority country. That means that, as I
mentioned, as everyone here has said, the very constituents you
need to turn against Sunni Taqfirism or Sunni jihad are right
there, and they are willing and they are able, but they face a
lack of credible alternatives.
And here is the thing that sort of gets me. You know, the
U.S. puts out this policy of train and equip, right? We are
going to create essentially a Sunni--actually it was Sunni-
Turkman, not even Sunni-Arab at the start--but a Sunni
counterterrorism proxy force, send them in with packs and M-4
rifles and white pickup trucks, and have them fight not only
ISIS and make them forswear in a piece of paper that they will
not use the weapons and the training they received to go after
any of the other manifold groups, which, as Max also pointed
out, are responsible for the vast, overwhelming majority of
casualties and fatalities.
A study that was done recently found that between January
and July of this year, Assad killed seven times the number of
people that ISIS has killed. For every atrocity ISIS has
committed, Assad has done one better, including burning people
alive.
We sent them in with a target painted on their back, right?
And it was no surprise that some of them defected to al-Qaeda
or sold their weapons.
Now, the one program that is being done with a marked
degree of success is the one that nobody wants to talk about,
which is the clandestine CIA program to back 39 rebel militias
in Syria, provide them, through Saudi Arabia, with TOW antitank
missiles. Putin has gone after them expressly, and I know it
because I talked to the rebel commanders from those units. And
still they hold the line. They have made, as they put it, a
graveyard of Syrian tanks in Homs and the al-Ghab plain.
Nobody wants to talk about this because this is the one
thing we are doing to actually give the constituents, the
indigenous people of Syria, some incentive to work with us.
They want to fight Assad first, and they want to fight him for
a very pragmatic, simple reason: He is the one killing them.
Mr. Higgins. You were embedded with the Free Syrian Army?
Mr. Weiss. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. How long ago?
Mr. Weiss. In 2012.
Mr. Higgins. How do you define the Free Syrian Army?
Mr. Weiss. In my personal experience, the people that I
saw, they protected me. I did a tour of the entire city with
them. I talked to innumerable activists. I mean, I am a
journalist for a long time. I can tell when I am being gamed or
somebody is giving me a statement that is coerced or not 100
percent truthful.
Mr. Higgins. Did you use the number 39 units or militias?
Mr. Weiss. This was way before that program was
inaugurated, or I should say before the program gained enough--
--
Mr. Higgins. In your experience, is the Free Syrian Army or
was the Free Syrian Army a cohesive, monolithic group?
Mr. Weiss. At the time, there were a lot of different rebel
units, but they had a common objective. Now, they were
insufficiently backed. You want to talk about external support.
Look, here are the facts, I have been to Turkey many times.
All these weapons have been pouring in from Libya, Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, you name it. But they sit in warehouses.
And you have Western intelligence officers going through the
warehouses with a manifest saying, ``Yes, you can have this.
No, you can't have that.'' The price of bullets in Syria went
up astronomically when the insurgency was in its second or
third year, okay? They fire their ammunition. They run out.
Then they have to come back and say, ``Mother, may I,'' to get
more. All the while they are facing down fighter jets, barrel
bombs, Scud missiles, sarin gas.
You are asking these rebels--Derek Harvey, a former Defense
Intelligence Agency analyst who anatomized the Iraqi
insurgency, put it best: We are asking them to fight five
different enemies at once with slingshots. And you wonder why
they have descended into chaos or, in many respects, defected
over to al-Qaeda or over to ISIS.
Mr. Higgins. We spent, the United States spent about $\1/2\
billion, about $500 million, trying to train and equip a
moderate fighting force that was vetted through the United
States of Free Syrian Army representatives. Was that inaccurate
or insincere?
Mr. Weiss. Well, that was the program I referred to,
Pentagon's train and equip. As computer programmers say, the
bug was a feature, not an accident, right? The
conceptualization of the program was completely flawed. The
raison d'etre of all Syrian rebels is to go after the regime,
not ISIS. They say, ``We will get to ISIS eventually, they are
our enemy.''
There is another program. We say that these groups were
vetted. Yeah, the rank-and-file soldiers were vetted. But guess
what, I have done deep reporting on this and I helped bury the
program because it was so flawed and tainted. The commanders,
the brigade commanders we were sending in to lead these guys
had not been properly trained or vetted. And it is any wonder
that they took our materiel and sold it to al-Qaeda?
So this is the program that, frankly, I opposed from the
very beginning, because you have to understand the culture, you
have to understand what these people are going through.
Mr. Higgins. You make a good point.
Mr. Boot, I just wanted to, on Iraq, you have advocated for
a Sunni Regional Government that would be autonomous, protected
by its own militia, and guaranteed by the United States. You
also suggested in your testimony the 30,000 or 40,000 U.S.
troops on the ground in Iraq to fight with Sunnis and that we
would train and arm the Sunnis in Iraq.
As you know, the United States spent $24 billion, $25
billion training an Iraqi Army of some 240,000 fighters,
including security and police forces. That failed miserably.
How does this work logistically? And how does that affect the
relationship if, in fact, it matters, with the Shia-led
government.
Mr. Boot. Well, I would say, based on my personal
experience on numerous trips to Iraq going back to 2003, that
our train and equip program for the Iraqi Security Forces was
actually working pretty well until we completely pulled out in
2011. And what happened after that is that the Shiite sectarian
regime in Baghdad completely corrupted and perverted the
security forces, which is why when ISIS rose up and struck, the
security forces fell apart.
At the moment, what we have been doing basically is we have
been trying to pour new wine into old bottles. We have been
trying to provide support for the Iraqi Security Forces as if
they still exist in their old pre-2011 from. But the reality is
that they don't. They remain hopelessly compromised by the
Iranians and the Shiite sectarians who really run the regime
there. And most of the energy of the government has been poured
not into standing up nonsectarian Iraqi Security Forces, but
rather in creating these popular mobilization forces, which are
Shiite militias effectively under the control of Iran.
Now you hear from the regime in Baghdad that they don't
want U.S. troops in Iraq to fight ISIS. Well, of course they
don't want U.S. troop because that would interfere with Iranian
designs to dominate the Shiite heartland of Iraq.
Mr. Higgins. Let me ask you this. The name of Qasem
Soleimani is often invoked. He is a guy that clearly gave Nouri
al-Maliki his final term. He is a guy that has demonstrated
extraordinary influence with the Shia government with his
control of the Shia militias. He probably saved Bashar al-Assad
in Syria in the final hour by actually traveling there and
conducting ground forces on the ground.
You know, going in there and propping up the Sunnis by
promising or committing to a regional government, does that not
necessarily--I am not saying that--I am not defending him in
any way, shape, or form, the current government or the previous
government in Iraq, because I think that whole experiment has
been a huge, huge failure for a number of reasons. We have
empowered the very people that we are trying to push back. But
does that not necessarily sow the seeds of a new civil war
between Shia and Sunni in Iraq?
Mr. Boot. Well, you already have a civil war going on in
Iraq. What I am suggesting is to create a more durable balance
of power that will actually keep the peace. What I am
suggesting is that if we create, whether working through
Baghdad or directly on our own, if we create the Sunni Regional
Government that would be protected by its own Sons of Iraq
militia and ultimately by the guarantee of American air power
and American support, I think that could create a balance of
power, because essentially you would have the Sunnis in control
of the Sunni area, the Shiites in control of the Shiite area,
the Kurds in control of the Kurdish area, and you would have a
more peaceful situation of the kind that actually existed in
2011 before we left Iraq.
At the moment, of course, what you have is the most radical
and extreme Shiites in control of the Shiite areas, ISIS in
control of the Sunni areas, and the Kurds, fairly moderate
Kurds, in control of their own areas.
The bottom line is that the Sunnis have no reason to fight
ISIS if they think that ISIS is going to be replaced by the
kind of Shiite tyranny that they have known after 2011. You
have got to give them a reason to fight ISIS. And, basically,
the reason is you have to give them a political end state that
they would be satisfied with, and the only one that I could
foresee right now is some kind of autonomy, which is not going
to be easy to do.
And they are not going to trust us very well because they
feel like we abandoned them in 2011. But if we show that we are
willing to help them, if we are willing to put some troops on
the battlefield to work with them, and if we are willing to
keep troops long term in, let's say, the KRG, maybe in Anbar,
and somewhere else, I think that might give the Sunnis enough
confidence and might create a more stable end state under this
loose Federal structure in Iraq. I think, at this point, that
is really the only good bet that we have.
And simply continuing to support the Shiite sectarian
regime in Baghdad, as we are doing now, even sending them F-
16s, that doesn't make any sense because essentially what we
are doing is we are subsidizing the Iranian power grab in Iraq,
where our Air Force is basically acting as the air force for
the Iranian militias. That is not helping to defeat ISIS. That
is only helping to entrench Iran more deeply in Iraq.
Mr. Higgins. Just a final thought, Mr. Chairman. We have
been dealing with this issue, whether it is the Foreign Affairs
Committee, the whole committee, the subcommittee, joint
committees of Homeland Security, Foreign Affairs. And it is
like Tom Friedman used to say, he would go to the Middle East
and he would say, ``I have traveled this area, I have studied
it, I have written about it, it is all very clear to me now:
What a mess.''
But I think the point is there is a book by Marwan Muasher
called ``The Second Arab Awakening,'' and in it he argues that
the Middle East it a very pluralistic society. And Bashar al-
Assad in Syria is an Alawite, which is a variant of Shia, and
it is not that everybody supports him, it is that the minority
groups that gravitate to him are afraid that they will get
slaughtered if a Sunni government takes over in revenge.
And that is a big part of the problem in the Middle East.
So long as there is a zero-sum game, the sum will always be
zero. And unless and until minority rights are actually
respected and guaranteed in some kind of document, not even a
constitution or a preamble, whatever.
You know, I look at the situation in Northern Ireland,
although it is not perfect today, but you took two warring
factions as part of the Good Friday Accord and they both had to
denounce violence. You know, there was mutuality. They had to
take risks. Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein, his life was not
threatened from without, it was threatened from within because
they were moving away from a physical force tradition.
And I think until you have that kind of breakthrough with
real leaders that have a vision for Middle East peace, you are
going to have a continuation of this horrible situation from
which there are nothing but bad decisions for the United
States.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you for that insight.
Ms. Kelly.
Ms. Kelly. Since my day has started, it seems like I have
been in meetings dealing with this topic. And one thing that
came up was about Turkey and their questionable partnership,
are they really true partners. Another meeting I was in, they
spoke about how porous their borders are and a lot of things
are going through Turkey that are causing problems for the
United States and others.
What do you think that we can do to truly get them
committed to defeating ISIS, or what can NATO do, if you think
they aren't true partners or really committed?
Mr. Sanderson. Thank you, Congresswoman. I would support
your suggestion that they have not been true partners. From day
one, they have facilitated the movement of extremist fighters
through their border to fight Kurds and to fight the Assad
regime. Fighting the Assad regime is a good goal, but fighting
the Kurds has not been, and they are our best partner on the
ground.
They have tightened their borders a little bit, but they
still see these elements, these extremist Islamist fighters
coming in as doing their bidding against Kurds in particular.
They do have a big border, but they have allowed these
fighters, fighters I have interviewed, fighters that have been
treated in Turkish hospitals, and I have seen those medical
records and I have seen those fighters, they still ply the
borders from Turkey's side.
I do not know what we can do to turn the screws on them.
They seem to have an awful lot of leverage. The President has
publicly upbraided them for not doing all that they can. But we
take a lot of advantage from using the Incirlik Air Force Base
there. That is part of the deal we have with Turkey.
Unfortunately, I think they hold a lot of the cards. And as
powerful as the U.S. can be, in this area, the Turks are very
much a tier 1 actor and they can call a lot of the shots. But
they are not being nearly as helpful as they could be.
Ms. Kelly. That is very disappointing.
Anyone else have a comment?
Mr. Gartenstein-Ross. Congresswoman, thanks for the
question. I think it is excellent.
I think that Turkey has taken a very dark turn. In addition
to what Mr. Sanderson has said, I would point to two factors
that are worth looking into. One is Turkish charities that have
been supporting extremist factions throughout the world. There
is a lot of information on that. And the second thing is I
would look into recent U.N. delisting of extremists who were
hosted in Turkey, including Mohammed Islambouli, who, according
to open source reporting, is a high-level figure in the
Khorasan Group, which is associated with al-Qaeda.
I think that Turkey is not supporting ISIS. I think they
are supporting al-Qaeda factions. And that points to one other
thing that I think is worth raising. Mr. Sanderson referred
earlier, in the Q&A, to the 16-year-old he spoke to who left
ISIS because ISIS conscripted him to fight against Nusra. The
Nusra Front is the al-Qaeda affiliate. As Mr. Sanderson said,
the Nusra Front is very popular in Syria.
So while we wouldn't like it to be this way, dealing with
the problem set of al-Qaeda I think is actually even more
complex than dealing with the problem set of ISIS. And our
moderate rebels have been helping al-Qaeda to take ground. I
mean, this is something that I wish were not the case. But
since the Russian bombing started, U.S. officials have been
very open about that in the media. They have named areas where
moderate rebels were bombed, such as Idlib and Hama, and those
correlate with areas where Nusra has control, and Jaish al-
Fatah, which is the coalition it is a part of, but where it is
the major faction.
Now, I agree with what Mr. Weiss said, which is that if you
look at it from the rebel perspective, I don't think this makes
them terrible people. I mean, when you are faced with enemies
on all sides, you are going to find temporary marriages of
convenience.
The real question I have is, are we going to be able to
clean this up in some way? Or are we helping al-Qaeda to take
ground only to create another mess? I think it is something
that really deserves a hearing both with advocates, such as Mr.
Weiss, of arming the rebel factions and also those who are
opposed to it. Because what I see deeply disturbs me, and I
also think it is actually a violation of U.S. law.
Mr. Weiss. I agree with everything Daveed said, including
Turkey's dark turn. You will recall the U.S. Special Forces
raid that killed Abu Sayyaf, I think somewhat erroneously
referred to as ISIS' oil minister or CFO, some of the best
reporting done on the aftermath of that raid was done by a
friend of mine at the Guardian, Martin Chulov, who said the
intelligence that the U.S. took back from that compound has
very much implicated the Turkish Government in all kinds of
conversations and discussions with senior ISIS officials.
Turkish businessmen have been buying more oil from ISIS than
even Bashar al-Assad, who remains one of the chief financiers
of ISIS through the energy economy trade.
I think that this is exactly as Daveed said, let the
Islamists and the jihadists come in and let them be the
commandos if NATO doesn't want to have it. Assad will take it
by hook or by crook.
I have traveled the Syrian border from Turkey. I can give
you a funny anecdote or two. There was a native from Homs,
Syria, wearing a keffiyeh, who was stopped by the Turkish
Gendarmerie and questioned, interrogated for 20 minutes because
the guy didn't think he was Syrian. I went across, no problem.
So apparently I look more Syrian than someone from Homs.
Another journalist friend of mine who is Indian was
actually stopped once. He has been across that border two dozen
times. And the last time he was stopped and arrested, he
convinced the Turks that he was a Syrian refugee. I guess he
had dark skin. They gave him a refugee card. Now he can go back
and forth as he likes. He is a British journalist too, but from
India by heritage.
It is a sieve, that border, and it is a sieve not because
it is so difficult to invigilate, but because the Turks have
chosen to look the other way.
With respect to the rebels, I want to be very clear. David
Petraeus, not exactly a squish on radical jihadism, Sunni or
Shia, made a very controversial comment actually to the Daily
Beast, my publication, several months ago. He said, look, there
are elements within Jabhat al-Nusra, which is the official al-
Qaeda franchise in Syria, that we can peel away to work with
us.
Now, this was remarkable for two reasons. Number one, you
will recall the awakening/surge period in Iraq. The only group
that the U.S. refused to work with in the Sunni insurgency
constellation was al-Qaeda in Iraq. There were every other
group, whether nationalist, Islamist, or even, frankly,
borderline jihadists, who had been on Tuesday bombing U.S.
compounds or military checkpoints or forward operating bases,
on Wednesday receiving U.S. weaponry and close air support
because they had become essentially a paramilitary squad
hunting and killing al-Qaeda in Iraq.
A same dynamic exists today in Syria. Now, Daveed is right,
rebel groups that we would consider, quote/unquote, moderate or
nationalistic or at least not so bad in the Islamist
orientation, work cheek by jowl with Nusra or work at an
operational tactical capacity with Nusra because they think
Nusra, frankly, most of them are Syrians, they are not so bad,
and, yes, the West demonizes them all as al-Qaeda, but we know
a lot of these people.
There are interviews. I can acquaint every member on this
panel with many of them. People who went from the anti-Assad
protest movement to some to FSA battalion to Jabhat al-Nusra to
ISIS, then defecting. What does that tell us? Not everybody is
born a die-hard ideologue. Not everybody who is a jihadi
yesterday will remain one tomorrow. There is a lot of human
capital that can still be worked with.
But, again, you have to be persuasive. You have to show the
Sunni Arabs of that country that we have their back, that their
plight matters to us. And right now, they think the opposite is
true. And that, ultimately, in addition to Assad's depravity
and the IRGC's depravity and Lebanese Hezbollah's depravity, is
the greatest recruitment drive for ISIS.
Mr. Boot. If I could just jump in and make one fast point.
I think we have really been hurting ourselves. We have been in
this cycle in Syria since 2011 when we say, ``Well, we are
concerned about who the rebels are, we are concerned that some
of the rebels are radical Islamists, so we don't really want to
help them, we are going to stand back and watch what happens.''
Well, what happens is exactly what my colleagues have been
describing, which is that when we are not doing more to help
the moderates, that only helps the extremists, because the
extremists find support from other countries, from outside
backers, what have you, whether it is Turkey, Qatar, whoever,
winds up backing the more radical elements and those are the
ones that get in power.
And then a few years down the road we are saying, ``Oh, my
gosh, where are the moderate rebels? They don't exist
anymore.'' Well, what do you expect would happen if we are not
providing the same kind of backing to the moderates that other
groups are providing to the extremists?
But to underline the point that Michael has just made, and
I think it is an important point, which is that a lot the
people who are with the al-Nusra Front or who are with ISIS are
not necessarily ideologues, they are not necessarily fanatical
jihadists, they are just opportunists looking for a way to arm
themselves and to defend themselves against the Bashar al-Assad
regime. If we can offer them an alternative way to do that
which doesn't involve the imposition of this extreme Salafist
brand of Islam on Syria, which is not very popular with
ordinary Syrians--I mean, ISIS is out there punishing people
for smoking. I mean, if you travel in this part of the world,
everybody smokes. This is not a popular position to take.
So people are not embracing groups like ISIS because they
love the ideology. They are embracing it because this is the
only way they can survive. But if we can offer them a different
way to survive, I think you will see that a lot of these
opportunists will leave the ranks of the al-Nusra Front, will
leave the ranks of ISIS just as quickly as they left the ranks
of the Taliban in the fall 2001. When we started fighting
against Taliban, all of a sudden all this formidable support
that the Taliban had dissolved within a matter of months
because people decided that was no longer the winning side.
Unfortunately, at the moment, we have not convinced anybody
that our side is the winning side.
Mr, Kelly. I am sure my time is up.
Mr. Poe [presiding]. I want to thank all the gentlemen.
I would like each member that wishes to make some brief
closing comments. We will start with the ranking member.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you.
We have just scratched the surface of all these issues, but
it was important to do because I think it demonstrated how
complex this is. And simplistic solutions that some people
offer can be counterproductive.
One of the dynamics I learned, and I don't have an answer,
I think in hearings like this sometimes you walk away with more
questions, which is good. But the narrative that if we are just
there and have more of a military presence on the ground that
suddenly Sunni Arabs are going to feel we have their back and
they are going to all of a sudden come up in arms and join us,
I don't think it is that simple, based on what Mr. Weiss was
talking about. There are other alternatives besides us, like
al-Nusra. They are there. And it is not that simple.
I will leave one thought that we didn't get into that I
think, with all of the complexities of what will be challenges,
there is one thing that we can really--not us, but our allies
in Europe can do--they can start taking passenger name records
for their own security. They can start checking more than 30
percent of the people at the Schengen exterior border.
I know there are different laws and different privacy laws
in those countries. Yet, I would hope that in the wake of the
terrible tragedy, the second terrible tragedy in France, that
maybe those things can be changed. And they should be things
that change immediately. I hope that happens. At every
opportunity, I am going to continue to press my European
colleagues to do that. It has languished since 2013, the bill
to deal with the passenger name records.
So I hope they can move forward on this. They will help
their own security. I understand and respect their sovereignty.
But they also by making these changes help keep us more secure
here as well.
So I thank all of you for--this is a very good hearing and
all of you were great contributors to do that.
So I want to thank our witnesses and yield back.
Mr. Poe. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Rohrabacher from California, closing comments.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, thank you very much. And it has been
enlightening.
And, Mr. Boot, let me just suggest that I think your plan
for a Sunni Regional Government and that part of your plan is
good. It is excellent. It is probably the only, I would say,
real plan that I have heard thrown onto the table and it has a
lot of validity to it. So I hope that the powers that be will
take that seriously, and I will be talking about it myself,
although I am not a power that be, I am just here.
Let me ask you this. All over the Internet there is an
interview with General Wesley Clark, former, I believe, NATO
commander, who immediately after--a day or two after 9/11 went
to the Pentagon. And one of his generals he worked with over
his life visited him. And the general confided that they were
not, this is a couple days after 9/11, they were consumed with
the plan to move forward with a forceful regime change against
Saddam Hussein in Iraq, not Afghanistan, but against Saddam
Hussein.
And then he came back about a couple weeks later, the same
general said, ``Well, are you still moving forward on Saddam
Hussein?'' And according to General Clark, he said, ``Well,
actually, my friend then said, no, we are now preparing to
forcefully remove from office the five or six governments in
the Middle East that are deemed to be pro-Russian, including
Libya, including Assad, including Saddam Hussein, et cetera.''
Now, have any of you heard that even after 9/11, that our
Government was targeting its activity on that type of--for that
type of a mission, to eliminate, basically regime change for
those regimes that had been close to Russia during the Cold
War?
Mr. Sanderson. No, Congressman.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You haven't heard? Okay. So have you heard
Wesley Clark's statement on this? No one has heard it.
I would suggest that you--I am not--listen, Wesley Clark
may be making it up. I doubt if a man of his stature would make
this up. But I would suggest you take a look at it.
And with that said, one last point on Assad, and that is I
know these players. I have never met the son Assad. I did meet
his father once a long, long time ago. And Assad in those days
was known as the guy who protected Christians in that part of
the world. But I know the different players. I don't know one
player there in the Middle East that if their government was
being confronted with an uprising that was being supported by a
Shiite government, that that government wouldn't be just as
brutal as what Assad has been in suppressing his regime.
It is okay, listen, I want to say all of you gave me some
good insights today. And I remember, as I say, Mr. Weiss gave
me a personal, how do you say, briefing one time and it was
excellent. All of you did an excellent job. Thank you for
actually giving us something to think about.
Mr. Poe. The Chair will recognize the gentleman from New
York.
Mr. Higgins. Dr. Gartenstein-Ross, you had indicated in
your opening statement that there is a need to challenge the
ISIS narrative of strength, and that ISIS has vulnerabilities
and we have to make those vulnerabilities work against them. Do
you want to elaborate?
Mr. Gartenstein-Ross. Yes. So their key vulnerability, the
one that actually holds the potential to completely reverse the
ISIS' brand, is the territoriality aspect of their mission.
When they declared the caliphate, one of the things that they
had to do was maintain a legitimate caliphate. If their
caliphate reaches the point where it is nonviable, then they
have a lot of explaining to do to their constituents.
A second thing is they have a narrative that has rested so
much on strength. That is why they don't have a problem burning
men alive, drowning them in swimming pools, and putting it on a
video, beheading people on video, talking selfies with severed
heads. It is a narrative of strength. It works while they are
winning.
We saw a complete brand reversible previously with al-Qaeda
in Iraq, which was very similar--which ISIS was born out of--
very similar to ISIS. Back in the 2005 to 2007 period, they
were one of the strongest players. They were the dominant force
in Anbar province. They committed massive atrocities. And then
when they started to lose, suddenly the narrative shifted from
one of strength to one of them having overplayed their hands.
Al-Qaeda, in fact, views AQI's loss as devastating to their
organization. They have been trying to rebrand themselves ever
since.
In terms of their narrative of strength, they have at times
exaggerated their victories in ways that they have gotten our
media to echo. They claimed falsely that they controlled the
city of Derna in Libya, something we now know definitively was
not true, but CNN, BBC, and other major outlets reported that
they controlled Derna when they actually didn't. They have
experienced four major reversals in Africa, the most important
of which is the Algerians basically wiping out the entirety of
the ISIS branch in their country. They also got kicked out of
Derna by the Derna Mujahideen Shura Council. They also had
their defector organization from a militant organization called
Al-Mourabitoun experience significant losses at the hands of
the al-Qaeda leader Mokhtar Belmokhtar, who went after them
ruthlessly. And they have experienced significant losses at the
hands of Shabaab's internal security apparatus as they have
tried to establish a presence there.
The point being, they have a lot of losses that people just
aren't aware of. And I think that one of the key things our own
information operation should do is focus on this narrative of
strength.
Now, right now doing so will not be particularly helpful,
right? They just executed the Paris attacks, the Sinai attack.
They are in a position of strength right now, regardless of
their loss of Sinjar and other territorial losses. But there
have been ebbs and flows for ISIS. And right now they are at a
period that is quite good for them. It is not necessarily going
to last, and we need to focus on shattering their narrative of
strength.
Mr. Poe. I do want to thank you once again. Fascinating,
depressing. And I think it is incumbent upon us, Members of
Congress, work with the administration, that we look at the big
picture of what is taking place with ISIS, the growth, and then
have a response, a military response partially, a political
response, and important also that we understand the
consequences of every act and failure to act. What is the long-
term consequence of what we do as a Nation regarding ISIS, how
it affects not just us but the whole chaos in the Middle East.
I think that is a big job ahead of us.
And I appreciate, personally, and the committee appreciates
your insight specifically about what is really taking place in
the Middle East.
Thank you very much. The subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:35 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
