- EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR EUROPE AND EURASIA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2017 BUDGET
PROPOSAL FOR EUROPE AND EURASIA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE, EURASIA, AND EMERGING THREATS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 9, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-167

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-380PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2016

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats

DANA ROHRABACHER, California, Chairman
TED POE, Texas                       GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ms. Alina Romanowski, Coordinator of U.S. Assistance to Europe
and Eurasia, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S.
Department of State............................................     4
Mr. Daniel Rosenblum, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Central
Asia, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, U.S.
Department of State............................................    19
The Honorable Thomas Melia, Assistant Administrator, Europe and
Eurasia Bureau, U.S. Agency for International Development......    30
Ms. Ann Marie Yastishock, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for Asia, U.S. Agency for International Development............    42

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Ms. Alina Romanowski: Prepared statement.........................     7
Mr. Daniel Rosenblum: Prepared statement.........................    21
The Honorable Thomas Melia: Prepared statement...................    33
Ms. Ann Marie Yastishock: Prepared statement.....................    44

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    62
Hearing minutes..................................................    63

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2017
BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR EUROPE AND
EURASIA

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 9, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dana Rohrabacher
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I call to order the Europe, Eurasia, and
Emerging Threats Subcommittee for this afternoon's hearing on
the administration's budget proposal.
For the coming fiscal year the President has asked that
Congress appropriate $50 billion for international affairs
programs. Over $900 million has been requested for programs in
the geographic jurisdiction of this subcommittee. This amount
is much greater than what was sought just a few years ago, and
I take this increased level of spending as an indication of our
Government's renewed focus on the region, especially in Eastern
Europe.
Increasing our efforts in that part of the world to grow
diplomatic links and improve prosperity is a good thing. Yet
let me note that we are currently $19 trillion in debt, and we
have added $1 trillion to that since this same hearing was held
last year. And every dollar we use to help people of foreign
countries places that much more of an additional burden on the
backs of the American taxpayers and their children.
All the government programs should meet a high standard,
but foreign assistance in particular, if it is to be given at
all, must meet rigorous standards of accountability. Congress
has a duty to scrutinize the President's request to make sure
that it is responsible and that it properly supports our
Nation's priorities.
During my time in Congress I have participated in many
hearings on assistance programs. I have always been proud of
the generosity of the American people. They are willing to lend
a hand to less fortunate people whom they have never met. That
is certainly an admirable part of the American character. But
at some point generosity and responsibility have to go hand in
hand. I have grown increasingly mindful to the limits of what
America can afford and of what assistance dollars can actually
provide.
Today, we will discuss the effects of the ongoing war in
Ukraine and the migration crisis and other factors that play in
Europe. We will review our efforts and how we are coordinating
with other international donors.
Lastly, let me note there is a grave distinction between
humanitarian assistance and development aid. Of course we
should be ready to respond to natural disasters, earthquakes,
floods, and the like. However, development funds can't work if
recipient countries do not undertake sound economic reforms.
The role of government assistance is not to replace private
investment. Private investment has to go hand in hand or
eventually we will fail to accomplish our goals.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions and extraneous material
for the record. Hearing none, I so order.
And with that, I turn to my ranking member, Mr. Gregory
Meeks, for his opening statement.
Mr. Meeks. I want to thank you, Chairman Rohrabacher. Thank
you very much for, first of all, for holding this hearing to
provide us an opportunity to examine the administration's 2017
budget request and our Government's ability to execute our
strategy in the region.
When discussing our fundamental strategy for a Europe
whole, free, and at peace, my attention is immediately drawn to
the ongoing war in the Ukraine and in the country's struggle to
reform its political economy. And while Russia continues to
play a disruptive role in the region, I cannot stress enough
the importance of the countries that are not in the spotlight
in today's news cycle.
Europe and Eurasia is, after all, a diverse region in terms
of levels of political and economic development and of cultural
and historical background. It has been a difficult year in our
subcommittee's region as the rise of populism, migration, and
acts of terror have put additional strain on an already limited
budget. I am convinced that the work of our diplomats and aid
workers in the field ensure that America's interests are being
protected while bringing peace and prosperity to the region.
The overall budget reflects a particularly urgent demand
that, frankly speaking, may require more resources, in my
estimation, when 2017 arrives. I am referring to the situation
in Ukraine and the economic tightrope the government is
currently walking. Yes, the reform of the economy must be done
by the Ukrainians themselves following successive governments'
failure to reform. But the new Ukrainian Government will never
be able to meet the rightful demands of its citizens without
the West's economic and political support. With a closing
political window, I want to make sure that we help a committed
government get reform right.
Not considering the Ukraine portion of the budget, however,
we are left with a relatively small budget given the myriad of
concerns. A few weeks ago, this subcommittee hosted a lively
hearing on progress and challenges in Turkey. Since the
hearing, we have witnessed additional turmoil within our NATO
allies' borders, not to mention the continuing humanitarian
disaster in Syria.
This is all related to the migration issue in Europe, which
is of tremendous concern to me. Their path through the Balkans
or Mediterranean is fraught with danger. Yet integration into
European society can also be very difficult.
All of this is to say that there is plenty of urgent work
to be done in this region in coordination with our EU partners.
Yet, I ask, is the EU still an attractive enough goal for the
Western Balkan countries and Turkey?
Meanwhile, in Central Asia we face similar problems, but
with different variables. As the Russian economy reels,
citizens feel the combined effects of low oil prices,
corruption, a nonmodernized economy and Western sanctions. As a
result, scores of migrant laborers, many of them men, are
returning home to Central Asia. They are not only to deal with
the local economy's reliance on remittances as a significant
source of income, but the economies may not be able to absorb
the influx of labor. In these countries, having frustrated
portions of society with nothing they can do to support their
families, people will look toward more drastic options to
express their despair.
And finally, in the Caucasus, where USAID has been active
in various programs in the diverse region, I would like to hear
how the 2017 budget aims to address the problems that seem
increasingly difficult. I am referring to the backsliding of
democracy and significant flare-ups in so-called frozen
conflicts.
As EU and NATO memberships become either less attractive or
attainable goals in the medium term, our assistance there
becomes that much more important. I realize that these
conflicts are incredibly complicated and will not be solved in
a day or two or even tomorrow. But I am a believer in diplomacy
and would like to encourage dialogue through organizations like
the OSCE.
In conclusion, I look forward to discussing the proposed
2017 budget with our four colleagues here from the State
Department and USAID. It is my goal as ranking member of this
subcommittee to challenge, nudge, and encourage you all to make
sure our dollars are being used to their fullest potential in a
diverse region that is so important to our economic and
political interests.
Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Meeks.
And today we have four people whose opinion on these issues
are really significant. You are people we trust in your
expertise enough to be overseeing these programs. And we are
anxious to hear your views. And let me just note, we are not
anxious to hear them more than 5 minutes per person. And if you
could sort of put the rest in the record and condense it to 5
minutes, that would be very helpful.
Unfortunately, there may be a vote between now and the
questions and answers. Let's hope we can get the witnesses
through by that vote.
First we have--and, again, with a name like Rohrabacher, I
always forgive everybody for mispronouncing it, so please
forgive me if I am mispronouncing your name--Alina Romanowski.
Is that it?
Ms. Romanowski. It is actually Alina.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Kalina.
Ms. Romanowski. Alina.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Alina. Got it.
Ms. Romanowski. Romanowski was perfect.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Got it. Okay.
And Alina is a State Department coordinator for U.S.
assistance to Europe and Eurasia. And in that role she
coordinates our assistance programs across multiple State
Department bureaus and government agencies. Previously served
as deputy assistance administrator to USAID's Middle East
Bureau and held senior positions in the Bureau of Educational
and Cultural Affairs.
Next we have Daniel Rosenblum. Got it. He is the deputy
assistant secretary of state for Central Asia. From 2008 to
2014 he served as the coordinator for U.S. assistance to Europe
and Eurasia. Before that he held numerous positions of
responsibility within the State Department before joining the
executive branch as a legislative assistant to the executive
branch right here on Capitol Hill. All right.
Then Ms. Ann Marie--tell me.
Ms. Yastishock. It is Yastishock.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Yastishock. Got it. The USAID
assistance administrator for the Asia Bureau. She is a career
senior foreign service officer who has worked on behalf of our
Government around the world overseeing programs focused on
building the rule of law, democracy, and governance. Her
postings included Burma, Georgia, and Ukraine. Wow. That is a
very tough--three tough assignments.
Then Mr. Thomas Melia. Right. Got it. Serves as USAID
assistant administrator for Europe and Eurasia. He was
confirmed in that role just this past December. Before then he
served as deputy assistant secretary of state in the Bureau of
Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. Prior to joining the State
Department he worked for Freedom House, the National Democratic
Institute, as well as here on Capitol Hill for then-Senator
Patrick Moynihan.
Thank you all.
And we will start at this end, and you may proceed, Ms.
Romanowski.

STATEMENT OF MS. ALINA ROMANOWSKI, COORDINATOR OF U.S.
ASSISTANCE TO EUROPE AND EURASIA, BUREAU OF EUROPEAN AND
EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Romanowski. Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking Member Meeks,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here
today and for your personal investment in supporting our
efforts to expand a Europe whole, free, and at peace, and a
safer, more open Central Asia.
Since I last appeared before this subcommittee, our
partners in Europe, Eurasia and Central Asia have made progress
in key areas supported through our assistance. In Ukraine,
Prime Minister Groysman raised gas prices to meet IMF
requirements and passed critical reforms to strength judicial
independence, shrink and modernize government bureaucracy, and
reform the energy sector, which significantly limits the use of
Gazprom as a political lever.
In Moldova, we helped businesses move out from under
Russia's trade barriers and toward free markets in the West.
In Georgia, our support to populations around the
Administrative Boundary Lines has strengthened local economies
and created jobs.
And in Central Asia, civil society in the Kyrgyz Republic
successfully pushed officials there to reject a draft foreign
agent law.
While the success of our assistance is significant, the map
of a free, democratic, Europe, Eurasia, and Central Asia
remains incomplete. We continue to grapple with corruption,
backsliding on democracy, suppression of media and civil
society, ethnic tension, and protracted conflicts across the
region. Given these challenges, your increases to the budget
for this region have allowed us to meet urgent needs in
countering immediate threats and helping countries move toward
more prosperous futures.
Our request for 2017 for the Europe/Eurasia region is $787
million, and for Central Asia it is $164 million.
Today I will focus on Europe and Eurasia and my colleague
Dan Rosenblum will cover Central Asia.
On Europe, we align our request with four strategic
objectives. First, we are committed to supporting the sovereign
choice of countries to determine their own political and
economic destinies. That struggle is vividly illustrated in
Ukraine where Russia has sought to stymie its democratic
rebirth at every turn.
Since the crisis began, the U.S. Government has committed
over $1 billion in assistance for Ukraine. This includes over
$600 million in security assistance, over $111 million for
humanitarian efforts, and about $10 million for U.S. advisers.
We have also provided the Ukrainian Government with two $1-
billion loan guarantees and signed a third agreement on June 3.
To keep Ukraine's positive progress on track, we have requested
$295 million for Ukraine, which will support the next phase of
its anticorruption reforms.
Like Ukraine, we are also assisting Georgia and Moldova to
pursue clean, democratic governance and closer ties with the
European Union. Funding for Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine makes
up 56 percent of our Fiscal Year 2017 request.
Of course, Europe as a whole remains susceptible to malign
Russian influence and its dependence on Russian energy leaves
it particularly exposed. Energy diversification continues to be
a key component of our strategy. In the Baltics and Central
Europe, for example, critical projects have reduced energy
vulnerability, including the opening of new LNG terminals in
Lithuania and Poland.
Our request for the Balkans includes about $154 million to
help these countries complete their democratic journeys,
integrate with Europe, and reduce their vulnerabilities to
external pressures.
With respect to our second objective, to combat corruption
and build rule of law and accountable governance, our request
will support independent judiciaries, increase government
transparency, promote e-governance, and empower civil society.
Toward our third objective, we are working to reverse the
backsliding on democracy and attempts to close the space for
political pluralism and public discourse throughout the region.
Our request includes about $232 million for democracy programs.
Regarding our fourth objective, U.S. assistance is playing
an important role in addressing serious challenges to peace and
stability across this region and within our own country. Our
request includes $15 million for the European Security
Assistance Fund to help increase the defense capacity of key
allies and partners, including $3 million for countering
violent extremism in the Balkans.
We must not forget, however, the importance of building
bridges between people. In Russia in particular, we will
continue to support direct engagement between Russians and
Americans.
For 25 years our assistance to this region has been leading
the way in tearing down walls, building lasting connections
between peoples, and improving the lives of millions. Our
request has been designed with today's tough budget climate in
mind. We are committed to working diligently and effectively
with the resources provided by the American people in the
service of our values and our national interest throughout the
region.
I will now turn to my colleague Dan Rosenblum to detail our
Central Asia request. I look forward to your questions, and
thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Romanowski follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

STATEMENT OF MR. DANIEL ROSENBLUM, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR CENTRAL ASIA, BUREAU OF SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIAN AFFAIRS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Rosenblum. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Meeks, Mr.
Weber, thank you very much for the invitation to testify today.
And I ask that the full text of my statement be included in the
record.
The U.S. has two fundamental national security interests in
Central Asia. The first goes back to the breakup of the Soviet
Union when the U.S. set out to support the effort by the
peoples of Central Asia to establish independent sovereign
states free from undue external interference or intimidation.
Our second primary interest is the stability of these
sovereign and independent nations. We seek to prevent violence
and the emergence of conditions that could result in states
becoming havens for terrorist groups hostile to the United
States.
Those two key national security interests can best be
achieved, we believe, by promoting security, prosperity, and
good governance. That is the best recipe for long-term
stability and for maintaining independence. And that is exactly
the recipe supported by this budget request.
Let me briefly review what we are doing in each of those
three areas.
Our security efforts focus on improving border security and
strengthening the capacity of local security forces to counter
terrorist threats. Our partners in Central Asia share our goal
of disrupting the finance and recruitment efforts of Daesh and
other international terrorist groups.
Of course our trainings and other security-related
engagements always emphasize that violent extremism must be
distinguished from peaceful acts of expression, assembly,
association and religious practice. We stress that stronger
protections for basic rights and freedoms will make the
countries of Central Asia safer and more secure and, by
extension, make us safer and more secure.
Our economic efforts are focused on promoting internal
market-oriented reforms and economic diversification, as well
as better connectivity among the Central Asian states and with
their neighbors.
Central Asia remains one of the least economically
integrated regions in the world. What is more, the region's
economy has been deeply affected over the past 2 years by
Russia's negative economic growth and by low global commodity
prices, leading to currency depreciation and a greatly
decreased flow of remittances being sent home by migrant
workers in Russia.
These trends make the economic programming in this request
more important than ever. We are promoting good governance in
Central Asia through a variety of programs, including technical
assistance to support internal reforms, and the strengthening
of independent media and civil society.
We also know it is essential to address the deeply rooted
problem of corruption, which not only contributes to potential
radicalization, but also harms the vitality of the private
sector.
The recent creation of the so-called C5+1 diplomatic
platform following Secretary Kerry's historic trip to all five
states in Central Asia last fall could allow for unprecedented
regional cooperation on issues of common concern. Secretary
Kerry and the five Central Asian foreign ministers agreed to
form working groups to address economic connectivity,
environmental challenges, and security concerns, especially the
threat of violent extremism. We are grateful that Congress
provided explicit funding in its Fiscal Year 2016 appropriation
to support this platform with concrete regional projects.
Mr. Chairman, I want to say with respect to Central Asia's
relations with its neighbors that we do not see political and
economic developments in Central Asia through the prism of a
zero-sum game. This is a region where everyone can benefit from
smarter security and trade that is inclusive, multidirectional,
and rules based. We think that when the countries of Central
Asia look around for partners, they can and should choose as
many as they wish.
Finally, we think it is very important to recall that these
are relatively young countries that are celebrating this year
only their first quarter century of independence. The U.S. was
one of the first countries to recognize the new states of
Central Asia, and since then our support for their sovereignty,
independence, and territorial integrity has been and will
continue to be ironclad.
If these governments can make a greater commitment to
accountable, transparent, and inclusive governance, the dynamic
nations of Central Asia stand to make tremendous gains in the
coming decades, gains that will not only contribute to security
and prosperity in the region, but also to our United States
security and prosperity.
I look forward to answering any questions members of the
subcommittee might have about specific countries or specific
programs, and I thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rosenblum follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE THOMAS MELIA, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, EUROPE AND EURASIA BUREAU, U.S. AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Melia. Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking Member Meeks,
Representative Weber, on behalf of the U.S. Agency for
International Development, I thank you for this opportunity to
testify today in support of the President's Fiscal Year 2017
request for Europe and Eurasia. I would ask that the full text
of my testimony be inserted in the record and I will just touch
on a few high points.
The Europe and Eurasia region is in part a tremendous
success story about U.S. assistance, providing case studies of
targeted aid that helped countries transition quickly to free
markets and democratic systems. Twelve countries have
transitioned from receiving U.S. assistance and are now
important U.S. partners and allies in the region and around the
world. Yet the region's transformation remains incomplete.
Progress is uneven in key areas, important achievements are at
risk, and in a few cases we are seeing regression.
In the Western Balkans, while there are key points of
progress--Croatia and Slovenia have entered the EU, Montenegro
and Serbia are in EU accession negotiations, and a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Kosovo entered
into force on April 1--other countries struggle.
In addition, a troublingly high number of Western Balkan
citizens have joined radical violent Islamic extremist groups
and traveled to conflict areas to join the fight. While the
numbers have decreased in recent months, Bosnia and Kosovo
remain among the top contributors, on a per capita basis, of
foreign fighters traveling from Europe to Syria and Iraq.
Stagnant economic conditions and high levels of youth
unemployment, as well as Kosovo's continued isolation on the
world stage, provide ripe conditions for radicalization.
Through programs that help improve the economic prosperity of
these countries and promote good governance, USAID seeks to
address these drivers of violent extremism.
The President's combined State and USAID request for the
Balkans reflects a broad number of U.S. foreign policy
objectives. Collaboration with host governments is real and
significant in the Western Balkans, and U.S. aid and technical
advice is highly valued.
In Albania, our bilateral assistance strengthens the
country's justice sector, improves local governance, and helps
civil society serve as a watchdog.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina our diverse program addresses the
issue of radicalization. USAID initiated a 3-year program in
2015 that pilots new approaches to address youth
disenfranchisement and enhance opportunities for young people
to participate in community initiatives. This effort will be
implemented in six at-risk communities where there is evidence
that young people are being recruited as foreign fighters for
Syria and Iraq. This project provides psychosocial support to
youth deemed vulnerable to radicalization through trained and
experienced teams of psychologists.
In Kosovo, in addition to major efforts in energy security
and economic growth, USAID will continue to seek to move the
country closer to membership in the EU and to normalize
relations with Serbia. Our work in inter-ethnic dialogue
focuses at the grassroots community level by helping people
come together to recognize that their futures are intertwined.
In Serbia, our assistance focuses on strengthening
democratic institutions and the rule of law, reducing
corruption, enhancing democratic and economic inclusion,
supporting civil society, and increasing access to independent
information. With $2 million in Complex Crises Funds, USAID in
Serbia also launched a program to mitigate the impact of
migrants on local communities, which at its peak in 2015 was
seeing upwards of 5,000 migrants per day transiting through
Serbian municipalities. Just last month, I visited one such
refugee facility outside Belgrade run by the Vlade Divac
Foundation, where our assistance helps improve crisis response
coordination between the government and civil society service
providers.
The President's State/USAID request for Armenia,
Azerbaijan, and Georgia will address urgent issues in a fraught
region. In Armenia, our assistance will help alleviate
disproportionate economic dependence on Russia, integrate
Armenia into regional energy systems, and promote local
governance initiatives. In Azerbaijan, we continue to look for
opportunities to advance democratic and economic reforms and
support civil society despite significant restrictions on our
partners. In Georgia, we continue to work with the government
and independent actors in civil society and the media to ensure
that Georgia continues on a path to democracy and that the
gains achieved to date are sustained.
Finally, supporting Ukraine's comprehensive reform effort
remains one of the agency's top priorities and the President's
Fiscal Year 2017 State/USAID request will allow us to continue
that work. We will be building that out in partnership with
Prime Minister Groysman who is visiting Washington next week,
meeting with USAID Administrator Gayle Smith and other senior
administration officials.
Ukraine is fighting a war on two fronts. Externally,
Ukraine continues to combat Russia's aggressive actions. Our
support also requires that Ukraine continue to battle against
corruption, the internal enemy that has held Ukraine back for
well over two decades. The U.S. has provided more than $1.1
billion in foreign assistance to Ukraine since the crisis
began, and now also a third sovereign loan guarantee that was
signed on June 3. To support anticorruption efforts, USAID has
also deployed U.S. advisers and experts within several
Ukrainian ministries. We have also been active in providing
humanitarian assistance and addressing some of the mounting
public health crises in Ukraine.
In conclusion, I would just say that we must not forget
that the countries of Southeast Europe and the former Soviet
Union are still young states working to build political
institutions, regulatory and market frameworks, and
institutional competencies required to access the capital and
energy technology markets that will secure their futures. U.S.
assistance, mostly technical or advisory, is critical to
continued integration into the European and world systems. We
must recognize that Europe is being tested by the continued
flow of migrants and refugees, Russia's continued actions, and
the growing potential of violent extremism gaining traction in
the region. U.S. national security interests require sustained
engagement in this region now more than ever.
Thank you for your attention, and I will be glad to take
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Melia follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

STATEMENT OF MS. ANN MARIE YASTISHOCK, DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Yastishock. Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking Member Meeks,
and distinguished subcommittee members, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on USAID's role in advancing U.S.
foreign policy goals in Central Asia. Before I begin, I ask
that my full statement also be entered into the record.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So ordered.
Ms. Yastishock. Thank you.
The Fiscal Year 2017 budget request of $164.1 million for
foreign assistance in Central Asia reflects an increased
commitment to American engagement in this strategically
important region and is crucial to its success. Central Asia is
continually challenged by the influence of neighbors, broader
regional threats--such as the violent extremism that exerts an
increasing pull over a growing number of labor migrants--and
pressing development needs.
Our request furthers USAID's mission to end extreme poverty
and promote resilient democratic societies while also
countering Russian pressure in Central Asia through increased
funding to reduce dependence on Russia's economy and increased
access to objective local news. Our request supports efforts to
counter violent extremism by addressing its drivers with an
emphasis on assistance to labor migrants.
And the request supports USAID's efforts to address
pressing development challenges in three main areas. First,
increasing economic connectivity to create jobs and stronger
country-to-country ties; second, meeting urgent human needs of
global consequence; and, third, promoting stability through
accountable and inclusive governance.
First, on economic connectivity, offering little economic
opportunity at home, the countries of Central Asia are some of
the world's most dependent on remittances from abroad. To
reduce this massive flow of migrant labor and contribute to a
more stable, prosperous region, our assistance is encouraging
domestic economic policy reforms that promote trade, attract
investment, and create jobs. Under the New Silk Road and C5+1
initiatives, we are promoting connectivity on energy and trade.
Second, we are meeting urgent health, food security, and
environmental needs. On health, the region has come a long way
with our assistance. Yet Central Asia battles some of the
highest rates of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in the world.
USAID is working on multiple fronts to help the region reverse
this trend, including with rapid testing technology from
California.
On food security, we are working through the Feed the
Future Initiative in Tajikistan to reduce poverty,
undernutrition and stunting, and we are helping the region's
wheat growers adapt to more frequent droughts, in addition to
encouraging regional cooperation on water management.
Third, we are promoting stability through accountable and
inclusive governance. USAID support is wide-ranging and
tailored to each unique country context from a robust array of
democratic systems strengthening programs in the Kyrgyz
Republic, civil society and rule of law support for targeted
groups in Tajikistan, and court system strengthening that is
opening the door to greater rule of law exposure in Uzbekistan.
I will highlight key assistance areas in the five
countries.
In Kazakhstan, we partner to encourage further democratic
reforms, improve health services and food security. USAID
support contributed to the passage of ``access to information''
legislation last year that for the first time allows
independent media to report on government activities.
In the Kyrgyz Republic--the only democracy in Central
Asia--our support contributed to parliamentary elections in
October 2015 that international observers widely declared as
credible, transparent, and accountable. USAID focuses on
sustaining and strengthening the country's democratic processes
heading into next year's Presidential election.
In Tajikistan, the poorest of the Central Asian countries,
boosting agricultural productivity is essential to improving
lives. Fiscal Year 2017 funding will enable us to continue
targeting a 20-percent increase in household farm income and a
20-percent reduction in childhood stunting.
In Turkmenistan--one of the most isolated countries in the
world--USAID supports Turkmenistan in participating more fully
in the global economy through reforms and the introduction of
international financial standards. We have provided training
and study tour opportunities to Turkmen officials and civil
society members to enhance their understanding of good
governance principles.
And finally, in Uzbekistan we are expanding agricultural
opportunities and promoting more responsive governance. Our
request enables us to support Uzbekistan's limited number of
NGOs, which are operating in a challenging environment.
Mr. Chairman, the countries of Central Asia face ever-more
complex challenges in charting their own course, making USAID
engagement as vital today as it was 25 years ago at
independence. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and
look forward to your counsel and questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yastishock follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you to all of you. And just a
few questions.
Let's look at Kosovo, because you spent considerable time
talking about Kosovo. It has been over 20 years now, and we
have played a dominant role in their government and in advising
them and making them a priority for us in that part. Now you
tell me that Kosovo is the number one country where foreign
fighters for ISIL are being recruited. What does that say about
our development system in that part of the world?
Mr. Melia. Well, I would say a couple things in response to
that, Mr. Chairman. One is that Kosovo ranks high on a per
capita basis. It is a small country with a small population. So
it is on a per capita basis that they rank relatively high, at
the top of the scale in Europe, but of course there are
countries in the Middle East and elsewhere that provide larger
numbers and on a per capita basis as well. But it is a
significant problem nonetheless. It may be small in absolute
numbers, but it is a problem anywhere that foreign fighters are
being recruited.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Any guesstimate over the last 20 years
what we have spent in Kosovo?
Mr. Melia. I don't have that with me today. I would be glad
to provide that to you later.
Mr. Rohrabacher. But it is a considerable amount of money,
and it is probably more than, as you say, for any other country
its size, it is probably one of the highest level. Wouldn't you
say?
Mr. Melia. I believe it is relatively high. Certainly on a
per capital basis.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So let's just note that where we have been
involved the most, we now have the highest recruiting level for
those people who are getting involved in terrorism. Something
is wrong. Something is wrong with that.
I know Kosovo also has been the country which has been the
wonderful recipient of mosques provided by Saudi Arabia. Isn't
that the case? So we are providing assistance and money and
something to help them develop, which has not seemed to work,
and the Saudis provide mosques in order to train these people
in radical Islam.
There is something very, very wrong with that whole
formula. I would think that, number one, again, it comes down
to should our aid be involved with humanitarian emergency aid
or should it be involved with development aid. And, quite
frankly, it doesn't sound, from what I have seen over the
years, the development part of it is not a very successful
element. Helping people whose lives are in danger because of
Ebola or an earthquake or a tsunami, that we have gone good at.
But this development doesn't seem to have worked.
By the way, in terms of the refugees, how much are we now
putting in? Can someone answer? How much are we putting into
the refugees in Europe? How many billions of dollars or
hundreds of millions or what are we talking about?
Ms. Romanowski. Actually, Mr. Chairman, if I could also
add, go back just briefly, if you would permit me to Kosovo and
specifically our support.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Sure.
Ms. Romanowski. I will say that we are making progress, and
many of the Balkan countries that do have foreign fighter
challenges are building countering violent extremist
strategies, and they have started to take and enact some
legislation. They have developed national security CVE
strategies, with our help they have, and in our budget for 2017
we do have about $3 million that we are going to put to help
them support tackling that problem. They recognize they have a
problem, and they want our assistance in helping it. So we are
doing that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I guess spending all that money on
strategies means that strategists get a lot of money. That is
great.
Ms. Romanowski. And they are also going ahead and
undertaking legislation that will allow them to go after the
foreign fighter.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me ask you this. Have we given money
to, I guess in Europe it is the Interpol, specifically added to
their money so they can track down terrorist organizations?
Ms. Romanowski. I will have to get back to you with the
answer to that question about whether we specifically support
Interpol. But I know that we do share information.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yeah. It would seem to me that the
development strategies that we have had in Kosovo, if you look
at that, have not worked. We visited Kosovo last year. Young
people continue to be unemployed with no hope of new jobs. And
we end up with all of these mosques. But, again, in terms of
how much are we providing for humanitarian emergency assistance
to the refugees in Europe, Western Europe.
Ms. Romanowski. If you may, we have at this point provided
to UNHCR for humanitarian assistance to Greece, western Turkey,
and the Balkans, in 2015 we provided about $26.6 million. And
this year, in 2016, about $41 million.
Mr. Rohrabacher. $41 million. And that is going to what
countries again?
Ms. Romanowski. It is going to UNHCR, the United Nations
humanitarian organization.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. What countries do they provide
money to?
Ms. Romanowski. In this particular case, they are
supporting Greece, western Turkey, and the Balkans, as well as
the rest of the world in humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. And let's just note, in this
humanitarian crisis that is now being faced in Europe, that
these are basically Muslim people who are going into different
cultures and there are a number of Muslim countries who perhaps
could be doing more for them. It is beyond me how this thingis
all going to play out in the end. But we do see with Kosovo
that we have got a serious problem if people who are not in the
Middle East are being recruited into these terrorist
organization. That is really worrisome.
I will yield now to Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all four of you for your dedicated
work, USAID, State Department. I think the American public
really doesn't understand the significance and the importance
of the work that you do and how it integrates and helps us all
move forward.
So I just want to thank you for your service, number one.
It is very, very important. And we have got to figure out a way
that we can let the American people know how important it is,
because oftentimes, I guess, because they don't understand when
they hear about funding to the State Department and to foreign
affairs, et cetera, they think that it is wasted money. I don't
know of a better investment.
We need to have these dialogues so that we can understand
and try to make sure that we break it down so that they
understand why certain dollars go where and the significance of
it. So, for example, I know when we talk about the OCO account,
why we would want money to go there as opposed to the general
budget and/or money that may be set aside for the DRG.
In fact, when I was looking at the State Department's
budget in 2015 for Europe and Eurasia budget, only 20 percent
of that at the time was placed in the OCO account and it looks
like now that that figurehas grown to about 60 percent. So I am
just trying to understand why would we move and go from 20 to
60.
Ms. Romanowski. If I can address that question. Our level
of commitment to each of our countries should be judged, I
think, by the overall level of resources dedicated to
supporting our strategy and not necessarily specifically the
breakdown of OCO versus base funding.
This question of OCO and base funding was something that
the Department--it was part of a larger conversation between
the Congress and the administration within the context of the
2016 budget. And in coordination, I think, we have an agreement
that our OCO funding will be targeted to areas impacted by the
manmade crises as well or natural disasters.
So for our region in Europe, this means allocating OCO to
the frontline countries in crisis or are continuing in crisis,
such as Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova, which are not
progressing as quickly and still need a lot of our support for
the reforms they need to undertake. And for Central Asia, it
meant allocating OCO to the Central Asia regional program,
which does address the regional integration of Afghanistan and
countering Russian pressure.
So we understand the difference and we have an
understanding that at the end of the day our assistance will go
to those countries that need it and that we believe continue to
need our assistance and also are making progress.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. And I think the other thing, again,
when we talk about assistance and working together, maybe I
will ask Mr. Melia this, do we, and if we do, how do we
coordinate with our European Union allies on assistance to
countries in Europe and Eurasia so that we can make sure we are
getting the best bang for our buck and we are working
collectively together?
Mr. Melia. Sure. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Meeks.
In the 10 locations in the wider Eastern European region
where we have offices or missions, we have regular consultation
with other donors in country. We do that jointly with State
Department colleagues at the Embassies in those countries, and
we work very closely to make sure that we are working in tandem
with them.
In those places where we have a very small presence, like
in Macedonia and in Albania in particular I am thinking of, we
have struck interesting partnerships with European donors where
they are putting money into some of the programs that we have
designed and are implementing to enlarge them, to make them
last longer or cover a wider swath of the country, in enhancing
agricultural production techniques or in supporting judicial
sector reform in particular, I am recalling.
Just a few weeks ago, we signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Government of Romania to work together
in assistance programs. For them that means largely in Moldova,
one of the weakest countries out of the former Soviet Union,
joining Romania. Today we signed a specific agreement where
they are joining us in an agricultural production project
together.
So we look for opportunities to leverage our small presence
to enlarge it with others' contributions. I would say that our
people in the field are very entrepreneurial that way in
looking for ways to maximize the American investment.
Mr. Meeks. Can you tell me, are there any countries within
our subcommittee's jurisdiction that are being provided
migration and/or refugee assistance and why those countries as
opposed to others directly?
Mr. Melia. Well, the principal places that have been the
focus of our limited efforts on helping communities and
countries deal with the migration crisis were Serbia and
Macedonia, which were facing the brunt of it.
Macedonia, last year we had a $3.5 million bilateral
program as the foundation of our presence there. It is a very
small presence. So in order to be able to deal with a sudden
crisis like the migrant tide that washed in last year, we drew
money from Washington, and this $2 million investment that went
to Serbia, and a smaller amount that went to Macedonia, enabled
us to finance local groups' efforts to provide social services
to the migrants that were coming through, advising them on
their rights, helping provide shelter.
But the larger American investment in helping this has gone
through our colleagues at the State Department's PRM Bureau,
which has put money through U.N. agencies. I saw those U.N.
agencies on the ground in Macedonia and in Serbia providing
those kinds of services with ``Blue Jackets'' and under the
multinational flag.
But the U.S. is providing about a third, as I understand,
about a third of the money that has gone into the UNHCR efforts
in the Balkans in the last year or two.
Ms. Romanowski. Congressman, if I could also add, we do
have also ongoing programs that deal with border security and
border control. And at the peak of the flow of the migrants
where those countries had no clue how to deal with it, our
presence of our INL and border collaboration was able to
actually help those countries think differently on how they
would have to address the flow and get a handle on it. So we
have been very involved in providing the kinds of technical
advice, technical assistance, and also just simply best
practices that some of these countries desperately needed at
the time of the crisis.
At this point there are also some refugees who are left in
some of those countries now that the borders are somewhat
closed and we will continue to respond to their interests in
sort of how do we manage those migrants and refugees who are
there who are sitting there waiting for going back or moving
on.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. Just a few questions
for the record my staff would like to ask, and then a couple of
my own points.
Could you give us an update on U.S. participation in Expo
2017 in Kazakhstan? Someone have any information on that for
us? Will the U.S. and the U.S. companies be able to fully
participate in that expo.
Mr. Rosenblum. Mr. Chairman, I can respond to that.
So, as you may know, under current law the Department of
State can't spend appropriated funds on U.S. pavilions or major
exhibits at international expos, unless funds are expressly
appropriated by Congress for that purpose. And as a result, as
part of a longer-term effort to address this, in the 2017
budget request the State Department is actually proposing
language to address that. To allow for funds to be spent toward
international expos.
But in the meantime, with respect to the Kazakhstan expo,
we are in a bit of a bind, I would say. You know that the last
expo, which was in Milan, Italy, was a big success as a
representational event. It got, I think, 6.1 million visitors
came to the U.S. pavilion. But as a financial matter it was not
such a great success. The private sector partner who raised
money for that expo didn't raise the necessary amount. And we
are now working with that private sector partner to find a
solution to the debt.
But in the meantime, even though the Astana expo will cost
less than the Milan one did, without having strong financial
commitments from the private sector the Department of State
can't confidently proceed to give the formal U.S. blessing to
the pavilion.
So we are still working with the Government of Kazakhstan,
also with the Departments of Commerce and Energy, to find a
creative solution to this and find some way that we can, under
existing legal authorities, have a presence there.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you, Dan. Thank you very much. My
staff wanted that question answered. So there you go.
And has the United States been able to sign a new bilateral
assistance agreement with Kyrgyzstan to replace the one that
was abrogated last year?
Mr. Rosenblum. I can address that as well.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let's hear.
Mr. Rosenblum. So as you probably know, last summer, our
bilateral assistance agreement with Kyrgyzstan was unilaterally
canceled by the Government of Kyrgyzstan. It is important that
we have this because without it our assistance is subject to
local taxation, which is against all U.S. policy. And so it
provides us a basis for helping Kyrgyzstan in a variety of ways
that we are not able to do right now.
Secretary Kerry's visit there in the fall helped to--was
sort of a turning point, and I think our relationship is in a
much better place today, and much----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Headed in the right direction, would you
say, now?
Mr. Rosenblum. Yeah, it is headed in the right direction
and we are talking intensively about getting a new agreement in
place and we hope to have it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. I just noted that we have 15 minutes
before the vote is over, and I will finish up my questioning
here. Mr. Meeks will have his. We will see if whatever we can
squeeze out, but this hearing will be adjourned at 5 minutes
till the time that we have to go over and vote. So there you
go.
I am a little concerned about when I keep--what role did we
play in making sure that the Lithuanians have their LNG
facility? Did we have any government money involved in that?
Ms. Romanowski. Mr. Chairman, I would like to get you a
response for the record, but my understanding is that we did
not have any resources for that. It was so--but I will get
you----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Let me just note that----
Ms. Romanowski [continuing]. An answer for the record.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. When we are talking about,
and we have people here as representatives of our Government,
talking about how we are involved with--or we are in some way
promoting these things, at some point I would hope that we
start trying to improve relations with Russia rather than
trying to hit them in the face. I mean, I just--over and over
and over again part of the testimony today, and it is a policy
of our Government, which you reflect, which is a hostility
toward Russia that is driving us away from each other.
And every time there is something we can do that will
undercut them economically or undercut them in some way in
their relationship with people around them, it would be as if
some--Russia would come in and do something with Mexico to try
to make sure that we couldn't work with Mexico or something.
These are hostile acts, as far as I am concerned, and I know my
colleagues disagree with me on that.
Mr. Meeks may or may not disagree with me on that, but I
think--what are we doing? Do we still fund these people-to-
people exchanges with Russia? Are we at least doing some of
that?
Ms. Romanowski. Mr. Chairman, yes, we are. And in fact, we
are planning on continuing and I have requested funds in our
2017 budget to be able to continue to engage with people-to-
people exchanges and programs between Americans and Russians
who would like to engage. And it is--we have been very open
about our engagement with Russia. We have consistently pointed
out that the United States and Russia should continue to work
together on a range of issues that affect our national security
concerns.
We are also frank when we disagree, as I am sure you know,
whether it is on Ukraine or on the treatment within Russia of
civilian--their civil society, political opposition, or
journalists. But we do believe that it is important that we
maintain the people-to-people contacts. They have been
invaluable. And we have requested resources.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me note, I was the head of a codel.
This is, you know, our committee overseas relations with
Russia, as well as Europe and Central Asia. We recently headed
a codel to Russia. It was like a few months ago, and we were
the first codel there in the last 3 years. People got to know,
there are incredible implications to this continued role toward
making things more hostile and more hostile and more hostile.
You have pictures of Russian planes buzzing our ships. Of
course, no one noted, when they said that, where that ship was
located, which was 26 miles from St. Petersburg and, yeah, it
was international waters, but that would be the equivalent of
sending a missile delivery system boat of Russia off of
Catalina Island, which is 26 miles off of my shoreline. I think
we need to really pay attention to try to be peacemakers where
we can rather than this incredible hostility that could lead us
to war, which would be a catastrophe for the world.
And with that said, Mr. Meeks, I give you the last word on
that and then we will adjourn.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. Let me just say, one of the things I
do agree with you on is that people-to-people contact is
tremendously important. I think that we need to fund it and I
think that that is important.
But let me just then defer with you when you talk about
aggression on our side. It wasn't the United States that
invaded Eastern Ukraine. It wasn't the United States that, you
know, when they talk about Georgia and other countries in the
region. So when you talk about aggression, it seems to me that
the aggression is coming from the other side. It takes two to
tango.
And I know that this President and this administration was
doing everything it could to try to improve those
relationships. And we have talked about, you know, against,
quite frankly, some of my colleagues, not Mr. Rohrabacher, but
on the other side, he was being criticized for doing it early
on in his administration. And so we--but it takes two to tango.
And clearly, if I look at the aggressive part, especially the
military aggression, that is not on us. That is on them.
The question that I wanted to--I guess the final question
that I want to ask is the current and the future shape of the
European Reassurance Initiative. I know that the President is
asking or is going to be asking to quadruple the ERI this year.
But I just want to know, do we know how that money will be
distributed? You know, because there has become some issue on
the distribution or how the money will be distributed and if we
are going to increase it. I, just for my edification, would
like to know if there is a plan on how that will operate.
Ms. Romanowski. Congressman Meeks, I will have to get back
to you on the exact details, because as you know, the European
Reassurance Initiative is also a very large Defense Department
program. And how it will all break down are the things that
still are under a lot of discussion, and we can get back to you
with the details on that.
Mr. Meeks. That would be great. Because I think that would
help, you know, especially as we are reviewing on our side, we
know how the money is being spent and why. And I think it helps
us when we want to explain it to the American people also and
how it is to our advantage and, you know, especially when you
are talking about the increase therein.
So with that, I know that we have votes, Mr. Chairman, and
I don't want to miss these votes that we have got coming up. So
I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. My ranking member is
right. When Russia was involved in those, we weren't involved
in that with them. We were too busy in the Dominican Republic,
Panama, Grenada, and helping Somoza and all of these other
dictators that we have been helping and invading their country
when they were overthrown. Reagan did it. Listen, I was there
with Reagan too.
But the bottom line is, this is not their--we do some of
the same things that we are condemning the Russians for and I
do not have a double standard on that. And I think communism
was the greatest evil in my lifetime and I am proud that we
defeated it. But that Russia is no longer the Soviet Union, and
we should be trying to aim at peace with them rather than--and
reconciliation rather than beating them down every time we have
a chance.
So with that said, this hearing--and thank you for your
work, and my door and the ranking member's door is always open.
If you have some things you would like to talk over with us, I
am open to you. So please take advantage of that offer.
And with that said, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:03 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
