- AFRICA'S DISPLACED PEOPLE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AFRICA'S DISPLACED PEOPLE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-86

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-424PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2015

_____________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS,                    AMI BERA, California
Tennessee

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 6/2/15 deg.
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ms. Catherine Wiesner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State,
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, U.S. Department
of State.......................................................     2
Mr. Thomas H. Staal, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Democracy, Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance, U.S. Agency
for International Development..................................    10
Mr. John Stauffer, president, The America Team for Displaced
Eritreans......................................................    35
Ms. Ann Hollingsworth, senior advocate for government relations,
Refugees International.........................................    47
Ms. Natalie Eisenbarth, policy & advocacy officer, International
Rescue Committee...............................................    54

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Ms. Catherine Wiesner: Prepared statement........................     5
Mr. Thomas H. Staal: Prepared statement..........................    12
Mr. John Stauffer: Prepared statement............................    38
Ms. Ann Hollingsworth: Prepared statement........................    50
Ms. Natalie Eisenbarth: Prepared statement.......................    57

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    82
Hearing minutes..................................................    83
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey, and chairman, Subcommittee on
Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations: Prepared statement..............................    84
Ms. Ann Hollingsworth: Refugees International Field Report.......    86
Ms. Natalie Eisenbarth: Report on Integrated Community Case
Management at the International Rescue Committee...............    94
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith: Statement of the U.S.
Committee for Refugees and Immigrants..........................    97

AFRICA'S DISPLACED PEOPLE

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 9, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:08 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The hearing will come to order, and good
afternoon, everybody. Sorry we are starting a few minutes late.
Without objection, I am going to put my full statement in the
record, and in conversations with our ranking member, she will
likely make a statement shorter than we normally give, both of
us, because there are a whole series of votes likely to be
happening, and it is important to get to our witnesses.
Last year, nearly 60 million people were displaced
worldwide. In fact, one out of every 122 people on Earth today
is yet either a refugee, internally displaced in their home
country, or seeking asylum in another country. In sub-Saharan
Africa, there are more than 15 million displaced people. Of
that total, 3.7 million are refugees, and 11.4 million are
IDPs. These disruptions of normal life in Africa are caused by
conflicts such as in Somalia, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali, Burundi, Western Sahara, and elsewhere. These disruptions
not only affect those who are displaced, but also the people in
whose communities these displaced people are relocated.
African refugees and internally displaced people face
numerous issues from security in the places in which they seek
refuge, to death and mayhem trying to reach places of refuge,
to conflict with surrounding populations to warehousing that
consigns a generation to be born and live in foreign countries.
Today's hearing will exam the various issues displaced
people face, and the U.S. response to these conditions in order
to determine the effectiveness of our Government's efforts to
help and to determine whether course corrections are necessary.
The terrible plight of African refugees has been much in the
news in recent months because of the deaths of thousands trying
to reach Europe across the Mediterranean and attacks on
refugees in South Africa reportedly caused by xenophobia.
So I, without objection, will put my full statement in the
record. I yield to Mr. Cicilline for his opening.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
you and our Ranking Member Bass for calling this important
hearing today. And thank you to the witnesses for the testimony
that you will provide.
The level of conflict and displacement around the world
today is astounding, and the shocking number of 15 million
people displaced in Africa is heartbreaking. Some of the
conflicts that have upended people in Africa such as in Darfur,
the DRC, and Somalia have gone on for decades, and we now face
entire generations of children and their parents who have been
born and raised away from their homelands. Many of these
displaced persons have never lived outside of an IDP or refugee
camp. They lack access to basic necessities and have little
schooling.
Aside from the obvious tolls those conflicts have, they
also have a lasting impact on generations of Africans. The
United States is one of the largest donors to the U.N.'s High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as provides millions of
dollars every year in bilateral humanitarian assistance, but
needs still outpace global donations. So I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses what more we can do to make certain
that the needs of IDPs and refugees are being met, and thank
you again for the testimony you are about to provide, and I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
I would like to introduce our first two panelists, and I
thank them for taking the time to be here and for their work
and their dedication.
Beginning first with Ms. Catherine Wiesner, who is Deputy
Assistant Secretary in the State Department's Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and Migration, a position she has held
since February 2012. She oversees the Offices of Assistance
Programs for Africa, Multilateral Coordination and External
Relations, and International Migration. She has also served as
Principal Director to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for African Affairs in the Department of Defense. Previously
she worked for UNICEF, the International Rescue Committee,
UNHCR, and Save the Children.
Then we will hear from Mr. Thomas Staal, who is currently
the Acting Assistant Administrator for the Bureau for
Democracy, Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance at USAID. He
has worked for USAID since 1988, beginning in Sudan as an
emergency program officer. He worked in the USAID regional
office in Kenya managing food aid and project development
throughout eastern and southern Africa. More recently, he
served as the USAID Mission Director in Ethiopia. Before
joining USAID, Mr. Staal worked for World Vision as their
country representative in Sudan.
Catherine, if you could begin.

STATEMENT OF MS. CATHERINE WIESNER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF STATE, BUREAU OF POPULATION, REFUGEES, AND MIGRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Wiesner. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member
Bass, and members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to
describe today what the State Department's Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and Migration is doing in Africa to
protect and assist African refugees and other persons of
concern on the continent.
We should note that today is South Sudan's Independence
Day, and it is a painful reminder of how conflict can undo
progress and shatter hope. Instead of celebrating, South Sudan
is embroiled in a humanitarian crisis that is the worst in
Africa and one of the worst in the world.
In a year that set new records for displacement, Africa has
not been spared. Today, we count 4\1/2\ million sub-Saharan
refugees, and more than 11 million internally displaced.
Burundi is the newest emergency. Some 150,000 refugees have
already fled, fearing that political violence and intimidation
could escalate into mass atrocities.
Mr. Chairman, as you noted, conflict continues to stalk
Nigeria, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Mali,
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, and
Libya, and for each country afflicted, there are two, three,
four neighboring countries struggling to stop the violence from
seeping across their borders and to host thousands and
thousands of refugees. The vast majority of refugees flee to
areas that are underdeveloped, remote, and difficult to reach.
Moving civilians out of harm's way and providing life-saving
assistance is expensive and it can be dangerous. Refugees often
join vulnerable migrants on the move, lured by predatory
smugglers taking advantage of lawlessness in Libya and
elsewhere.
The humanitarian organizations that we support are
stretched incredibly thin, but they are doing heroic work,
standing up for humanitarian principles and finding creative
ways to get around obstacles and to save lives.
U.S. leadership and our diplomatic and our financial
support for these organizations are vital. Humanitarians are
innovating and using new technology, such as biometric
registration, cash transfers, and remote e-learning to improve
services. Our Safe from the Start initiative is keeping more
women and girls safe from gender-based violence.
On recent trips to Africa, I have seen the scale of the
crisis we face, and I have also seen the importance of the aid
that we provide. I was in Ethiopia a few months ago, which
hosts more refugees than any other African nation. Refugees
come from Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, and Somalia, and are
found in camps on nearly every one of Ethiopia's borders, as
well as in all its major cities and towns.
Many refugees set off for Europe and the Gulf states,
despite the efforts of the government and humanitarian
agencies. They know human smugglers may abuse them, kidnap them
for ransom, or abandon them to die in the desert or drown at
sea. It doesn't stop them because they would rather risk death
than stay behind in places where they have no hope for any kind
of future.
I just returned from Niger, one of the most impoverished
countries in the world. Boko Haram's rampages have chased more
than 100,000 people across the border from Nigeria, and
displaced an additional 50,000 inside Niger. Many are scattered
in villages where food is already scarce and insecurity
restricts access. But agencies are responding creatively with
cash transfers and vouchers and assisting all those in need
based on vulnerability.
For pastoralist refugees from Mali, the Niger Government
has set aside an extensive zone where they can move with their
animals, allowing for greater self-sufficiency, and also
dignity. In Niger and elsewhere, investments made in schools,
clinics, and clean water for refugees and host communities
alike contributes to local development while fostering peaceful
coexistence.
We work closely with USAID and our diplomatic colleagues to
resolve conflict. In the meantime, aiming to ensure that there
is a safe place of refugee and that aid reaches
internationally-accepted minimum standards. We and USAID are
also working to develop greater coherence between relief and
development assistance, particularly for protracted crises.
Durable solutions can seem elusive. Al-Shabaab's atrocities
have set Kenya on edge, and while U.S. diplomacy has worked to
prevent Somalis from being forced back prematurely, they still
get branded wrongfully as potential terrorists.
Darfuris in Chad still need protection and struggle to
achieve self-reliance. Political stalemate on the Western
Sahara has left Sahrawis languishing for far too long in
Algeria. And the Ebola epidemic has delayed efforts to bring
Ivoirian refugees home from Liberia. And yet there are bright
spots: Tanzania and Zambia are allowing more refugees to stay
permanently, and some to become citizens. Some 19,000 African
refugees will find new homes in the United States through our
resettlement program this year.
My Bureau expects to program nearly $800 million across the
continent of Africa this fiscal year, channeling our funds
through leading humanitarian organizations, such as the U.N.
Refugee Agency, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the International Organization for Migration, and a range of
other aid groups. Even with this record amount, we cannot claim
to be meeting all of the needs, even at the most basic level.
We can, thanks to the generosity of Congress, confidently say
that we are saving many lives, and we are assisting millions to
live in greater dignity and with hope for a better future.
Thank you, again, for holding this important hearing, and I
look forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wiesner follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Ms. Wiesner, thank you very much for your
testimony.
Mr. Staal.

STATEMENT OF MR. THOMAS H. STAAL, ACTING ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT, AND HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Staal. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify
today, and for your continuing support for USAID's assistance
to the displaced throughout Africa.
As my colleague Catherine has just mentioned, we are
grappling today with the largest global displacement in
recorded history. Whereas in the past, natural disasters
triggered mass movements of people across Africa, terrorism and
ethnic and sectarian strife are now increasingly driving record
numbers of people from their homes. Across Africa, the most
vulnerable are the hardest hit--in the midst of power grabs by
armed forces, governments, and terrorists. Women are facing new
levels of terror, rape, and forced indoctrination. Children
have been stripped of their innocence and inflicted untold
tortures by armed groups.
But amidst these horrors, there are countless affected
individuals in search of peace: The girls from Chibok, Nigeria,
lucky enough to escape the grips of Boko Haram, Imam Omar;
Archbishop Dieudonne and Reverend Guerekoyame, from the Central
African Republic, who are bringing communities together to heal
the scars of war and find faith in the power of forgiveness;
the children of Bor in South Sudan who continue to learn in
their native Dinka through our mobile literacy programs. Their
courage and resilience in the face of brutality reminds us why
we must continue and to do more to help.
Despite resource, access, and security constraints, we are
doing everything possible to reach Africa's displaced people
with life-saving assistance. For instance, in South Sudan, we
are the largest humanitarian donor. Since the current crisis
began in December 2013, we have provided $1.2 billion in food,
shelter, clean water, health care, and psychological support to
the people. As fighting rages on, more than 40 percent of the
country now faces life-threatening hunger. Our humanitarian aid
is an essential lifeline for those who are suffering from this
senseless violence.
In Nigeria, we are making sure displaced and host
communities have access to health care, vaccines and clean
water. We are also supporting informal education centers for
displaced children. And thanks to the flexibilities provided
to--in our food aid accounts, we have provided food vouchers to
over 100,000 Nigerians in conflict. And with these vouchers,
they can buy healthy foods in the local market, which helps to
combat malnutrition and restart economic activity in these war-
ravaged areas.
We are also committed to protecting women, children, and
other vulnerable groups. For instance, we are providing health
and psychosocial support to victims of gender-based violence in
South Sudan, and to survivors of Boko Haram's abuses in
Nigeria. In the Central African Republic (CAR), we worked with
UNICEF to negotiate the release of 3,300 boys and girls from
armed groups and reintegrate them back with their families.
We know that the plight of displaced people will not lessen
unless we address the root causes of violence and state
fragility at the heart of Africa's displacement crisis. That is
why we are investing in peace building, promoting inclusive
governance, and expanding educational and economic
opportunities for Africa's most marginalized communities. Our
Office of Transition Initiatives is addressing the conditions
that have allowed extremists like Boko Haram to flourish.
Through innovative sports and radio programs, we are
working with local communities, especially young people, to
overcome feelings of exclusion and the lure of extremism. We
have harnessed conflict early warning tools and engaged in
concerted diplomacy through the interagency Atrocity Prevention
Board to address flashpoints of instability.
In CAR, the Complex Crisis Fund, and other programs have
proven critical in preventing genocide and mass atrocities,
expanding the space to safely provide humanitarian assistance,
facilitating the conditions for peaceful transition. USAID has
provided $7.5 million to promote community dialogue, especially
between groups of different faiths in CAR, and we are reviving
local media networks to provide accurate information and dispel
rumors that are spreading fear. And we have launched the CAR
Peace Partnership, which is providing several million in
private donations linked with $7 million of USAID funding to
support CAR's transition over the next 5 years.
We may not have stopped the violence in CAR, but we have
been able to improve security conditions, allowing people to
begin to return home, laying groundwork for peace. These
efforts, and many more, are helping Africa's displaced to
rebuild their lives, restore tolerance in their communities,
and realize their aspirations for a more peaceful and
prosperous future.
We thank the subcommittee and its members for their
longstanding support, which makes these efforts possible. Thank
you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Staal follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Staal, for your
leadership and for your testimony today.
Let me ask you if I could, especially since you did work
with World Vision in the past, and both of you might want to
speak to this. You know, Africa is a continent of faith, and
from my travels, sometimes the faith community, for whatever
reason, is not included as robustly as it should. I know you
know that, and I am wondering if you could just tell us when it
comes to IDPs and refugees, is there a plan, an aggressive
effort to try to build on the economies of scale that would be
provided?
To give an example, I was in Jos a few years ago with Greg
Simpkins, and while we were there--it is a place where Boko
Haram has slaughtered many people. We went to fire-bombed
churches while we were there. We met with Archbishop Kaigama
and also met with the Muslim leadership who worked very, very
closely together. And then we went to an IDP camp that was
grossly underfunded and in great need. The Jubilee Campaign was
providing some funding, and, as a matter of fact, one of the
men I met there who actually had a gun put to his head, an AK-
47, and was told to renounce his faith in Christ, he said: No.
I am ready to meet my Lord, and they blew his face off, and you
could see the results of that. They left him for dead. We
brought him here courtesy of the Jubilee Campaign. He testified
in 2172. You could have heard a pin drop, you might recall,
when he testified about what he had been through.
But at the IDP camp where I met him, it was with great
regret that they were not getting the kind of help that they
need. And, you know, I brought that to the attention of the
Embassy. I hope that there has been an effort to try to reach
out and do that. You did point out some of the numbers, and I
know, you know, it is always, do you have the budget? Do you
have the wherewithal? Is Congress providing enough? It is a
shared responsibility.
So if you could speak to that. These IDPs that are
scattered, and you put that in your testimony so that people
who are already poor are taking on more, you know, desperately
poor people and traumatized people at great sacrifice. So if
you could speak so that, I would appreciate that.
And my second question would be on the budget. Is the
budget sufficient? Are we providing enough? Do you feel that
there are unmet needs that you would be doing if you had the
money? Today, Ann Hollingsworth from Refugees International,
will speak about her personal observations to the Sudanese
refugee population in Chad. As she points out, in her view, it
is an underreported story, and she goes to great lengths to
talk about the cuts that WFP has made in early 2014, of a
dramatic 50 percent cut, up to 60 percent in some areas, in
food rations for Sudanese refugees in Chad.
She does point out later on about the self-reliance
approach, which I think is a very innovative and good idea,
provided there is an infrastructure that can accommodate that,
and that is part of what her concern is, that there is not that
infrastructure to accommodate a self-provided approach. If you
could speak to that as well.
And then apparently we are not going to have votes until
4:30. So we are not as rushed as we thought we would be.
One of the areas that I think is absolutely
transformational, I know you believe it as well, because USAID
is totally committed to it, and that is the first 1,000 days of
life from conception to the second birthday, and the scaling up
programs that are going on. In Nigeria I have met and been to
places, camps and to healthcare facilities, where stunting, and
you know it, is a huge problem. And if the child and the mother
get, as you know, sufficient supplementation, good nutritious
foods, stunting almost goes away. Not in all cases. The child's
immune system is bolstered big time, and I don't know if you
know this, but I actually authored three laws on autism,
including the Combating Autism Act, and most recently, the
Autism CARES Act.
And three studies show that if a woman has folic acid in
the first month of the pregnancy, after that it has an almost
negligible impact, but the first month it brings down the risk
factor of autism by 40 percent, which is absolutely
transformational. As we know, WHO attests to, we are talking
about tens of millions of kids, children, throughout Africa who
are autistic and on the spectrum, and a very simple innovative
inclusion. And I know Uganda and others have already
supplemented, or put into their flour and other things, the
right amount of folic acid.
So my question is about that first 1,000 days of life. In
2010, I met with seven first ladies of Africa at the U.N., and
they gave powerful presentations, but they don't always have
the wherewithal to make sure that that unborn child and that
mother, right until the second birthday, get the help they
need. And then the next 25,000 to 30,000 days of that life will
be exponentially improved, immune system strengthened, ability
to resist malaria and its consequences. So I am wondering in
the refugee population, the IDP population, what are we doing
to scale up that first 1,000 days of life initiative?
Mr. Staal. Thank you, Chairman Smith, for those questions.
Critical questions, and, in fact, on your first question,
working with faith-based organizations, just this morning I was
actually on the panel over at the Religion and Sustainable
Development, focusing on humanitarian assistance, meeting with
a number of faith-based organizations.
That is an increasingly important part of the work there.
Unfortunately, some of the conflicts in Africa are sectarian
conflicts, and so the role of faith-based organizations has
unique challenges, but unique strengths, and their strengths
are that they have networks, they have credibility in the local
community, they have systems to get out the word through their
churches, mosques, and so on, and actually we have been--I
don't say that maybe ``surprise'' is not the word, but happy to
see that they are actually able to work together in many cases.
You know, the case of Central African Republic where the Muslim
imam, Catholic bishop and a Protestant leader have been working
very closely together. In fact, the Islamic relief organization
has their offices in the Catholic Relief Services (CRS)
building. They provided offices for them. So you are seeing
that. And increasingly, we are trying to work through those
organizations. South Sudan is another major example of that
where we have really reached out.
Now, they may also be involved in the conflict. So there
are concerns of partiality. There are concerns sometimes that
they are too closely linked with Western organizations. You
know, it is good that Catholics have reached back through CRS,
for instance, but on the other hand, sometimes local
organizations say you are too closely linked. So that is
something that they have to overcome and that we work with them
on, and important to build that local capacity. But definitely,
that is a major focus for what we are doing. I have met with
the religious leaders in northern Nigeria from both sides as
well, and they can play a crucial role there.
On your question about the budget, we have a robust budget
thanks to Congress. We are the largest humanitarian assistance
providers throughout Africa and the world. The needs are huge,
as you and others have said and so we are increasingly looking,
first of all, to make sure that every dollar is well spent, and
then, are there ways that we can tweak our programs to make
sure they are even more effective and more efficient?
Some of the food aid efficiencies that we have been able to
do by some local purchase or vouchers have actually been able
to reach 600,000 more people with the same amount of money over
the last year because of that.
In the camps, Dadaab and Kakuma in Kenya, through working
with UNHCR, they now do fingerprinting of all the refugees.
That has reduced the number of beneficiaries by 20 percent,
because there were a lot of people that shouldn't be getting
the assistance or were double-counting and so on, and that is
saving $1.5 million a month right there.
So, we are able to stretch those dollars. And then at the
same time, we are working very closely with other donors to
make sure they are upping their stuff, and with what you might
call nontraditional donors.
I made a trip to Chad a few months ago with the Saudis, the
Kuwaitis, the Emiratis and the Qataris to try to increase their
support, not only in the Middle East, but also in Africa. So we
are making some progress, but it is a huge demand, and I think
we also need to go to more creative methods. Such as how do we
get the private sector to be more involved? In the Central
African Republic, we have a peace partnership bringing in the
private sector, but I think it is not just about corporate
social responsibility. We need to find ways to make it
attractive for investment in those communities, and I think
that is something that is a challenge for us and the
international community to work on.
Mr. Smith. On that first 1,000 days, is that----
Mr. Staal. On the first 1,000 days--yes. Thank you. That is
so critical.
That is part of the reason that we have recently, over the
last couple of years, put a lot of thinking and research to
develop improved products, especially for those young children
in the first month and in the first year. With these ready-to-
use supplemental foods and ready-to-use therapeutic foods, we
have redone our famous CSB, the corn/soy blend, so that it is
now more fortified with the right kind of vitamins and
minerals, especially addressing the kids at that age, and
working, not only through our humanitarian programs, but
through Feed the Future and some of our agriculture programs,
to make sure that countries are properly fortifying the flour
that goes through their normal commercial sectors. There is
iron fortification and other types of things to address some of
those very issues. Critical. Thank you.
Ms. Wiesner. I think my colleague Tom has said most of it,
but just to add on the question of working with religious
communities, when I was in South Sudan at the IDP site inside
the UNMISS peacekeeping base in Bor, I met with a pastor who
was still in touch with his colleagues of other ethnicities who
were living outside of that base, and the level of violence
between communities in South Sudan has been so shocking, but it
is heartening when you find people like that who are determined
to overcome that violence. And a number of the religious
leaders who actually have resided inside these camps have been
helpful in mitigating some of the intercommunal tension. So,
part of the increasing focus on recognizing the role of
frontline humanitarian responders has been that the first
people usually to provide aid are from within local communities
they are from the country themselves.
Even the national staff of some of the international
organizations that we fund are, in fact, from those
communities. And so I think making sure that we understand the
important role they play and invest in that is quite important.
On the budget, Tom has also said it, but there is no
question that this is an extraordinary period of humanitarian
need, and that the resources are not keeping pace, but I think
the bottom line is that the U.S. Congress has been generous and
that the U.S. is generally paying its fair share. So I think
the partnership that we could form would be to do some of this
outreach that Tom has talked about to other states, to the
private sector, even for private giving. A lot of the money
that is raised from private individual donors generally goes
toward natural disasters, which is really important and
wonderful, but we would like to see if we can increase that
type of interest in some of these conflict-related situations
and bring more donors into the field.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ranking Member Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. A few questions I
wanted to ask you, I was thinking about what you were saying in
terms of the first 1,000 days, and it made me think of how
difficult it is, frankly, to be pregnant here in Washington,
DC, if you are poor, let alone in an IDP camp. So I wanted to
know what we were doing in terms of family planning for those
women who do not want to be pregnant because they are in a
refugee camp, and, you know, whether it is direct U.S. dollars
or U.S. collaborating with NGOs. What are we doing to provide
family planning services in IDP camps?
Mr. Staal. It is so critical to provide all the options for
the local women in terms of family planning for those who want
it. When I was working in Ethiopia, I visited not only local
communities, but the IDP camps. Often they are living in the
local community, to improve the skills, if you will, of the
local health providers so that they can counsel young women on
what their options are, and then provide those services at the
community level. It used to be you had to go all the way to a
hospital. Now, in many of these countries, through our
interventions, they are able to provide that at the local
community level.
Ms. Bass. But what about in the IDP camp? Are you referring
to IDP--when you say ``community,'' you are referring to the
camp itself? So while we provide the food assistance and all, I
am just wondering, in the camp?
Mr. Staal. Yes. Through our food assistance and through our
healthcare assistance, we then also provide various family
planning methods to the women. First the counseling on what
their options are, and then the actual----
Ms. Bass. Birth control?
Mr. Staal. Birth control, condoms, things like that.
Ms. Bass. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Wiesner. And we also support UNFPA which provides
reproductive health services to displaced people, and they have
been working on improving their emergency services to make
those available sooner in an emergency including for
adolescents.
Ms. Bass. So I was thinking about, you know, every few days
on the news, we see the folks who are dying at sea leaving
Libya and going to Europe, and I was wondering what kind of
collaboration are we doing?
Ms. Wiesner. Well, first of all, two of our key partners,
the U.N. Refugee Agency and the International Organization for
Migration, are highly engaged in this challenge. And so we do
support both of those organizations to work with countries of
origin, with countries of first asylum, with countries of
transit, and as well as the work they do in Europe where people
arrive. So, one of our priorities is to promote the role that
they play because they operate based on a set of very important
humanitarian principles.
But it is a very complex challenge. Migration is not
something that can be stopped. It is not something that
necessarily should be stopped. People who are fleeing violence
and persecution need to have the opportunity to seek
protection. Even people who are just seeking better economic
opportunity for their families will always continue to do so,
and, in fact, can be a benefit to the societies that they
travel to.
The challenge is in making that migration safe and orderly,
and so, I think that is what Europe is grappling with right now
is how to create more legal avenues for migration, how to crack
down on unscrupulous smugglers who take advantage of people,
and also, to address the root causes that are causing people
who would not otherwise choose to move from doing so. And that
is a responsibility, I think, of the global community because
of the humanitarian dimensions of this crisis. But it also is a
very specific responsibility of states, because ultimately,
immigration laws and policy are the responsibilities of states.
What we always advocate at PRM, from a humanitarian
perspective, is that human rights must be respected, even as
countries seek to implement laws and secure their borders.
Ms. Bass. You know, you mentioned 19,000 African refugees
in the United States. Where are they?
Ms. Wiesner. Where are they coming from or where are they
going to?
Ms. Bass. Both, actually.
Ms. Wiesner. So 29 different nationalities benefit from
that program, which means they are coming from all over the
continent.
Ms. Bass. So are they connecting--when they come to the
United States, are they connecting with family? We have had the
situations in the past whether they were refugees from Somalia
or other countries or the Sudan, so is it that type of
situation where they are not connected to family here or they
are?
Ms. Wiesner. It is both. And Somalia is one of the largest
populations that we do resettle, and some of them are coming to
join family who have come previously; others are coming purely
based on their own claims to asylum.
Ms. Bass. Could you list a few other countries? Like the
top five, maybe, would be helpful.
Ms. Wiesner. We will get back to you with the precise
figures on the top five.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from Ms. Catherine Wiesner to Question Asked
During the Hearing by the Honorable Karen Bass
In FY 2014, the top five African nationalities admitted to the
United States through the Refugee Admissions Program for resettlement
and the number of refugees for those nationalities were:
1. Somali--9,000
2. DR Congolese--4,540
3. Eritrea--1,488
4. Sudanese--1,315
5. Ethiopia--728

Ms. Bass. And then I can't remember which one of you
mentioned providing psychosocial--I think it was you, Mr.
Staal--mentioned providing psychosocial services. And were you
referring to Nigeria?
Mr. Staal. Yes.
Ms. Bass. So who are the providers and how is that done?
Mr. Staal. It is a combination of organizations--some of
them are U.N., like UNICEF, especially for children who are
affected, either directly through the release from captivity,
or just from the displacement, and then some of our NGOs as
well. In fact, we make sure that every grant that we provide
through our OFDA programs includes the protection aspect as a
component.
Ms. Bass. And are they social workers? Do you know what
kind of providers they are?
Mr. Staal. It is a combination of things. Most of them are
probably not trained social workers. Some of them are, but
there is a lot of other things too. Even things like we provide
what we call safe spaces for the children in the IDP or refugee
camps, so that there is a tent that is just for children to go
and play, and maybe have some kindergarten----
Ms. Bass. I am just curious as to how they deal with all
the different cultures that they encounter, you know. What kind
of backgrounds and training that they----
Mr. Staal. It is critical to involve the local community
themselves, and find people in the community that you can
provide some training, maybe they already have some, and work
with them to help to bridge that gap. Yes, so critical.
Ms. Bass. And then, finally, you were talking about our
involvement in CAR, and you were talking about the conflict,
the Muslim/Christian conflict, and are we involved in any
conflict resolution? And we are able to fund faith-based
organizations directly. Correct?
Mr. Staal. Yes.
Ms. Bass. We fund both Christian and Muslim?
Mr. Staal. Yes. Thank you very much. In CAR, we have
several programs that are definitely focused on conflict
prevention, youth engagement, and directly involving faith-
based organizations, both Christian and Muslim, primarily
through international organizations that have international
faith-based or Western or Muslim groups who then have local
groups that they work through there.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Staal. And we are seeing some real positive movement
there. Thanks.
Ms. Bass. Excellent.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you to our witnesses. I think as was mentioned, we are living
at a time of really unprecedented refugee and displaced
persons. I think the number is close to 60 million, according
to the United Nations. And you spoke a little bit about what we
are doing, both what the U.S. is doing and what we are
encouraging others to do, and in light of the magnitude of the
challenge, is the United States doing enough? Should we be
doing more? Are there additional things we could be doing to
support the refugees and internally displaced persons? And at
the same time, what success are you having? You said you have
been in conversations with some potentially new donors. I think
the last report by the U.N. was that if you look at the
humanitarian crisis in Syria, Iraq, South Sudan, Yemen,
Somalia, and a few others places, that international donors so
far are only providing about 26 percent of the need, which
means obviously three-quarters of the need is not being met.
Would you talk a little more about the conversations that are
being had with other countries and the likelihood that they
will do their part in responding to this crisis in different
places around the world?
Mr. Staal. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline. An important question.
As I said, the need is so huge, and there is a combination of
things, and we have seen some positive movement from,
especially the Middle Eastern countries. As I mentioned, I was
in Chad, and as a follow-up to that, I know that several of
them have now put some money into supporting some efforts in
Chad. In Somalia, actually, they are doing quite a bit of work
with local organizations. Part of the issue is we don't always
know what they are doing, and a big issue is trying to sort of
help them to understand the need to cooperate, with the
coordination systems that other international donors work with
in.
So we have a cooperation now with the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation to build their networks. They have asked
for training. They want to understand the system better and
work with us more closely. So that is a critical aspect.
And on the first part of your question, trying to address
those psychosocial needs are so important. Actually, there is
an interagency group called the Atrocity Prevention Board.
Maybe you have heard of it, chaired by the NSC and involving a
number of U.S. agencies in helping us to make sure that that is
an important aspect in all these situations, looking at our
U.S. Government efforts and making sure that we are doing that.
This has helped us to get support for those kind of efforts in
CAR and in other countries, and to marshal our resources and
efforts in a coordinated fashion across the interagency.
Mr. Cicilline. So if I could just follow up on Ms. Bass'
question with respect to the psychosocial services. I mean, we
have spent a lot of time focused on the necessities of food and
water and shelter, but would you speak a little bit about the
unmet need as it relates to more of the kind of counseling and
mental health interventions and psychosocial services because--
particularly children are coming from horrific unspeakable
experiences of violence, and feeding them and being sure they
are housed and have clothing is a base, but there are obviously
huge needs. Would you speak a little bit about what the level
of unmet need is in that area and what we could be doing
better?
Mr. Staal. That is such a critical question. In any
disaster situation, people become more vulnerable to all kinds
of predators, to--vulnerable to a number of protection issues,
especially women and children. But, unfortunately, one of the
phenomenon of the recent events in Africa, as I mentioned, is
more related to sectarian and ethic violence and terrorist
violence rather than just natural disasters. And we are finding
that those issues of atrocities, especially against women and
children, are worse than ever, and so we are having to increase
our efforts. That is why, as I mentioned, all of our OFDA
grants include protection as a feature of what we are trying to
do, especially counseling for children who have been affected.
UNICEF is the main provider there, but Save the Children,
obviously, and other organizations that we work with. Gender-
based violence is such a huge problem. We are seeing in South
Sudan, you have probably seen some of the U.N. reports and so
on that it seems to be done not just drunken soldiers, but
really a systematic process of atrocities. I think we saw that
years ago in the Balkans as well. And when you have these kind
of sectarian or ethnic issues, it becomes even worse.
Ms. Wiesner. I would add in terms of the question of unmet
needs, that I think one of the areas where we have really seen
some ground lost is in the inclusion of education services for
all ages of children, preschool, primary, and secondary
education, when they are in situations of displacement, when
budgets are stretched, and as you said, the focus tends to then
go toward very, very basic lifesaving activities, education
doesn't always make the cut. And that is really something that
I think is disheartening to the humanitarian organizations
themselves. They want to be able to provide those services.
They know the importance of it for everything from psychosocial
support to the future for these populations for the countries
that they come from, education is critical, and I would
certainly put that in the category of one of the often unmet
needs.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Just a couple of follow-up questions. On the
question that I posed earlier about Chad, again, Ann
Hollingsworth makes an impassioned plea, including in her
recommendations that donors and WFP must immediately increase
food rations to 2,100 kilocalories per day for vulnerable
Sudanese refugees, until such time as assistance can be
adjusted in line with region-wide households, economic
assessments. And, again, she talks about having just been there
along with Michael Boyce, her colleague, and I am wondering
what we are doing vis-a-vis that situation, if you could be
specific?
Secondly, you mentioned, Mr. Staal, about the Atrocities
Prevention Board, and, of course, the international community,
including and especially the United States and the U.N. missed
it with Rwanda when the genocide could have been mitigated,
maybe even stopped, years ago. Infamously missed it. The famous
facts. I held hearings on it at the time, and soon thereafter.
Yesterday I had a bill on the floor on Srebrenica, and I
actually had the translator at one of my hearings in the 1990s
who was there when the Dutch peacekeepers gave over to Mladic
the okay to take out some 6,000 Muslim men, and 8,000, of
course, were slaughtered within a 4-day time period, and the
20th anniversary for that, as we all know, is on July 11, and I
have been to re-interment ceremonies at Srebrenica, moved to
tears by the families who lost loved ones, who were butchered
and killed simply because they were Muslims. It was genocide.
And that is what our resolution reiterated again yesterday.
But it brings me to your point, Mr. Staal, about the
Atrocities Prevention Board, which sounds good and may be doing
a wonderful job, but as we all know, according to UNHCR, in the
2014 Global Trends report in the past 5 years, at least 15
significant conflicts have started, or re-ignited worldwide.
And eight of those have been in Africa, as you know, and both
of you know so well. And I am wondering, you know, what role
the Atrocities Prevention Board is playing. We are planning a
hearing to hear about that sometime in the latter part of
September. We will ask them to give us a sense of what kind of
day-to-day work they do. But maybe you could shed some light on
that.
And finally, the TIP Report. As you may know, I am of the
author of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 which
created our strategy, our landmark effort to prevent,
prosecute, and protect, protect the victims, of course. The TIP
Report is a month late, and I am always worried when it is
late, because it may be because Secretary Kerry broke his leg
and wants to personally unveil it. And he is a little busy in
Iran.
But, again, there are multi-taskers and there are people
who could take--I am always worried, especially with regards to
this hearing, every refugee camp, IDP camp I ever go to, I ask
questions about trafficking and what is in place to ensure that
no young girls or boys, or women, even, in their 20s or 30s are
trafficked into a horrible outcome. And I am wondering if you
could speak to that effort, because I know you are doing much
on it. You always do. But just if you could elaborate and
provide some insights to the subcommittee, particularly with
all these new IDPs and refugees.
And before that, I do want to note that Albert Puela is
with us today. He is Member of Parliament from the DR Congo. I
met Albert on our way to Goma several years ago looking into,
you know, the peacekeeping effort there. But Albert is a Member
and he won reelection, and Albert, thank you for joining us.
Please, if you could answer the----
Ms. Wiesner. Yeah. I will say a few words about Chad and
then turn it over to Tom who has been there. It is an excellent
report from Refugees International, I think, because it lays
out the challenges. Chad is a somewhat unique situation.
Sometimes it is politically sensitive to promote self-reliance
of refugees, because it raises questions about land access, the
right to work, vis-a-vis local populations, and a host of other
issues. In Chad, the government is actually quite keen for
refugees to become self-reliant, and it is more a challenge of
the environment, the development funding, the development
actors. So it is important also to recognize that some of these
protracted issues are very context-specific in terms of what
the solutions are.
On trafficking, thank you for asking those questions, every
time you go to camps because we ask the same ones. And it is
certainly part of the protection role of UNHCR and other actors
who work there to ensure that children and vulnerable
populations are not trafficked out of camps, are not recruited
into armed groups, and any number of other threats that could
face them. So thank you for raising those questions when you do
travel.
Mr. Staal. Thank you very much. As I mentioned, I was in
Chad a few months ago and visited a couple of places around the
country, including the southern area where the refugees were
coming across from the Central African Republic. Chad remains,
actually, a pretty large beneficiary of our Food for Peace
Program. We have been putting normally over $50 million a year
worth of food aid there and some other humanitarian assistance.
And we continue to stay committed to that. So that is going to
be important. But as you say, at some point, the refugees need
to find a way to either go back home, but if that is not
possible, to find a way to become part of the local economy.
The Atrocities Prevention Board, what we have been able to
do is then bring all the U.S. agencies together to focus on an
issue. So, for instance, in the CAR, where we don't have a
USAID mission, we were able to get support for some of our
conflict prevention and youth engagement programs working with
faith-based organizations. We got support for that across the
interagency, and then were able to use some of the funds that
were generously provided by Congress for a country where we
don't normally have an aid program.
In Burundi in 2013, we saw that this was going to be a
difficult place and that things were not going in the right
way. So, again, we were able to put in additional resources
there toward things like youth engagement especially, some
civil society support, and help with developing their election
system. Now, that doesn't mean you won't have a guy who is
going to try to run for president even though--the term limit
issue. But the technically the election system is working much
better.
So those kinds of things with the Atrocity Prevention
Board, we are able to get support to do some of those kind of
things that we think are critical.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Sorry I was late. We get to be double-booked
here, so sometimes it is hard to get everywhere at once. So I
am sorry I missed your opening. Certainly no disrespect in any
way.
I want to ask a general question, and then I will let you
all continue with the train of thought that you have had here.
When I think about Africa, all the displaced because of these
wars, because of dictators, layered in with all the disease and
other things that we have to fight with, and then masses of
people heading north, and we see them, you know, you go to
northern Spain, you see them in the plaza. I mean, you see them
everywhere. Right? Because folks are trying to get where they
are safe and can eat. We all understand that.
And, but we are Americans. We are way over here. USAID, you
know, is on site. State Departmentis working. Do we have
influence to change the course here? I mean, on a general
level? Are we secondary to Europe here, or can we really play
the lead and can we get the herd moving in a different
direction, or are we just fighting to tread water? Does my
question make sense to you all? Is this winnable, or do--or is
this winnable only by the Europeans, I guess?
Ms. Wiesner. So we did address this a bit, and I think the
first----
Mr. Clawson. And I apologize for the repetition.
Ms. Wiesner. That is okay. No, the first thing to say is
that migration has existed forever, and will continue to do so.
I think what is so concerning today is the scale, the nature of
that migration, the number of deaths that we are seeing. We
learn about the deaths when we know about boats drowning in the
Mediterranean. There are also people dying in the desert before
they ever get to the shores of Libya, and we don't see a lot of
that.
I was in Niger recently, and there is a town in the north
of Niger called Agadez, where the International Organization
for Migration predicts 100,000 people will move through that
town this year on their way to Libya. And this is an
impoverished country that is already hosting refugees from
Nigeria and Mali, and is now sort of the target of attention
from Europe and elsewhere as a very important transit point. It
has, again, historically, throughout the years, been an
important crossroads for trade and migration. And, in fact,
west Africa has freedom of movement. So it is not illegal to
travel to Niger. What is illegal is to be smuggled into Algeria
or Libya and then across the Mediterranean. So all this to say
it is a very complicated challenge, and certainly those whose
are fleeing from war and persecution need to be able to do so
and need to be able to find protection.
I think what some of our investments do, and can do, and do
do, is improve the situation for people in their home countries
and in their countries of first asylum. When people leave
Eritrea for Ethiopia, they should have some opportunity to make
a life for themselves and we have worked very hard on improving
the conditions of camps there. The option to travel across the
sea should not be the only one that they see for themselves.
But you also, when you interview those migrants, find that
some of them are paying huge amounts of money, actually, to
take those journeys. They are saving up thousands and thousands
of dollars to be able to take that risk on behalf of their
families.
Mr. Clawson. Can I jump in just for a second. Do the
Spaniards, French, and Italians, among others, see it the same
way as what you just explained?
Ms. Wiesner. Well, the European Union is a collection of
member states, and we--so I think you have, you know, a very
wide range of views within the European Union. There are
certain states that are quite generous in accepting refugees
for resettlement that provide great benefits to those who
arrive in their countries, and others who have different
policies. We do have a policy dialogue with the European Union.
We call it the Platform on Refugees, Asylum, and Migration,
where we get together regularly to discuss at the diplomatic
and the policy level, and compare notes.
We are also a destination country for migration here in the
United States, and it is a different set of conditions and a
different, you know, group of people that are seeking to reach
the United States. But there are some similarities in figuring
out how you can appropriately secure your borders, but also
allow those who are seeking protection to have the opportunity
to do so.
So we are engaged in dialogue with the European Union, but
we also see that there is a certain prerogative that they have
to address this situation. We do urge always that they work
with the U.N. Refugee Agency, with the International
Organization for Migration, and other groups that can assist
them with best practices in handling migration challenges.
Mr. Staal. Thank you, Mr. Clawson. Part of the issue that
we are trying to address from the USAID side is the root causes
of the migration. You are not going to stop everybody. As
Catherine was saying, migration and refugees have gone on
forever. But a lot of those drivers of the displacement are
rooted in the local community. Sometimes it is economic. It is
political. It is violence. It is a number of other things. So a
lot of our programs are trying to help with conflict
mitigation, and again with youth engagement. A lot of it
involves young people who are not finding jobs. So partly, it
is to give them a sense of hope that there is something going
on.
And, you know, that is economic issues and so on. It is
also good governance. What we are finding is most of this
displacement happens from fragile states. And the way we define
fragility is, number one, the ability of the government to
provide services, whatever it is supposed to provide,
everything from electricity and water and schools and security.
But it is also the legitimacy and the credibility of the
government. It is those two factors.
So a huge part of our program is to try to address those
drivers of fragility that will then hopefully reduce the lure
of extremism and the desire for people to leave and find
something else.
Mr. Clawson. So if leadership is not trustworthy and
equitable, which means opportunity for everyone, then we are
really fighting an uphill battle here, and when the rich get
everything and everybody else gets nothing, then why stay? But
what I hear you saying is, you know, we are working at
humanitarian level and a governance level, and what I am saying
is if the Europeans don't get in the game on that, then it just
feels like a long putt for Americans to solve problems, and I
am, on how you all describe the issues, having been to a lot of
these countries, I think I agree, and certainly admire what you
all do, and the kinds of sacrifices your folks make for this
region.
Mr. Staal. Thank you very much. It continues to be an
issue, but the Europeans are involved. Right after this hearing
I am heading up to New York to meet with the Brits and the EU
and several of the other Europeans, in this case specifically
about Yemen, but a similar issue, and we meet regularly about
issues in Africa as well. So they are involved.
Mr. Clawson. Are they doing their fair share?
Ms. Wiesner. What I was going to add, we are certainly the
lead humanitarian donor in the world. I oversee our
international migration policy office at PRM, and in these
dialogues that we have had over the last few years with the
European Union, I think what we have seen is that other parts
of the Commission that have responsibility for home affairs,
for immigration policy, have started to realize that their
investments in Africa and other sources of migration need to go
beyond just law enforcement, and address some of the same root
causes that Tom was talking about.
And that is what has been really interesting, and, you
know, there was a $1 billion trust fund recently established by
the European Union, and when I talked to the head of their
mission in Niger and said: Is this going to go beyond just
counter-smuggling and trafficking, which is important, to
address some of the root causes and create opportunities for
people in their home countries, they said that is certainly the
intent.
So I think you are seeing an evolution in the thinking,
too, as the problem has gotten so much larger and more visible
to really try to understand the complexity of it and realize
that it requires more investment on various fronts.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for letting me have so much time. I
yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Clawson.
Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
You know, sometimes I don't feel like we put enough
pressure on the EU. Because if you are going to talk about root
causes, I mean, you are talking about their former colonies.
And they have a level of responsibility to this, and they don't
step up enough. And it seems like, to me, we need to put a
little extra pressure.
Anyway, I neglected to ask about African refugees who have
been going into Israel. And I wanted to know, one, if you could
speak to that and to what extent we are working with the
Israeli Government.
I was recently in Israel in May, and, at that point, when I
was there, it was an issue. And I am not referring to
Ethiopians. I am referring to other African countries where
there is a growing refugee problem in Israel and how we might
be working with the Israeli Government around that.
Ms. Wiesner. Sure. Yes. So, previously, we had been quite
focused on the situation of sub-Saharan Africans moving through
the Sinai to Israel and how they were both treated in the Sinai
and received in Israel. When a wall was built on that border,
that particular phenomenon has subsided somewhat.
But we have continued to receive reports and express our
concern to the Government of Israel about the treatment of sub-
Saharan Africa asylum seekers in Israel. Both the detention
practices as well as the accessibility of the asylum system are
two things that have been part of an ongoing dialogue with that
government.
Ms. Bass. What countries are they coming from, and how are
they held? I mean, I have seen a couple of photographs, but I
don't know much about it. It is not talked about very much.
There is not a lot of news coverage about this.
Ms. Wiesner. My understanding is that it is a lot from the
Horn of Africa--Somalis, Ethiopians, and Eritreans, among
others.
Ms. Bass. And do you know in what kind of situations they
are in? Do you know what I mean? Is it a camp? Is it like an
IDP camp? Or what is the physical setting? And do you have any
idea on the numbers?
Ms. Wiesner. We will definitely get back to you with the
numbers.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from Ms. Catherine Wiesner to Question Asked
During the Hearing by the Honorable Karen Bass
According to the Population and Immigration Authority (PIBA) of
Israel's Ministry of Interior, as of April 1, 2015, Eritrean and
Sudanese nationals constituted 92 percent of the 45,711 individuals
seeking asylum and refugee status in Israel. These individuals have
been classified in official Israeli government documents as
``infiltrators''. Of these, 33,506 (73 percent) are from Eritrea, while
8,637 are from Sudan (19 percent). In addition, there are 2,984
individuals from the rest of Africa; their countries of origin are not
delineated by PIBA, but past groups seeking protection in Israel have
includes those from the Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of
Congo.

Ms. Wiesner. Most migrants and asylum seekers live in
cities. There aren't really camps. But there has been a problem
of detention of----
Ms. Bass. So maybe that is what I am referring to, because
what I saw was not a city.
Ms. Wiesner. It was probably one of the detention
facilities.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I do have one final question. When it comes to
U.N. humanitarian appeals, UNHCR appeals and the like, have you
detected any diversion of prioritization for African crises,
especially with Syria, Iraq, ISIS, Yemen? And you will be
talking about Yemen at the U.N. very shortly. Is that diverting
money and prioritization away from these other crises? Is there
a relative loss of capacity because of that?
Mr. Staal. That is a difficult question. I don't know that
I have seen diversion, but, certainly, the multiplicity and the
demands across the world are having an impact everywhere. But I
haven't seen that they are getting a higher percentage of their
appeals than other countries. But it is a huge demand across
the world.
Mr. Smith. But even as those appeals are formulated--and I
have had conversations with UNHCR for 30 years on this, over 30
years--they have a need, but they also do an expectation about
what they think they might be able to get, rather than just
going with the need, and then if they fall short, at least they
tried for what they truly needed.
So I do worry that we never know what the real calculation
would have been had it been all needs-based, I would just say.
Mr. Staal. I know that is an important factor that we have
to look at.
Ms. Wiesner. Yeah, we have also had this dialogue on going
with UNHCR, and they do now do needs-based budgeting, so there
is a sense of, you know, what the full scope of the needs are
against what they are receiving.
But you are right; because they don't ever receive the full
amount that they feel they need, they have to make decisions
about what to allocate to different country operations, and
that can be hard. It is why they appeal for as much flexible
funding as possible, to be able to balance out between
different areas.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Anything else you want to add?
If our subcommittee could be of any help, please let us
know, and we will do our level-best.
Mr. Staal. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wiesner. Thank you very much for this hearing. Thank
you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
I would like to now welcome our second panel to the witness
table, beginning with, first, Mr. John Stauffer, who served
with the Peace Corps in Eritrea from 1966 to 1968, teaching
English and science to rural middle school students there. In
2003, after the worst of the repression within Eritrea, he
joined with one of his star Peace Corps students, who was an
asylee, and founded a group called The America Team for
Displaced Eritreans, which was established in 2010. He now
assists Eritrean refugees and asylum seekers in the U.S. and
around the world through resettlement services, policy
advocacy, and lifesaving interventions.
We will then hear from Ms. Ann Hollingsworth, who joined
Refugees International in January 2014. In her role as senior
advocate for government relations, she leads Refugees
International's advocacy efforts within the U.S. foreign policy
community. Previously, she represented the International Crisis
Group at Washington policy audiences. She provided political
and strategic analysis and covered all crisis group areas of
reporting, with primary responsibility for advocacy and
research for the Africa portfolio. She has been a panelist at a
variety of foreign policy events, including with the State
Department, Brookings Institution, and the Tom Lantos Human
Rights Commission. She also served in the office of U.S.
Senator Ernest Hollings.
We will then hear from Ms. Natalie Eisenbarth of the
International Rescue Committee, who is a policy and advocacy
officer at the IRC, based right here in Washington. In this
capacity, she leads IRC's policy and advocacy toward the U.S.
Government on issues related to the organization's work in sub-
Saharan Africa. Ms. Eisenbarth focuses specifically on
humanitarian responses in South Sudan, Central African
Republic, Somalia, and Kenya. She has completed research and
factfinding missions in South Sudan, CAR, DR Congo, Kenya,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Mali. Prior to joining the IRC, she
worked at InterAction, facilitating its policy advocacy on
international humanitarian missions.
Ms. Bass. May I say a word?
Mr. Smith. Sure. I yield to Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
I just wanted to acknowledge that we have been joined by
Nokuthula Sithole. She is Miss South Africa USA, and she is
running for Miss Africa USA. I just wanted to acknowledge her
being here.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. And we are joined by Congressman Mark Meadows of
the subcommittee.
Mr. Meadows?
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership on
this effort and continuing to highlight what for many of us is
just an unbelievable travesty and difficult thing to swallow. I
mean, I know for me and my family this particular issue has
been something that dates back some 25 years. And so I just
fully support you, not only in this effort, but thank each of
the witnesses for being here.
Certainly, your testimony goes a long ways to touching even
children. Both my son and my daughter getting involved really
came from hearing compelling testimony that happened right here
on Capitol Hill many years ago. And so, hopefully, young people
will get engaged and continue to fight for those that, many
times, they can't fight for themselves.
So thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And look forward to
your testimony.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Stauffer?

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN STAUFFER, PRESIDENT, THE AMERICA TEAM FOR
DISPLACED ERITREANS

Mr. Stauffer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and subcommittee
members and staff, for conducting this important hearing, and I
am honored to participate today.
Again, I am John Stauffer. I am president of The America
Team for Displaced Eritreans, which is a small, U.S.-based
nonprofit that assists refugees and asylum seekers from
Eritrea, located in northeast Africa. We maintain a Web site at
EritreanRefugees.org.
Many years ago, I was a teacher in Eritrea with the U.S.
Peace Corps. And now, for the past 11 years, I have, along with
other team members, assisted Eritrean refugees fleeing acute
oppression and abuse in their country. I can also speak toward
the situation as it stands in Israel.
As part of our work, we seek assistance and protection for
individuals or groups of refugees in dangerous situations when
we are contacted by victims or their relatives. We have helped
refugees in at least 15 different countries in Africa and
elsewhere. We operate by alerting and then working closely with
UNHCR, pertinent local NGOs, local government officials, or
other Eritreans, any of whom may be able to help the refugees
on an urgent basis. We also assist Eritrean refugees who are
here in the United States.
Eritrea is a police state, often referred to as the North
Korea of Africa. On June 8 of this year, the U.N. Human Rights
Council released a 480-plus-page report on human rights
offenses conducted in the country since independence in 1993.
In Eritrea, there is extensive, abusive, essentially
unpaid, endless military conscription, often characterized by
survivors as slave labor. Soldiers accused of any infraction or
dissatisfaction are often tortured. There is total lack of
basic human rights, almost no freedom to worship or to
congregate, no free speech, and no public media. There is
ongoing surveillance, threats, and intimidation and abuse of
the families of those who flee the country. And there is acute
and extensive torture of those who are imprisoned.
So it is no wonder that, as a consequence of those
conditions, thousands of citizens, mostly young people and
often unaccompanied children, flee the country every month.
Initial destinations of flight from Eritrea include Ethiopia to
the south, where about 100,000 Eritrean refugees now reside,
primarily in refugee camps, most surviving with little to do
and no hope for the future, and Sudan to the west, where there
are also refugee camps, plus many urban refugees. Here, life is
equally hopeless, and kidnappers and human traffickers lie in
wait.
Sudan, in particular, is often the starting point for new
and horrific ordeals. Eritrean security police operate freely
in eastern Sudan and in Khartoum and seek out and haul back to
Eritrea high-value targets such as government officials and
military officers who have sought refuge. The refugees may be
kidnapped and extorted locally for a few thousand dollars or
taken off to Egypt or Libya, where they are abused.
In 2007, Eritreans were paying smugglers to move them
across Egypt to the Israel border, where thousands entered with
the hope for asylum. But, by 2009, a system of human
trafficking developed, not for servitude, but for the purpose
of torture, for extortion of huge amounts of money. Groups of
refugees would be either double-crossed by their paid smugglers
or be kidnapped in Sudan and then be trucked into Egypt and
sold to rogue Egyptian Bedouins and end up in torture camps in
northern Sinai.
The refugees would be tortured continuously and mercilessly
to extract ransom from their impoverished families in Eritrea
or in other countries. As torture, molten plastic from burning
bottles and bags would be dripped onto bare skin, causing
excruciating pain. Victims were tied and left on the ground
under the blazing sun. They were burned with cigarettes and
electroshock. Women were continually raped, often gang-raped,
and men were raped as well. Victims were threatened with
extraction of body parts.
The victims were forced to call relatives by cell phone,
and then they were tortured while on the phone so their
relatives could hear their screams. The torture business became
more lucrative, and typical ransoms grew from a few thousand
dollars to at least $30,000 per person. Relatives who managed
to raise the funds became impoverished for life.
When the Morsi government in Egypt fell in 2013, the
Egyptian Army restored its presence in northern Sinai, and the
atrocities against the Eritrean refugees abated there.
We learned recently at a conference in Geneva with UNHCR
that 7,000 Sinai torture survivors are presently in Israel. But
kidnapping, extortion, and torture of Eritrean refugees
continue to occur in Sudan, Libya, and possibly other parts of
Sinai. Still, there seems to be little governmental effort in
Sudan and Libya to stop it. To the contrary, corrupt security
officials often know of the traffic and torture yet look the
other way.
Finally, tragically, many Eritrean refugees are torture
survivors, from their time in Eritrea or from the period of
their flight or both.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for considering these
observations.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stauffer follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Stauffer.
Ms. Hollingsworth?

STATEMENT OF MS. ANN HOLLINGSWORTH, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, REFUGEES INTERNATIONAL

Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Chairman
Smith, Ranking Member Bass, and the members of this
subcommittee for holding this important hearing today.
Refugees International, or RI, is a nonprofit,
nongovernmental organization that advocates for lifesaving
assistance and protection for displaced people in some of the
most difficult parts of the world. Based here in Washington, we
conduct 12 to 15 field missions per year to research displaced
populations. RI does not accept any government or United
Nations funding, which allows our advocacy to be impartial and
independent.
I am here today to describe the current situation for the
longstanding Sudanese refugees in Chad. My colleague Michael
Boyce and I went to Chad in May and June of this year, visiting
the capital of N'Djamena and then to the east to meet with
refugees, host communities, humanitarians, development actors,
and government officials. Our new report, released today, goes
into greater detail of RI's key areas of concern: Food ration
cuts, as the chairman addressed earlier; and a self-reliance
approach, with little funding or leadership.
Given the topic of today's hearing, I think the Sudanese
refugee crisis underlines two major challenges that we see
today in many parts of Africa. The first is that the most basic
needs of too many vulnerable families are not being met, in
large part because humanitarian funding has not kept pace with
historic levels of demand worldwide. The second is that
protracted displacement is not just a humanitarian problem; it
is a development problem. Yet development actors are still
reluctant to provide the leadership, coordination, and
multiyear funding that could give displaced people a chance at
long-term self-reliance.
The Sudanese refugee population in Chad is an underreported
story, a hard thing to imagine 10 years ago when the Darfur
crisis took center stage. The essential humanitarian support
that both United States and the U.N. refugee agency, or UNHCR,
has given to this refugee population over the years is well-
documented, but there are currently 360,000 Sudanese refugees
in Chad struggling to survive in a harsh environment with few
opportunities available for them or for their host communities.
In early 2014, the World Food Programme, or WFP, made a
dramatic 50-percent cut--up to 60 percent in some areas--in
food rations for Sudanese refugees in Chad, from the previous
allotment of 2,100 kilocalories a day to around 800.
We saw firsthand the effect of these cuts at a food
distribution inside Am Nabak refugee camp. Both refugees and
aid workers told RI that refugees, particularly women and
children, had responded to the cuts with worrying coping
mechanisms. Women RI spoke with left camps to find what little
work they could, often farming or making bricks. Sometimes
these trips would last for days or weeks at a time, with
children being taken out of school to work or to care for their
younger siblings while their parents were gone. An operational
NGO worker that RI spoke with noted an increase in cases of
sexual violence and exploitation against the Sudanese refugee
women since the ration cuts began. It was clear that the
consequences of food ration cuts for the most vulnerable
households have been unacceptable, and an immediate increase in
food assistance for these households is absolutely essential.
In the longer term, WFP and UNHCR are in the process of
executing a new approach to food assistance for Sudanese
refugees, one in which aid is targeted on the basis of need.
The two agencies are conducting economic assessments that will
divide households into four groups, from very poor to better
off. Full rations would only be provided for poorer households,
roughly 60 percent of all refugees, according to preliminary
data. Wealthier households would receive more limited amounts
of food or nonfood assistance according to their means. U.N.
officials project that the transition of this approach will be
completed by the end of 2015.
But, at the same time, these cuts are occurring as the
humanitarian community in eastern Chad has begun to move toward
a self-reliance approach for the Sudanese refugees. This
approach involves giving refugees opportunities to support
themselves financially, trying to strengthen ties between
refugees and their Chadian neighbors, and incorporating the
refugees into Chad's domestic, health, and education systems.
In principle, this transition is laudable. However, in
eastern Chad, the transition faces a major and potentially
fatal obstacle. The communities that refugees are meant to join
are some of the poorest in the world, with extremely weak
institutions, markets, and social services. In the words of one
humanitarian, ``Everybody is talking about socioeconomic
integration, but how do you integrate refugees into an area
where people are starving?''
Humanitarian organizations like UNHCR do not have the
staffing, the funding, or the mandates to fix these problems.
Development donors and organizations do, yet they are virtually
nonexistent in eastern Chad. That is the reality on the ground.
In refugee-hosting areas, donors and development agencies
must prioritize efforts to improve water management,
agricultural inputs and techniques, land management and dispute
resolution, and women's empowerment.
So the way forward: Donors and the WFP must immediately
increase the food rations, and I think we covered that earlier.
Secondly, donors, including USAID and the World Bank,
should provide dedicated funding to development and resilience
initiatives in eastern Chad that benefit both the Sudanese
refugees and Chadian host communities.
And just as a sidenote, I appreciated Acting Assistant
Administrator Staal recognizing the delegation visit of
November trying to pull in more Middle East donor dollars. And
that was great to hear, but obviously we have a long way to go.
Finally, UNHCR should freeze its budget for core refugee
protection and assistance in eastern Chad. Further cuts should
only be considered once refugees begin receiving long-term
support from development actors.
In conclusion, I left Chad with profound stories and images
of Sudanese refugees, both of despair and of strength. I
listened to a female refugee who grabbed my hand to tell me
about her struggles to find resources to take care of her
mother and the three orphaned children in her home. I heard
many stories about fears for their future, including how they
will find enough food to eat. The vulnerabilities of this
population are very real, and the international community must
return the spotlight to them now.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hollingsworth follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Ms. Hollingsworth, thank you so very much for
yours.
And, Ms. Eisenbarth, if you could proceed. I am going to
step out for a moment, and I apologize. I have read your
testimony, so----
Ms. Eisenbarth. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mark Meadows will take it. There is a briefing
on Srebrenica, which, again, had a resolution on the floor, but
I will only be about 10 minutes. And I have a lot of questions
for you folks. But my distinguished colleague can do a better
job.

STATEMENT OF MS. NATALIE EISENBARTH, POLICY & ADVOCACY OFFICER,
INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE

Ms. Eisenbarth. On behalf of my organization, the
International Rescue Committee, I would like to thank Chairman
Smith, Ranking Member Bass, Mr. Meadows, and members of the
subcommittee for holding this hearing.
I would like to request that my written testimony be
included in the record.
Mr. Meadows [presiding]. Without objection.
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you.
The International Rescue Committee, or the IRC, is a global
humanitarian NGO with a presence in 22 cities in the U.S. and
40 countries worldwide, nearly half of which are in sub-Saharan
Africa.
The topic of today's hearing, displacement, is at the very
core of the IRC's mission. We provide emergency relief and
postconflict development and help people uprooted by conflict
and disaster to rebuild their lives. We share the
subcommittee's deep concern about the safety and security of
people who have been driven from their homes.
Displacement, whether in one's own country or across
borders, leaves affected persons particularly vulnerable to
economic shocks, at risk of human rights violations, without
access to basic services, and often puts their physical safety
in jeopardy.
The Internal Displacement Monitoring Center estimates that
in 2014 in sub-Saharan Africa at least 4.5 million people were
newly displaced within the boundaries of their own countries.
The U.N. Refugee Agency, UNHCR, estimates that nearly 760,000
people became new refugees.
The majority of these new refugees and IDPs became
displaced as a result of conflict. The circumstances of
conflict-induced displacement often take years to resolve, as
the subcommittee and Mr. Smith noted before. As the average
length of displacement reaches 17 years, we must make a renewed
commitment to help people not only survive in the midst of
displacement but to regain control of their lives and thrive.
U.S. support for assistance to displaced persons typically
comes through the main international humanitarian assistance
accounts: The International Disaster Assistance account for IDP
assistance, the Migration and Refugee Assistance, and Emergency
Refugee and Migration Assistance accounts for refugees.
Alongside other accounts for food assistance and support for
international peacekeeping, these accounts are the backbone of
U.S. support for displaced persons. Congress' support in
funding these accounts is invaluable and enables the U.S. to
save lives and prevent suffering.
I would like to spend the majority of my testimony devoted
to what more we can do to aid those in situations of protracted
displacement. When people are displaced for years on end, their
needs go beyond the essential means of survival. To respond
better to their needs, we must address five critical challenges
common to most protracted displacement situations in Africa.
First, there must be a commitment to peace and the
protection of the most vulnerable. Governments hosting refugees
and experiencing internal displacement bear the primary
responsibility for preserving asylum space and ensuring
displaced persons receive protection and assistance.
For its part, the U.S. Government must continue to be vocal
about the importance of refugee-hosting nations keeping their
borders open and fostering an environment that is supportive of
protecting and assisting refugees and IDPs. We also need
political solutions to violent conflicts in places like South
Sudan and CAR and other countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
President Obama's visit to east Africa later this month is a
key opportunity to reinforce such priorities.
Second, the response to displacement must be better suited
to protracted situations. Assistance from the international
community is often designed to provide the essentials of
survival, which is challenged, as Ann noted, but saves lives.
It does little to enable IDPs and refugees to thrive during
what are often years away from home. The U.S. Government's
funding and advocacy and support of efforts to increase self-
reliance--things like supporting education for children and
young people and adults' opportunities to work in local
economies--their very means of self-sufficiency are essential.
Third, we must take a closer look at the traditional model
of delivering assistance to displaced communities and formally
recognized camps. Globally, the majority of displaced
individuals do not reside in formal camps or collective sites.
Instead, they are living with relatives, with friends, or
securing accommodations on their own, often in urban settings.
Assistance must be tailored to ensure that these refugees and
IDPs do not fall through the cracks and receive the assistance
they need.
In July 2014, a year ago, the UNHCR released a new policy
on alternatives to camps. The policy sets a vision for UNHCR
service to refugees, recognizing that while camps are an
important tool, they remain long after the reasons for their
existence have passed. As it stands now, the policy does not
incorporate how it should apply to the IDP populations around
the world, which is a critical area for attention in the
future.
The U.S. Government should continue to support and enable
UNHCR to align its practice with the vision in this policy and
continuously adapt its own assistance to ensure it is
reflective of the reality that most displaced communities
reside outside camps, and it should encourage other
international actors to do the same.
Fourth, we must align better international support based on
need. Displaced persons are often living in underdeveloped
places where the host communities alongside whom they reside
are themselves quite marginalized and vulnerable. Ann mentioned
this with respect to the situation in Chad. Addressing the
needs of IDPs and refugees in these settings provides a unique
opportunity to better integrate their service provision into
efforts to assist host communities.
Ensuring that assistance is targeted to the displaced
alongside host communities involves a recognition that
protracted displacement is not simply a humanitarian issue but
also a development problem. The World Bank now recognizes
displacement as a development issue. Other development donors,
including the U.S., should be encouraged to align their
programming and funding accordingly.
Fifth, I mentioned the critical humanitarian accounts
previously. The U.S. must continue to provide this critical
foreign assistance--it is a leader in providing humanitarian
assistance around the world--and, of course, continuous
improvements to aid delivery to make it more effective and
efficient.
I would like to close by highlighting two countries in
Africa that exemplify these challenges.
First, South Sudan, a country that is today marking its
fourth anniversary of independence, has been in the grip of
violent conflict since December 2013. Civilians are bearing the
brunt of this violence and often use displacement as a survival
strategy. Protection is paramount in this case.
The U.S. Government must continue to advocate to the South
Sudanese political leadership on the importance of protecting
and assisting IDPs. Simultaneously, the U.S. Government must
continue to support and advocate toward refugee-hosting
countries on the importance of preserving asylum space while
also expanding opportunities for refugees to become self-
reliant.
Secondly, the Central African Republic. The IRC has been
working in the CAR since 2006. In 2 weeks, we will release a
new report with the intention of refocusing attention on the
needs of the Central African people.
The IRC's analysis indicates that, while the international
narrative on CAR is one of progress and increasing stability,
humanitarian assistance is still desperately needed. However,
to effectively break the cycle of violence and poverty, as is
the case in many other African countries, we must take a long-
term approach to addressing the challenges that create
displacement while also providing the emergency assistance
necessary to save lives in the short term.
I appreciate your keen attention to these issues and thank
you for your time. Look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eisenbarth follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Meadows. I thank each of you for your testimony.
The chair is going to recognize the ranking member, my dear
friend, Ms. Bass, for a series of questions.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Chairman Meadows. I really appreciate
that.
Ms. Eisenbarth, it might be that you hand in the testimony
that you read, too, because I was trying to follow your
recommendations, and I think it is different than your written
testimony. So maybe you could leave us with that----
Ms. Eisenbarth. Okay. Yeah. Of course.
Ms. Bass [continuing]. You know, as well.
Well, first of all, I just want to thank the three of you
for what you do--for what you do and for what your
organizations do. Because it is tremendous, lifesaving work.
I wanted to ask you, Mr. Stauffer, you compared Eritrea to
North Korea. And, in a way, I think one of the biggest
differences is that everybody knows about North Korea; people
don't know about Eritrea and what you were describing.
And, you know, I have your testimony. The people that are
here don't have your testimony in front of them, but you have
included in your testimony some pretty gruesome pictures about
torture and torture camps. And I think that, obviously, a great
deal more attention needs to be brought to the situation. I
think Eritrea is very isolated, and it is not talked about a
lot. So I really appreciate you bringing it forward and also,
just in terms of your background, the fact that you lived
there----
Mr. Stauffer. Yes.
Ms. Bass [continuing]. That you were in the Peace Corps.
Mr. Stauffer. Yes.
Ms. Bass. So I wanted--one, you might comment on why this
is a mystery--I don't think it is just a mystery to me--but,
really, why Eritrea isn't talked about, why the situation isn't
highlighted there.
And then you also said that you had information about
Israel that you wanted to--I wanted to give you time to do
that.
Mr. Stauffer. Well, first of all, the isolation is pretty
much on purpose for the part of the regime that is in control.
They don't care to invite in any outsiders that might observe
what is going on or be a proponent or an agitator for
democracy.
There is no oil involved in Eritrea. There actually are
security issues. They have maybe 700 miles of coastline on the
Red Sea. But there has been, you know--there has been some
flare-ups with the press. I have worked with CNN, with Wall
Street Journal, and so on, and New York Times, but it sort of
just goes away then.
But this recent study by the Human Rights Council, the
United Nations, is really getting people's attention. And the
word is that it will be extended another year. I haven't seen
that officially.
Ms. Bass. What will be? The study?
Mr. Stauffer. The study, the COI, which basically was a
team of three members who interviewed people outside the
country. They were not allowed access into Eritrea. And so they
interviewed people who had fled the country in many, many
different places. They were here in Washington, they were in
London, and they went to Ethiopia, and so on. So this is really
creating a lot of new awareness and interest.
I can also say that our organization is just about to
release a 1-hour documentary on the Eritrean situation. And
that will be launched at West Chester University in
Pennsylvania on 8/8, August 8 at 8 p.m. So, you know----
Ms. Bass. Can you let us know--I mean, it would be--that is
one thing, to do it in Pennsylvania. It would be another thing
if it was known here in Washington, DC.
Mr. Stauffer. Sure. Well, this will be the initial public
screening, and, obviously, we would be delighted to--and we are
planning on, you know, getting some viewership and exposure
here in Washington. So we would welcome any help along those
lines to make this available.
Because we are working with some networks, we cannot put it
up on YouTube or Vimeo or anything like that, but we can
distribute DVDs.
Ms. Bass. Well, the chairman said he would be interested in
it also.
Mr. Stauffer. Okay. Well, we will let Greg know, then, as
soon as we are ready with that.
With respect to Israel, it is quite a story, actually. As I
had mentioned initially around, like, 2007, Eritreans were
purposely going to Israel. They were paying people to take
them, drop them at the border, and they would go in and say
this will be a nice life.
And, for a period of a couple of years, it went well, and
they were fairly well accepted, but then the numbers increased
and increased. And then, of course, the bad guys got involved,
with the torture and so forth, and were dropping people at the
border after they finished and got their money.
And so----
Ms. Bass. They were dropping torture victims?
Mr. Stauffer. Yes. Yes. If a victim was tortured and then
paid--and this is a whole other story. How do you pay $30,000--
--
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Stauffer [continuing]. And this is a network where
funds--the way it would work is that the refugee was handed a
cell phone. ``Call your relative, and give the relative this
phone number. And we want $30,000 from you, okay? So when your
relative has the money, they need to call this number, and then
they will get another number, and you will find a place where
you can send the money. And don't try any funny stuff or the
guy in the camp is going to be killed.''
So then the money would be sent. Most of the money went to
Israel, some went to Eritrea, some went to Sudan, some in the
United States, some was processed through Washington. And it is
unclear where all of the money was going, but there was a lot
of it. And we are afraid that a lot of it was going to fund
terrorism. As you may know, Eritrea is a state sponsor of
terrorism, and we know that they have trained Somali
individuals who are bent on terrorism.
So, anyhow, once they paid, they would be dropped at the
border with Israel. If they didn't pay, they would either be
forced to continue to do slave labor in the camps or they would
be killed, or a lot of people were saying--and I have some
evidence here--that there were organs removed from the
individuals, which was fatal.
So, anyhow, the numbers in Israel began to grow and grow,
and Israel never was wanting to accept them as true refugees
and to assimilate at all into the society. So Israel banned
UNHCR from doing RSD----
Ms. Bass. What is RSD?
Mr. Stauffer. It is refugee status determination.
And they said, ``Well, we will do it,'' Israel will do it.
So the numbers continued to accumulate. So the peak population
in Israel was about 50,000 refugees. Thirty-five thousand were
Eritreans, and the balance, most of them were Sudanese and some
South Sudanese.
So UNHCR had a presence there, but they weren't allowed to
do RSD.
And then, finally, in 2012 into 2013, they built a wall, a
fence, along the border with Egypt, so the influx stopped. The
refugees are--they jailed a lot of them with public statements
saying that we are going to make their lives miserable so that
they will want to go back to their own country. So about 5,000
of the Eritreans have now left Israel, one way or another. Some
of them have ended up in Libya and at the hands of ISIS.
And they have built a big prison toward the south end of
Israel, where a lot of them are being kept. It is a horrific
story.
They are gradually starting to do some RSD in Israel. We
provided a Tigrigna, Eritrean language, translation of the
Israeli RSD form to help the individuals. So at least they are
going on record that they have applied for it.
Ms. Bass. Given that the situation is so isolated, is it
possible that they are not aware of the torture and what is
going on?
Mr. Stauffer. Frankly, this is one of the drivers for our
documentary, and----
Ms. Bass. What is? The----
Mr. Stauffer. What you are saying.
Ms. Bass [continuing]. Torture?
Mr. Stauffer. So, for awareness in Israel----
Ms. Bass. Oh.
Mr. Stauffer [continuing]. That we will make a Hebrew
version of this with Hebrew subtitles, which will document the
fact--because this is it. I mean, this is a statement that--are
you really a refugee, or are you an economic migrant just
coming in?
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Stauffer. And they call them infiltrators, you know.
They don't call them refugees.
So the number of Eritreans in Israel now is about 30,000.
And, as I mentioned, 7,000 of them are torture survivors.
Ms. Bass. And when you say that the 30,000--they are not in
prison? They are in the general population?
Mr. Stauffer. Some of them are in prison. If I had to
estimate, there are probably around 5,000 in prison. The rest
are in the south, the southern part of Tel Aviv. That is where
the bulk of them--they are also scattered around in the
country, but most of them, they congregate in Levinsky Park in
Tel Aviv.
And the whole issue of whether they can work is they get
these temporary visas, and then the employers can get in
trouble, though, if the person doesn't have a visa. And there
are no real public health benefits available to these folks.
Ms. Bass. Is there any international observation of the
conditions in the prison? You say there is no public health--
there is no health--I mean, there has to be.
Mr. Stauffer. I am not aware that there is. There are a
couple of people from the Hotline for Refugees and Migrants who
are allowed access to the prisons.
I don't know that the conditions in the prisons are all
that bad compared to other places, but the point is that they
are in prison. And, you know, they haven't really done anything
wrong, other than cross into the country. You know, these are
not lawbreakers otherwise. I mean, the Israelis would say they
are lawbreakers for being illegal aliens, but other than that,
no.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Just one final question. Ms. Hollingsworth, you described
refugees being divided by their income, and you said some were
better off and wealthier. And I just wonder, what does that
mean to somebody who is in an IDP camp?
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you for the question.
Yes, this household economic assessment, I think, done by
World Food Programme and UNHCR is a strategy to be more
strategic with its assistance. And, again, I think that is a
laudable effort.
So I think the strategy here is to look at those who are
truly the most vulnerable to be able to actually get more
assistance to them than they are receiving today and lessening
the kind of assistance for those that--I wouldn't use the term
``wealthy,'' but better off in the terms of at least having a
few more resources available.
And we saw this, as an example, in one of the refugee
camps. We spoke with many refugees during our visit, and it was
described to us how much the vulnerable refugees were leaning
on the other refugees that maybe had a little bit more to
share. Now, again, I want to be clear, that is a very small
percentage.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, again.
Mr. Smith [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows?
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauffer, if you get your video done in Hebrew, I will
give you my personal assurance that we will get as many copies
as you can provide to the appropriate people in Israel at the
very highest levels of government to make sure that they are
aware of it.
I think for the vast majority of Americans, the
overwhelming majority of Americans, one, they don't even know
that this country exists, let alone the unbelievable, horrific
things that you are describing. And the U.S. population, by and
large, is a very kind and benevolent; when they see a need,
they will reach out. We have seen that over and over and over
again. And yet this particular issue is not one that has been
highlighted.
So, as it relates to both here in the United States, I know
the chairman and ranking member are very committed to making
sure that that message gets out, but you have my personal
assurances that from an Israeli perspective I will be glad to
make sure that the appropriate people get that.
To give you a perspective, they have a hospital right below
the Golan Heights that serves Syrian people that come across,
and yet the Syrians can't even tell them that they have been
served in Israel, for fear of retaliation when they return.
And so I would like to believe that this is a matter of
information and not just turning a blind eye. So we will work
on that.
Mr. Stauffer. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. Let me come to you. One of the issues that you
talk about at the very end of your testimony is a long-term
development plan. And for many Americans, that is a real
concern. When you say long-term development or any foreign
aid--you know, I share many times that I am big on foreign aid.
It does not get me votes back home in North Carolina. It is not
a positive thing.
So, with that, how do we target that development aid, where
we are not in a jobs program or we are in an education program,
where we are meeting the very basic humanitarian needs and yet
not in what some people would call nation-building?
Ms. Eisenbarth. Right. So thank you for that question.
I agree, from your earlier remark, that the American people
are quite benevolent. I also understand some of the challenges
with selling foreign aid back to your constituencies at home.
First, I would say that foreign assistance on the
humanitarian side primarily is my focus. But on the development
side, there have been some very strong accomplishments in terms
of making a difference on eliminating child mortality,
improving water and sanitation, improving access to health
care, including access to antiretroviral drugs, prevention of
HIV. All of these things are strong successes.
Mr. Meadows. So when you are talking about that as
development, see, many of us would put that more on the
humanitarian side of it, because, you know, it gets back to
what Ms. Hollingsworth was talking about, some are considered
well-off versus not well-off.
Ms. Eisenbarth. Right.
Mr. Meadows. Well, even the well-off folks that we are
talking about, their annual income is what even the poorest of
the poor here would--they would be appalled at what wealthy----
Ms. Eisenbarth. Right.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. Is in some of these nations.
Ms. Eisenbarth. Yeah. So, when we are talking about
development, I would like to think of it as creating
efficiencies in the humanitarian system, I think both from the
perspective of eliminating, if we can, or at least addressing
the causes of displacement.
So when you have populations, for example, in eastern DRC
who are continuously facing displacement because of violence,
because of lack of development there, that we are not just
continually meeting basic needs but looking at the long-term
causes of the vulnerability of those populations. And so,
instead of just feeding--the adage of giving a man a fish but
then giving a man a fishing pole.
And so looking at what we can do--of course not creating a
jobs program, but looking at what we can do to help populations
become more self-sufficient, particularly from the perspective
of communities that are facing displacement, that are facing
marginalization by the countries where they are residing, both
the host communities that are hosting displaced populations but
also the people that are displaced there.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
And so how do we address the difference between the
political aspect of this conflict--because many times it is
political, but oftentimes it is also tribal. And so, when we
look at it specifically within Africa, you look at a different
people group. You know, having spent a lot of time and being
familiar with what is now South Sudan, spending time on the
ground in Kenya, it is not always necessarily a political
conflict, as we see in some of the ones that you are talking
about. It has bigger underlying issues with regards of just
whether there is peace in the region. And so we can go in and
we can supply the development side of things, and yet that gets
overrun by a different people group.
So how do we best do that? And/or--and I will give you
maybe an easier place here--what is the role of U.N.
peacekeepers as it relates to that?
Ms. Eisenbarth. So the first question about the role of the
political side, perhaps, of the U.S. Government and the
political dynamics underlying conflict, I would say that it is
not an either/or scenario--people are facing some severe
circumstances overseas, as you have mentioned, particularly
those who are in the midst of the crossfire, in the midst of
conflict. And so you need to provide humanitarian assistance to
meet immediate needs. You also need a longer-term approach to
help those communities become self-sufficient. But you also
need--the U.S. has a lot of leverage, in some places more than
others, to persuade parties to the conflict to make peace, to
get over their political differences.
I think in the case of South Sudan and other places, CAR
being one of them--from what I know of those conflicts, it is
not necessarily at its core a tribal or an ethnic conflict.
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Eisenbarth. It is, rather, those kinds of identities
being exploited, if I may, by parties to the conflict to gain
popular support for their armed movement, in many cases. And so
you have to have the, like I said, I think there is a lot that
can be done on the political side, using the U.S. leverage, to
persuade parties to the conflict to make peace.
And I forgot your second question.
Mr. Meadows. U.N. peacekeeping.
Ms. Eisenbarth. Oh, U.N. peacekeeping. Thank you.
It is, obviously, a quite complex role that the U.N.
peacekeepers are playing. It is in constant need----
Mr. Meadows. It is interesting that you say that, because I
don't see it as that complex. I think maybe the definition of
where we need to go with U.N. peacekeeping and how it is
defined perhaps needs to be redefined. Because what we have
done is we have had a certain model there.
But we will follow up on that.
Ms. Eisenbarth. Okay.
Mr. Meadows. And, Ms. Hollingsworth, did you want to
comment----
Ms. Eisenbarth. Can I just say one last thing, though?
Sorry, Ann.
I think it is in need of constant evolution and looking at
how to improve the system, but it does save lives. For example,
in South Sudan, you have now, as of Tuesday, the U.N. was
reporting 150,000 people in U.N. peacekeeping bases. And so I
will be the first to admit that it is challenged and it needs
improvements, but it does save lives and is a worthwhile
investment.
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you. So, just circling back on
development, I actually think Chad is a great example here to
be referencing, because when we look at what Deputy Assistant
Secretary Wiesner raised in her comments today; Chad actually
wants the refugee population to be integrated. And so they have
made small steps to incorporate the refugees into both the
education and healthcare systems.
Now, from what we heard and from what we saw on the ground,
the capacity is definitely not there, but there are discussions
about the national development plan. There are a lot of things
being discussed right now in Chad. And Chad could be great case
study, because when we look at, sort of, the political angle to
this and what the role the host countries should be taking, we
have a couple of specific recommendations for Chad within our
report specifically targeted at that.
Secondly, on your peacekeeping question, we haven't brought
up what is going on in Darfur right now, and I wanted to
briefly raise this, just with the UNAMID context, very briefly.
Now, this is in no way a perfect peacekeeping mission, but I
just want to circle it back to what we saw on the ground in
eastern Chad, which is along the Sudan border. This situation
is fluid, and the violence in Darfur is increasing.
The Sudanese refugee population in eastern Chad, while it
is viewed as being quite chronic--and most of the refugees we
spoke with had been there for 10 to 12 years--we did meet a
refugee who had fled 6 days prior and had never been a refugee
before. So, basically, a militia group had said they were going
to do an attack on her village. It took her 15 days to get to
the refugee camp inside Chad, where her sister was. Her family
was scattered. She had no idea how she was going to survive and
take care of herself.
This ties back to UNAMID, which is the importance of the
protection of civilian capacity that we are looking at right
now. And access for humanitarian actors has been a longtime
problem in Darfur. But I did want to note that Darfur
definitely has fallen a bit off the radar, and the increased
violence that is going on in there needs to be addressed. And
UNAMID really needs to be there right now.
Thanks.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Thank you.
I will close with this last question. And, I guess, if you
can keep it as brief as possible, because we have some better
questions to follow.
With U.S. involvement in all of these different areas, how
do we avoid the image of coming in and trying to set up our own
governments, whether they be public governments or ones that
are controlled by the United States?
Because there is a big pushback with that, they want the
humanitarian aspect of it but not necessarily the conflict
resolution aspect of this.
So how do we do that most effectively? And can you point to
any examples where that has worked well, where the host country
has said, we appreciate you coming in? It has been that fine
balance of support but yet not so much of control.
Ms. Eisenbarth. So I think both Ann and I have referenced,
in terms of restructuring development so that it does become
more tailored to the needs of displaced populations and better
linked with humanitarian aid efforts, we both have referenced
the need to, through perhaps behind-the-scenes diplomacy, using
the leverage that I mentioned earlier that the U.S. has,
getting behind a national development plan, so that it is not
the U.S. coming in and pushing its way onto the development
agenda of host-country governments but, rather, getting behind
them using, perhaps, evidence.
There is a growing body of work that supports the
importance of using development to address protracted
displacement crises but working in partnership with host-
country governments and their own development plans instead of
bringing in our own agenda. I think that is one example.
It is happening in Kenya.
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Eisenbarth. There is a lot of opportunity there with
the devolution process to really partner with the Kenyans. And,
obviously, Kenya is one of the leading refugee-hosting
countries.
Mr. Meadows. Right. All right.
Ms. Hollingsworth?
Ms. Hollingsworth. I will be brief: Consultation,
consultation, consultation.
In the example of Chad, I think it is important to note
that the U.N. Security Council endorsed a U.N. Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. So I think that is a good angle, as
well, when we talk about the neighbors being involved with what
we want for the individual country so, again, it is not just
the U.S. Government coming in.
Thanks.
Mr. Stauffer. My experience, of course, is really focused
on Eritrea. And I think, there is no prescription other than
trying to continue to work on a humanitarian basis and
diplomatically and have dialogue to see if there is any path
forward that will change the behavior of the regime.
But the knee-jerk reaction there has always been that you
are trying to put us down, you are trying to keep us from being
successful, you are trying to support Ethiopia, our enemy, and
so forth.
So I would really leave this to the diplomats to figure out
if there is a way, but I think, not pushing for democracy but
rather pushing for improvements in humanitarian behavior.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much.
I apologize to each of you. I have to pop out. But we are
monitoring this back in my office. But thank you so much for
your leadership.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Meadows.
Thank you for your testimonies and your leadership.
Just a couple of questions, first to Mr. Stauffer.
As you know, Eritrea is a Tier 3 country in our TIP Report
designations--in other words, an egregious violator. In your
testimony, you have elaborated much more than the TIP Report
did in terms of the horrific nature of this ransom, of this
scheme, $30,000 per person, the torture business, as you
pointed out.
My question is, in 1998, I wrote a law called the Torture
Victims Relief Act. It has been reauthorized four times, and I
have a pending bill now to reauthorize it once again.
There are torture centers, victims centers all over the
world. We give money to the U.N. Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture for their centers, as well.
You mentioned 7,000 Sinai torture victims currently in
Israel. I am not sure how many are here and whether or not they
are getting the post-traumatic stress help that they so
desperately need that these centers can provide in a very
unique way. If you could speak to that?
Mr. Stauffer. My understanding is that there is none of
this going on for these 7,000 in Israel. And that was a topic
of discussion with the NGO, the Hotline last week, was about
how to get mental health attention to these folks in Israel.
There is the Center for Victims of Torture affiliate in
Ethiopia that is helping at camps in Tigray, which is in
northern Ethiopia.
But a lot of them, I am sure, in the United States, for
example. You know, the U.S. brings in Eritrean refugees and
resettles them officially. And many of these are torture
survivors, and they don't really talk about it. They don't want
to talk about it; they don't want to reveal it. So I think
there are a lot that are going untreated, and it is a shame.
But, you know, if it is an Eritrean, they should be screened
for torture. That is all I can say.
Mr. Smith. I deeply appreciate you bringing that to my
attention and to our attention as a subcommittee. Again, I
wrote that law, and I did not know they weren't getting help
either in Israel, and I don't know about getting it here.
You know, some of the estimates put it at as many as
500,000 of our asylees in the United States were torture
victims, some to different degrees of course. And the terrible
abuse that you cited in your testimony----
Mr. Stauffer. Yeah. I serve as----
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Certainly has traumatic PTSD----
Mr. Stauffer [continuing]. A witness in asylum cases in the
United States, and I see these declarations month-in and month-
out. And exactly. That is why they are asylees. That is why
they have gone to the trouble of going to Central America and
going to country to country to country into Texas, because of
this mistreatment.
Mr. Smith. And they do need to be encouraged to get the
help.
Mr. Stauffer. Yes.
Mr. Smith. Because it is so deeply repressed. I mean, we
have held hearings and heard from victims who got not total
relief but a great deal of relief from the burdens, the
sleepless nights, the chemical dependencies that follow because
they just can't cope with what they have been through.
So I would love to work with you on trying to ensure that
our Government is doing--and we will contact the Israelis, as
well--make sure that at our centers, at least, there is an
outreach to the Eritrean community to ensure that they get that
help.
Mr. Stauffer. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. We are looking to mark up our reauthorization
very shortly. So, you know, thank you for bringing all of this
to my attention and to the subcommittee's attention.
Eritrea signed the torture convention in September 24,
2014. And I am wondering what tangible impact that has had with
regards to the panel of experts that oversee the torture
convention at the United Nations. Have they looked into torture
by the government or its complicity in torture?
Mr. Stauffer. Not that I am aware of. I am not sure how
they would look into it other than what has already been done
with people that have left the country. I mean, you--there is
no access, no ability to do any forensic studies within the
country.
Mr. Smith. Because very often, you know, a Special
Rapporteur can go and visit, do a study, doesn't have----
Mr. Stauffer. The Special Rapporteur is not allowed in the
country.
Mr. Smith. Okay. If I could, Ms. Hollingsworth, you heard
the exchange earlier with the panel for the administration and
again, the subcommittee appreciates you bringing to our
attention just, as you pointed out, humanitarian organizations
like UNHCR do not have staffing, funding or mandates to fix
these problems, talking about Chad and the 360,000 refugees
from Darfur that are there, and please let us know how we could
be even more helpful as we go through the appropriations cycle
and trying to ensure that our response--I remember traveling
with Ambassador Williamson, and Greg and I have been to Darfur,
we have been to camps so--in Darfur. We actually met with
Bashir and argued with him in Khartoum. It was not a pleasant
time.
But that said, I was with Ambassador Williamson at the U.N.
Human Rights Commission, when it was still a commission, not a
council, and the reluctance to call what was going on in Darfur
a genocide was appalling. They just didn't want to call it
that, and if we have taken our eye off the ball prematurely,
which we may have with regards to Darfur, I think your timely
reminder as well as with the refugees' situation is a very
important one. If you wanted to elaborate on that at all,
please do.
And then the issue that you raised so well about the food
rationing cuts, that needs an immediate response. Malnutrition
and the undersupply of these important food stuffs, we have got
to address that. So maybe you could elaborate on that if you
would.
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I would
say that as much as we can during the appropriations process,
the development assistance is incredibly important through the
lens, as I have stated, through Chad. When I talk specifically
about how UNHCR does not have the funding or resources, I think
the technical expertise is also an important part of this, and
particularly when we look at those actors who are able to
commit long term to projects on water, which is so essential to
Chad, that is really the angle that we view as one of the most
essential, as far as development projects.
Secondly, to the food rations, again, I really appreciate
you pushing this with the first panel. We also want to be very
clear that this is to fill a gap that we saw on the ground. We
are not saying that the restoration of the 2,100 calories will
be forever. This is more until the household economic
assessments can be done and the new assistance strategy can be
implemented. And most importantly, Mr. Chairman, once that is
implemented UNHCR and others need to very tightly monitor the
coping mechanisms and impact on what is happening to the
population, and to be able to fix that as this moves forward.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Can I ask you, are you satisfied that anti-human
trafficking efforts for the IDPs and the refugees are as robust
as they could be?
Ms. Hollingsworth. We didn't look into that. So I can't
address that today.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Eisenbarth, in your testimony about the Central African
Republic, again, all of it was excellent, but just to ask you a
question with regards to that, 900,000 IDPs, 460,000 refugees,
and you cite obstacles that the IRC and other humanitarian
agencies are experiencing. Could you elaborate on what those
obstacles are?
Ms. Eisenbarth. Yeah. So as I noted in my testimony, I
think we are in a better place, overall, in CAR, but I want to
underscore that we shouldn't just see the country as on the
road to progress, that there are still a number of obstacles,
and I think primarily the one that we are experiencing is
addressing humanitarian needs outside the capital. The country
is still in the grip of some pretty serious insecurity, and it
is very difficult for humanitarian actors, the IRC, others, to
access populations that are outside some of the main population
centers. Bangui, of course, being one of them, but other major
towns upcountry, and so that continues to be a challenge that
befuddles our ability to get access to the populations that
need humanitarian assistance that have essentially no access to
basic services.
Mr. Smith. As you point out in your testimony, the average
length of displacement reaches 17 years. Is that African
centric, or is that an average----
Ms. Eisenbarth. I think it is a global figure, yeah, yeah.
Mr. Smith. Global figure. Okay. Is it worse----
Ms. Eisenbarth. It might be, but I can't say specifically,
but I think it is definitely indicative of Africa, perhaps, if
not worse.
Mr. Smith. Just let me ask, finally, if I could of you, Mr.
Stauffer, what has the ICC done vis-a-vis Eritrea? You know, we
know that they have been slow, but they are looking at
indictments of a couple of Boko Haram people. They have had one
conviction of a DR Congo person who committed genocide, but it
seems to me that the ICC could be doing more, particularly with
a country that has been so barbaric. You called it the North
Korea of Africa. And what has the AU done vis-a-vis Eritrea to
really bring focus and attention----
Mr. Stauffer. Well, I am not aware of anything that the ICC
has done. Certainly there has been a lot of effort in Europe to
raise awareness about as much--the situation in Eritrea it is
much more aware in Europe than it is here, partly because of
the many Eritreans that have come across the Mediterranean,
but--and there has been some really strong advocacy by several
folks, several Eritrean folks in Europe to create awareness,
but, you know, whether the ICC has even taken any, you know,
action or whatever internally, I just don't know.
And as far as the AU, there has been a process, a thing
called the Khartoum process where they are attempting to work
through--mainly diplomatically and maybe some economic aspects
to stop the flow of people coming out of Sudan, out of Eritrea,
moving up to the Mediterranean and so on. But there is,
frankly, I think, it has been lip service that has been coming
from Eritrea that they are going to try to stop the departures
and so forth.
And just as a thing that is really gotten things stirred up
is that the Danes sent in a team into Asmara to try to figure
out, we are giving all this asylum to Eritreans. Should we
really be doing it or are things as bad as they--and they came
out with a report that: Oh, things are getting better and they
are working hard on it. They should know that going to Asmara
is the last place in the world they will get the answer to this
type of question. And they did not get any corroboration for
anything good happening when they went south in Ethiopia and
talking to other people.
And, unfortunately, the Brits have been trying to utilize
this flawed report that, you know, things aren't at bad as they
supposedly are in Eritrea. But all indications are that it is
business as usual, and there has been nothing substantial to
change things, ICC or otherwise.
Mr. Smith. Has the Atrocity Prevention Board acted in an
early warning prevention capacity? Has it worked? Ms.
Eisenbarth?
Ms. Eisenbarth. I, to be on honest, have not followed their
work closely. But my organization has been, of course, watching
the situation in Burundi. We were active in Burundi long before
the current crisis, and of course, are now responding both on
the Burundi side and the Tanzania side. From my understanding,
there was a lot of work done by the Atrocity Prevention Board
to draw attention to the crisis in Burundi. And so, I think it
did catalyze some attention. Whether or not it could have done
more to prevent where we are now with the country, that is my
most recent experience with the APB, and so that is the best I
can say.
Mr. Smith. I had asked the previous panel, and maybe you
might want to respond to it on the first 1,000 days from
conception to the second birthday. Have you found in IDP
settings and refugee protection settings that there is an
awareness that, again, if you get that from conception that
first month, second month, third month, if you get that right,
that child's life is exponentially enhanced on a myriad of
fronts. If you don't, it is lost. You don't turn stunting
around when they are 2. So I am wondering, you know, if you
have seen an awareness of that? The first amendment I offered
that became law here in the early 1980s with the Child Survival
Fund, a $50 million authorization, and I traveled to El
Salvador during a day of tranquility between from FMLN and the
Duarte government to see that money used to vaccinate kids
against pertussis, diptheria, polio, and the like.
And so I am a big fan of vaccinations. Every dollar spent
there is transformational as well, and it is right in line with
this idea of early intervention having a huge impact. And I am
wondering if you have seen in the first 1,000 days are kids
getting their vaccinations as toddlers and as young children,
neonates, even, in these camps? Is that----
Ms. Eisenbarth. I appreciate your attention to this. I have
a personal passion for this issue as well. So I appreciate the
question. The IRC is quite active in malnutrition programming
in many of the countries where we are working. One program that
has proven quite effective in terms of delivering first-line
treatment and identification of symptoms of some of the leading
causes of child mortality has been the Community Case
Management Program in South Sudan. I will have to get back to
you with the exact figure, but it has resulted in somewhere on
order of 80-percent reduction in child mortality by addressing
some of these leading killers of children early on.
The IRC is currently doing some research into how we might
integrate malnutrition identification and first-line treatment
into this program. I think particularly in an area like South
Sudan, it is quite difficult to access, and I think it applies
to other countries as well, but in South Sudan, it is quite
difficult for families to reach health clinics, for even
humanitarian actors to set up operations, formal operations,
near where communities are displaced. Having a program like the
Community Case Management Program, where you have community
caseworkers going into communities, sometimes, in large part,
on foot, to work with communities to address some of these
leading causes of child mortality is very effective.
And, again, we are looking to see how we might integrate
malnutrition into that. The IRC actually released a report on
malnutrition in South Sudan just 2 months ago, and I think it
is important, from our perspective, to look at some of the ways
like this modification to this program where we can improve the
humanitarian response, but particularly in a case like South
Sudan, the conflict there has really set back efforts to
address some of the underlying causes of children not being
able to be well-nourished in their first 1,000 days, for
mothers as well. And it underscores the importance of finding a
political solution to this conflict, so that we can get the
communities in South Sudan back on the path to development to
address issues like access to safe water, access to health
clinics, all of these--access to food, all of these different
drivers of malnutrition. So I can send that report to your
staff.
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you. I did want to take note that
once the food ration cuts began in 2014, UNHCR did do a
nutrition survey to look at the impact, and our understanding
is the takeaways from the results of that survey was the
malnutrition rates had basically stayed about the same. We saw
a little bit of a different opinion when we spoke to the
refugees themselves, particularly the women spoke about the
children, and obviously the food concerns of access to food was
something that was raised time and again. I will say that
something we raised in the report is particularly important for
what you raise, Mr. Chairman, is the nutritional supplements
which have continued, and that has been our understanding. The
problem is that the children that are receiving those
nutritional supplements are sharing those with their extended
family because the food rations have overall been cut. So
because they are sharing, it means the recovery for their
malnutrition takes much longer. So I think that is an important
context when we look at the underlying concerns around this.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. About 15 years ago, Greg Simpkins and I were in
Lagos, and were speaking on human trafficking protection of
unborn children, which I am very pro-life. I believe in womb-
to-tomb protection. And a man came up to me and says: Well,
what are you doing about autism in Nigeria? And I said:
Nothing. Doing a lot in my own country. I have no idea you have
a big problem here. Again, I asked the previous panel about
this, and we have been working with his NGO ever since. His
wife is a medical doctor in Lagos. He works for Exxon. And
there is such an unmet need in Africa. WHO says tens of
millions of children are on the spectrum. We had a woman from
Cote d'Ivoire testify at one of our hearings on a global brain
health bill that deals well Alzheimer's, autism, and
hydrocephalic condition, which is also devastating in Africa,
and she said there was nothing whatsoever for my child. She now
is in Ohio and has gotten services which have helped her son.
So I have been raising it everywhere I go, and I am wondering,
again, twice jeopardize a child who is in a refugee camp or an
IDP camp who is on the spectrum may not even be recognized for
what he or she is suffering, and I am wondering if you have
seen any evidence of an awareness of a need to address autism
in that setting, because they are there?
Ms. Eisenbarth. I can't speak to a global awareness of
autism. I just will say that there is an awareness on the
critical importance of women, women who are of childbearing
age, women who are already pregnant, or who are likely to
conceive of also being the beneficiaries of nutrition programs.
There have been a number of efforts in refugee settings to
innovate and try to tailor specialized feeding programs for
women. But in terms of sort of rooting that in an awareness of
autism, I can't speak to that.
Mr. Smith. Is this something you could just keep in mind as
you go forward?
Ms. Eisenbarth. Of course. I will flag it for country
teams.
Ms. Hollingsworth. I can't speak to the autism issue, but
just to support Natalie there on the issue of women's health
issues and concerns, one thing I did want to flag that I
haven't had the opportunity to is the issue of--I raised in my
testimony women leaving camps to find jobs and other things.
The issue of getting water is particularly important, and one
of the female refugees we spoke with talked about the daily
trek to go find water outside the refugee camp. And
unfortunately, much of that water is contaminated.
So what would happen was she would bring the water back,
she would get sick, her children would get sick, her neighbors
would get sick. So this is a healthcare issue that I am sure
you know quite well, but I think it is important in this
context to raise with this opportunity. So thank you.
Mr. Smith. No. Thank you. Thank you for underscoring.
One final question, and it is on DR Congo. Can you shed any
light on that refugee and IDP situation? Again, Greg and I were
there in Goma. It has been a while. And we do have a
distinguished Member of the Congress, of the House, with us
today who deals with that issue as well. If you could, yes, Ms.
Eisenbarth.
Ms. Eisenbarth. I think eastern DRC is actually a perfect
case study for some of the issues that I have raised in my
testimony. As I said previously, I don't know if you were in
the room, Mr. Smith, but many communities in eastern DRC are
facing repeated displacement. Often remaining displaced for
years on end, and it is important to really look at the
holistic needs of those communities, that we are not just
delivering assistance along the peaks and valleys or the
conflict crisis situation in eastern DRC, but really taking a
long-term approach to addressing needs there.
We were thankful to see the appointment of Mr. Perriello as
the new special envoy for the Great Lakes region because,
again, looking at some of the underlying drivers of
displacement and some of the political issues that have been
persisting in eastern DRC and the region for many years is
essential to providing the stability that communities need to
meet their needs and to thrive.
Ms. Hollingsworth. Thank you for mentioning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. RI has produced three reports over the
past 12 months. Most recently, it was on looking specifically
at the USAID programs, 5-year holistic programming for gender-
based violence, and that was released. For the purposes of this
hearing, though, I would like to raise the concerns around
refugee support versus IDP support in the DRC, and I think the
refugees themselves inside the DRC are receiving assistance. It
is those 2.7 million or so IDPs that are, quite frankly,
neglected at this point. We have been championing this for
several months to get more assistance directly to them, and we
hope you will raise this as well. So thank you.
Mr. Smith. So thank you very much for your leadership. As
you come up with ideas that you think we could help amplify or
need to work on, please let us know. We do have a hearing on
Burundi scheduled for the July 22, and we really hope to bring
some additional focus on that crisis as well.
Thank you again. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
