- BURMA'S CHALLENGE: DEMOCRACY, HUMAN. RIGHTS, PEACE, AND THE PLIGHT OF. THE ROHINGYA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BURMA'S CHALLENGE: DEMOCRACY, HUMAN
RIGHTS, PEACE, AND THE PLIGHT OF
THE ROHINGYA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-117

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-264PDF                           WASHINGTON : 2015
________________________________________________________________________________________

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

MATT SALMON, Arizona Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Daniel R. Russel, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
East Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State.......     7
The Honorable Jonathan Stivers, Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for Asia, U.S. Agency for International Development............    17
The Honorable Tom Andrews, president, United to End Genocide.....    33
Ms. Jennifer Quigley, president, U.S. Campaign for Burma.........    43

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Daniel R. Russel: Prepared statement...............     9
The Honorable Jonathan Stivers: Prepared statement...............    19
The Honorable Tom Andrews: Prepared statement....................    36
Ms. Jennifer Quigley: Prepared statement.........................    46

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    56
Hearing minutes..................................................    57
The Honorable Tom Andrews: Material submitted for the record.....    58
Written responses from the Honorable Daniel R. Russel to
questions submitted for the record by members of the
subcommittee...................................................    65

BURMA'S CHALLENGE: DEMOCRACY, HUMAN.
RIGHTS, PEACE, AND THE PLIGHT OF.
THE ROHINGYA

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock
a.m., in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Matt
Salmon (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Salmon. The subcommittee will come to order.
Burma, also known as Myanmar, is a country with a long
history and a rich culture that has, after decades in military
rule, in recent years taken the first steps to transition into
a disciplined democracy. In 2011, the Burmese military regime
dissolved the ruling junta and handed power over to the union
Parliament and President Thein Sein, reserving considerable
influence for themselves.
On November 8th, Burma is scheduled to hold its first
openly contested election in 25 years with hopes that it will
be credible, transparent and inclusive. As the elections draw
near, we watch intently to see if Burma lives up to its
promises. Committee staff have traveled to Burma to observe
political dynamics and assess the humanitarian situation in the
lead up to this election, and I find that I am both optimistic
and pessimistic.
The ultimate success of the political transition remains
uncertain. How should we in Congress judge a systematically
manipulated democratic transition in light of what may be a
credible, transparent and inclusive election process on
November 8th? If the odds are intentionally in the ruling
party's favor but they have a clean election, how should the
U.S. respond?
We know that the election is not the end-all be-all for
Burma. We will watch the political transition unfold in the
coming months to look for a peaceful transition and sustained
dedication to transparency, openness, and reform. We welcome a
sustained transition to democracy, while it is yet to be seen,
and in the meantime we will urge restraint on further expansion
of U.S.-Burma relations. I look forward to hearing from our
distinguished panels what we should expect from the election
and the ensuing transition, and what it means for the people of
Burma.
There are other major issues to discuss here today. On
October 15th, the government, the military, and ethnic armed
organizations signed a joint ceasefire agreement after 2 years
of negotiations. About a dozen armed ethnic groups declined to
sign. I wait to see how the remaining ethnic armed groups will
be reintegrated into the process, how the post-ceasefire
dialogue will take shape, and how Burma intends to address the
humanitarian costs and challenges the conflict has wreaked on
their country.
Speaking of uncertain futures, I am saddened by the
resolute denial of rights to the Rohingya people. After the
2012 riots that displaced nearly 150,000 Rakhine and Rohingya,
there is little improvement in living standards. Our staff
recently visited Rakhine to investigate the conditions and look
at the displaced camps where over 143,000 still live. At the
Rakhine camps, residents asked the United States to provide
solar power, jobs, and funding for education.
And this is what the homes look like. You can see them on
your screens; they are on the screens on the walls. At the
Rohingya camps, homes were literally sinking into rice paddies
that the houses have been built on. If you see here, the
disparity is quite stark. The Rohingya, asked about the
amenities, what amenities were missing, they want to be able to
feed and provide for their families and their children.
As the monsoon season recedes, we may see another repeat of
earlier of this year, tens of thousands of migrants boarding
rickety boats to aimlessly tackle the seas in search of hope in
Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia. The United States alone
cannot be the solution to this problem. The Burmese Government
must address this heinous violation of human rights.
I do want to recognize the Burmese Government for making
commendable advances in its economy, its political system, and
civil society. The aperture has widened for greater freedoms
and voices to be heard, but not sufficiently. It is also clear
how much hard work remains to be done.
Members present are going to be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record, and
without objection, the hearing record will be open for 5
calendar days to allow statements, questions and extraneous
materials for the record subject to the length and limitation
in the rules. And I recognize Mr. Royce.
Mr. Royce. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Salmon.
Thank you, by the way, for traveling to Rakhine State in order
to view this firsthand, and also for this hearing.
Many are looking at Burma's upcoming elections to gauge the
progress in that troubled country. But a better yardstick in my
view is the country's abhorrent treatment of the minority
Rohingya Muslims, probably the most persecuted minority group
in the world. That should be our test, key test. The elections
are important, but this is even more important. It is the
yardstick.
For over three decades now, the Government of Burma has
systematically denied the Rohingya even the most basic of human
rights. A 1982 citizenship law denies the Rohingya Burmese
citizenship even though most of them have lived in the country
for generations. This goes back to the 8th century, their
presence there by the way.
In the past 5 years since the Obama administration's
outreach to the Burmese regime, 140,000 Rohingya and other
Muslims have been displaced by violence and hundreds have been
killed. As one 12-year-old Rohingya boy recounted during the
2012 violence, Burmese men broke into his house and beat his
father's head in with a brick before slaughtering him with a
knife. For the mass killings that broke out in 2012,
exceptionally few have been prosecuted, let alone jailed.
In fact, a non-governmental organization based in Southeast
Asia disclosed credible documents detailing state involvement
in persecuting Rohingya. They outlined state policies on
population control, restrictions on movement, and empowering
security forces to use abusive measures to control Rohingya,
among other steps.
Now it is no wonder that Rohingya by the thousands, as
Chairman Salmon just mentioned, are packing themselves into
boats to flee and they are fleeing for their lives. They end up
in Malaysia and Bangladesh facing the hardships of destitute
refugees. Others perish in the Indian Ocean or fall prey to
human traffickers. There must be a way to protect these
individuals through a ``safe zone'' in the Rakhine State. There
must be a way to have humanitarian groups have the ability to
go in there and work with this community and have people
protected in that state, and other minorities protected in that
state.
This tragedy is what happens when a government refuses to
recognize its own people. The Thein Sein government maintains
that Rohingya are merely Bengali migrant workers, but their
roots go back centuries. Muslims trace their roots back to
Rakhine State to the 8th century. These deep historic ties of
the Rohingya to Burma must be recognized and of course
protected.
The Government of Burma cannot claim progress toward
meeting its reformed goals if it so blatantly and cruelly
mistreats Rohingya Muslims and other minority groups. The U.S.
must prioritize the protection of human rights in its relations
with Burma using the tools we have at our disposal. In August,
Ranking Member Engel and I wrote to the Treasury Department
expressing our concern that only one individual had been added
to the Specially Designated Nationals List for violations of
human rights since violence erupted back in 2012. That is the
list for enforcing economic sanctions, blocking assets and
trade to accomplish our foreign policy goals. With the people
on the verge of genocide it is inexcusable that we are not
aggressively targeting abusers here. We need to do that. More
than one needs to be on that list, and I plan on working with
the administration providing additional names of Burmese human
rights abusers to be added to the Specially Designated
Nationals List.
And again I thank Chairman Salmon and I thank Mr. Sherman,
and I look forward to hearing from the administration on this.
Mr. Salmon. The chair recognizes Ranking Member Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding these
hearings about Burma, or Myanmar. I want to focus on three
things: The Rohingya, elections, and U.S. policy. I want to
associate myself with the last two opening statements. The
Rohingya constitute 1.1 million people, 2 percent of Burma's
population. The persecution has been well described by the last
two speakers. They have lived in, just recently, in temporary
camps for 3 years. Of course they face discrimination long
since then.
We advocate democracy around the world, but we should make
it clear we advocate democracy with minority rights around the
world. And as Burma heads into the elections in November, it
appears that both the ruling party, the USDP, and the main
opposition party, the NLD, are avoiding proposing solutions for
the plight of the Rohingya.
This is particularly disappointing when it comes to Aung
San Suu Kyi and her party. She has captured the imagination of
human rights advocates around the world for decades, but now
her voice is silent when we see the oppression of 2 percent of
Burma's population. Of course, the ruling party is worse having
passed four race and religion protection laws.
Now one issue here is the concept of citizenship. We have
birthright citizenship here in the United States. It is
controversial. Other countries have different rules. But what
we can't see is the circumstance where people who have lived in
a country for multiple generations are denied rights. We need
to be able to define the difference between reasonable
immigration law enforcement, which does involve deportations in
some circumstances, with ethnic cleansing of people who have
been there for generations. And I hope the State Department can
tell me that we have a line that guides the State Department on
what is the appropriate treatment of minority groups who have
been in a place for generations and yet are not accorded the
benefits of full citizenship.
I have been briefed by the Ambassador twice and the foreign
minister once on these issues just in the last few weeks. And
as I understand it, people, even if they did arrive before
World War II, are not citizens, their children are not
citizens, but their grandchildren may be citizens if they can
show papers that their grandparents arrived decades and decades
ago. This is an absurd system, especially when I am not sure if
it was the chief objective of the Japanese occupying forces to
issue a citizenship or residency papers to those crossing what
had been a border between two British-controlled areas in South
Asia.
Moving on to the election, the State Department had
different definitions for what would be a successful election.
Unlike the 2010 and 2012 elections where the standard was free
and fair, for the November elections we are calling for
elections to be transparent, inclusive and credible. I don't
know whether this is a raising of the bar or a lowering of the
bar. It has been said that it involves a lowering of the bar,
and we have to look at not only the Rohingya but some 600
villages where people are not going to be allowed to
participate in the election. We have to look at the voter list
prepared in part at our expense, yet containing many made-up
names on the one hand, and excluding many people who would
likely vote for the opposition.
As to what we can do, Burmese officials are asking us to do
three things: Sanctions relief, USAID and military financing,
and joint military exercises. In picking whether we are willing
to do any of these, we have to look at the human rights
situation. We should not be so arrogant as to ignore our own
economic circumstance and note that sanctions relief would not
cost the U.S. Government anything, might allow our companies to
make some money, probably not--and I would like to see a lot
better human rights situation before we talk about that. But
USAID, FMF, and even military exercises all come at the cost to
the American taxpayer.
The Burmese Government has made 11 promises. They haven't
even started to fulfill some of them. We of course have talked
about ethnic problems in Rakhine State. There is also the
promise to establish a ceasefire in Kachin, and that is also a
very unmet promise with only eight of the 20 groups who have
signed on, and of course the biggest groups have not. So I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses not only about Burma, but
also what standards do we apply to determine whether an
election meets our standards and what standards do we apply to
draw the distinction between reasonable immigration laws on the
one hand, and ethnic cleansing of people who have been in the
country for centuries on the other. I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be brief. I
had an opportunity to travel to Burma, I guess it has been 4 or
5 years ago, something like that, and it was shortly either
before or after then Secretary of State Clinton went there, and
have worked very closely in a bipartisan manner with our
colleague Joe Crowley on a number of issues related to Burma.
And the administration has tried to portray our new
relationship and the new Burma as a success story, and I think
probably the most positive thing that you can see is that the
jury is still out on that. There are still tremendous problems,
and some of them have already been mentioned particularly with
respect to the Rohingya.
And one of my main criticisms would be that the
administration has been too willing to reach out, work with,
cooperate with Burmese military with promises of reforms, which
we really haven't seen significant evidence that they are
actually carrying out with these things. There are still
tremendous human rights abuses of the minorities and the
militaries involved in these things, particularly with respect
to the Rohingya, as I say as already been mentioned.
And just one final point. I don't think that Burma can try
to tout to the world that they really have reformed and that
they are a true democracy until the most popular political
figure in the country, Aung San Suu Kyi, is eligible to lead
that country. And I think that is what the people of Burma, the
vast majority of people would like to see. It hasn't happened
yet, but I hope it does sometime in the very near future. And I
yield back the balance of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the ranking
member. Mr. Chairman, I think you put it best. When we think
about Burma, or Myanmar, both cautious optimism but also some
pessimism. And as I think about the next steps in Myanmar's
progress we are looking very closely at the November 8th
elections. I mean, there really does have to be a credible,
transparent and inclusive election here.
And that is a message that we have shared with the
Ambassador. That is something that I think many of us here in
Congress will be looking for. And again it is cautious
optimism. We want to see that progress. We want to see Myanmar
become more of a stable democracy. We want to see some
constitutional reforms that make it a much more inclusive
constitution that also makes Parliament a much more inclusive
body as well. It is going to take time, and I recognize that we
won't get where we would like to see Myanmar overnight, but we
do want to see that steady progress.
And Myanmar does have an important role as we look to
stabilize South Asia, as we look to work in that region to
develop economies, to address human rights concerns, et cetera.
But again, in no uncertain terms, the next big step is November
8th to make sure that this is a credible election that is
somewhat fair. So thank you, I will yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the
witnesses for joining us today. Like many on the panel before
us today, I want to be optimistic about Burma's future and
believe that the current leadership is ready to turn toward
democracy and respecting the human rights of its people.
But I join with others in being discouraged by the
continuing efforts to restrict the openness of the November
elections, and most importantly the ongoing persecution of the
Rohingya people. The Union Election Commission's uneven actions
and lack of transparency have severely undermined the
credibility of this election well in advance of voting.
This reminds me of the 2013 parliamentary elections in
nearby Cambodia. One of the major protests of the opposition
parties after the election was that the supposedly impartial
National Election Committee was in fact stacked by the ruling
Cambodian People's Party and Prime Minister Hun Sen. I believe
the case of Cambodia highlights the need for independent
election monitoring both from domestic civil society and by
international observers.
Even after the election, the consequences of two
constitutional provisions must be reckoned with today. The fact
that a quarter of the parliamentary seats are going to be
reserved for appointment by the military and not accountable to
the people, to the will of the people, raises serious questions
about the country's commitment to democracy. I have also raised
the issue of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi being
constitutionally barred from being President.
I join with Chairman Salmon and Chairman Royce in being
deeply disturbed by the ongoing repression of the Rohingya, a
Muslim ethnic minority. For years, the military regime has
claimed these people are not citizens depriving them of their
most basic rights. The persecution of the Rohingya has led to a
major refugee crisis that has affected Burma, Bangladesh,
Thailand, Malaysia and the entire region. Now the Burmese
Government is forbidding the Rohingya from participating in the
upcoming election.
I recently had the chance to meet with a group of
parliamentarians from Burma through the Tom Lantos Human Rights
Commission, including U Shwe Maung, a Rohingya member of
Parliament. He will not be able to run for election next month
because the Election Commission says he is not a citizen.
I thank the chairman for holding this important and timely
hearing. It is our duty to encourage Burma to continue down the
path of opening up and democratizing while we point out the
serious and ongoing human rights violations in the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you very much.
Our panel this morning is made up of distinguished
witnesses from the administration. First Assistant Secretary
Daniel Russel joins us from the State Department's Bureau of
East Asian and Pacific Affairs, and Assistant Administrator
Jonathan Stivers joins us from USAID. We are thrilled to have
you here today, and we will start with you, Mr. Russel.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANIEL R. RUSSEL, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Russel. Well, Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member Sherman,
members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify on this important issue today and for
your longstanding support of U.S. policy in the Asia Pacific
region and vis-a-vis the U.S. Burma relationship specifically.
I am very pleased to be here today with my colleague Jon
Stivers from USAID to speak about our support for democracy,
for peace, and for human rights in Burma.
I have been visiting Burma in my previous and current
capacity regularly since December 2011, when I accompanied then
Secretary Clinton, and I have seen reform in Burma create space
for political debate, for an active civil society, and for
greater press freedoms. Burma clearly has come a long way in 4
short years. That said, as the members have pointed out it
obviously has much work to do.
The elections on November 8th will be an important
milestone for Burma's transition. We want the entire electoral
process, from the campaign to polling to vote counts, to the
formation of the next government and the selection of the next
President to be as credible, as transparent, as inclusive, as
free and fair as possible given the challenges facing a
fledgling democracy, and given the shortcomings in Burma's
current constitution and its system. That is why we have been
providing assistance to political parties, civil society,
media, the government and others, as Jon will describe, and it
has made a difference.
It is also notable that the Election Commission has
welcomed international experts and observers to help advance
the quality and the credibility of the upcoming election. But
even if the election meets international standards, as of
course we all hope it will, Burma's transition to inclusive
civilian democracy will be far from complete.
As you have pointed out, the disenfranchisement of hundreds
of thousands white card holders, mostly Rohingya, undermines
universal suffrage. So does the disqualification of Muslim
candidates. The seats in Parliament reserved for the military
and the rules that bar Aung San Suu Kyi from the Presidency
deeply concern us as well. That said, these structural flaws
are not stopping her. They are not stopping the NLD or the 90-
plus political parties and the 6,000 candidates who are
competing vigorously, and by and large peacefully, for both
local and national seats.
What is unprecedented about Burma's elections now, in 2015,
is that no one actually knows who is going to win and that is a
good thing. But while the elections can be a significant step
forward for the country, they are only one step. The next
government is going to have to accelerate reform, improve
governance, heal religious and ethnic divides including in
Rakhine State, advance the peace process, and address the
constitutional obstacles to a full civilian democracy.
Now I mentioned the peace process. Like the United States,
Burma is a diverse union, and after nearly 70 years of ethnic
based conflict, it knows very well that reconciliation is
essential to Burma's national development and its security. So
we very much welcome last week's signing of a ceasefire
agreement as a first step toward a just and sustainable peace.
Not all groups have signed, although they have agreed on the
text of the document, and continued military action and a lack
of humanitarian access in Kachin and Shan States shows there is
still a lot of work to be done.
I also want to raise, as you have, human rights. Despite
the considerable progress documented in the State Department's
annual human rights report, over 100 political prisoners are in
detention while over 400 are facing charges according to civil
society sources. We have criticized the recent arrests of
students, activists and journalists for exercising their
democratic rights and freedoms, most recently Patrick Khum Jaa
Lee and Chaw Sandi Tun. Likewise, we have privately and
publicly objected to discrimination against religious and
ethnic minorities.
We are deeply, deeply concerned about the situation in
Rakhine State. We are pushing hard for the protection, for
opportunity, and ultimately a path to citizenship for the
Rohingya, a path that respects their rights, their safety, and
their dignity. And we are clear about the danger from measures
like the race and religion laws and the rise in religious hate
speech.
Mr. Chairman, advocating for democracy and human rights is
central to our diplomacy in Burma, across the region, and
across the globe. President Obama, U.S. diplomats do it, you as
Members of Congress do as well. I admit to being an admirer of
the Burmese determination to make a historic transition from
decades of military dictatorship, corruption and civil war, to
a peaceful union with a civilian-led democratic government, and
I believe it is in the best interest of the United States to
help them to succeed. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Stivers.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JONATHAN STIVERS, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Stivers. Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member Sherman,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
invitation to testify today on the role of USAID in advancing
U.S. foreign policy goals in Burma. It is an honor to appear
again before the committee and a pleasure to be alongside my
colleague from the State Department Daniel Russel.
The United States has a fundamental interest in the success
of Burma's reforms and remains a committed partner to those who
seek greater freedom, prosperity and dignity. Decades of
military rule and conflict have prevented the development of
well functioning government systems and has negatively impacted
Burma's economic standing. Today it is one of the poorest
countries in the world with a quarter of the population living
in poverty and significant health challenges including some of
the highest HIV, malaria and drug resistant TB rates in the
region.
Ultimately, Burma's future will be determined by its people
and that is why support for civil society is at the core of our
efforts, from strengthening political reforms and furthering
national reconciliation to expanding economic opportunity and
improving the health and resilience of vulnerable communities.
Most recently, democratic freedoms continue to be tested. I
associate myself with the concerns of Assistant Secretary
Russel in regards to the recent arrests, and one of the arrests
was the spouse of a USAID grantee. They should be released
immediately and unconditionally. While the people of Burma face
many development challenges, I will focus on the election, the
Rohingya, and the peace process.
In terms of the election, we knew from the beginning that
supporting the mechanics of a democratic election would be a
tremendous challenge but it was a challenge worth accepting
because the reformers in Burma asked for and needed our
involvement. And despite the challenges, the people in Burma
are actively participating in a vibrant and competitive
election season with 93 registered political parties including
60 parties representing ethnic minority groups.
The U.S. Government is providing more than 18 million in
assistance to support the elections and political process. This
includes assistance relating to the election administration,
election observation, political party building, civil society,
and the media. On election administration we are working
through the International Foundation for Electoral Systems
(IFES) to increase the capacity of the Union Election
Commission.
The Union Election Commission has made significant efforts
to engage with civil society on election preparations, include
ethnic representatives on the commission, improve the technical
aspects of election preparations and support the deployment of
independent election observers. In addition, through our
partner, the International Republican Institute, IRI, USAID is
helping to train political parties on managing effective party
offices and ensuring that party policies are representative and
inclusive.
But despite the positive steps, many Muslim candidates were
recently disqualified and hundreds and thousands of Rohingya
have been disenfranchised. Steps that limit political
participation run counter to democratic principles and raise
questions about the inclusivity of the elections.
In treatment of the Rohingya, the United States remains
deeply concerned about the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Rakhine State and the treatment of minorities
including the ethnic Rohingya population. More than 143,000
internally displaced persons remain in camps, with limited
access to basic services, restrictions on their movement, and
tremendous levels of poverty and malnutrition.
U.S. Government assistance over the past year alone include
more than 50 million in humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
people, including the Rohingya in Burma and the region.
Assistance includes access to safe drinking water, new
sanitation facilities and hygiene promotion activities in these
camps. And in response to the recent floods, USAID is providing
more than 5 million in flood relief and recovery to the people
affected in the disaster, reaching over 250,000 people with
emergency food and supplies.
The peace process. The long term stability of Burma and the
success of the reforms hinge on national reconciliation and an
end to the 65 years of armed conflict. The U.S. has provided
8.5 million for activities that bring together civil society
and the government to engage effectively, to build trust among
the key stakeholders, to ensure civil society and women's
participation in the peace process, and to provide training and
support for civilian ceasefire monitoring. Since 2012, the U.S.
has provided more than 100 million to conflict-affected
communities through the provision of food, education, health
care, protection, and other lifesaving services.
In conclusion, we are clear-eyed about the challenges
relating to these elections, the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Rakhine State and the peace process. As the events
unfold over the coming months, we will reassess the context and
nature of our assistance to Burma in close consultation with
the State Department and Congress. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today, and I look forward to your
counsel and questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stivers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. We thank the two panelists. We understand that
the election process includes the campaign, election day and
the transition to a new government, and it is not a single
event. But reports as recent as yesterday have the estimates
that up to 4 million citizens are unable to vote for varying
reasons. That is more than 10 percent of the 33.5 million
people officially eligible to vote.
I would like to know on what will we base our assessment
about whether this election is credible, transparent and
inclusive? I have heard that it will depend solely on whether
the Burmese people accept the election, but I have also heard
that we will make the call based on what we observe. Could you
provide any clarification on that, either of you, and what are
we prepared to do if the election doesn't meet our benchmarks?
Mr. Russel, I will start with you.
Mr. Russel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are absolutely
right in that the United States will call it as we see it. We
will make an assessment based on the facts and we will
calibrate our response to the elections based on our assessment
of how credible, how transparent, how inclusive, how free and
fair we think it was. We are not wearing rose-colored glasses
here. We are very mindful of the fundamental structural defects
that I mentioned. There is nothing fair about reserving 25
percent of the legislature for the military. There is nothing
fair about disenfranchising the white card holders, the
Rohingya. But Aung San Suu Kyi, the NLD, the parties, have
decided to contest the election on that basis mindful of those
defects. So we will assess, we will make our assessment based
on what we hear and see, based on what we are told by Aung San
Suu Kyi and the NLD, the other parties, and the election
observers.
It is important to note that not only IFES, but IRI, NDI,
Carter Center, EU, are there in substantial numbers as are many
thousands of domestic observers. We will listen to the Burmese
media and we will listen to the Burmese people. We will apply
these criteria, and we will also look at the morning after.
It is critically important, Mr. Chairman, that all parties,
including the military, accept the results of the polling and
then proceed with the process of selecting a Parliament,
government formation, as well as the choosing of a President in
a way that is fully transparent. Our ability to assist the new
Burmese Government, let alone to look at relaxation of
sanctions or other measures, will depend on our assessment of
the integrity of the overall process. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Mr. Stivers, do you have any thoughts?
Mr. Stivers. I think Assistant Secretary Russel explained
it very well. There are obvious challenges with the election--
structural challenges--before the voting even begins. But the
outcome of the contested seats is extremely important and as we
said before, there is an open and vibrant and competitive
process over those seats. The challenges are daunting in terms
of trying to administer an election in a country with 53
million people with limited experience with campaigns and
democracy. And certainly the voter lists needed a lot of work,
and we have been working with our partner, IFES, to try to
improve those.
And I have been there with IFES in Burma to see how that is
done. Realize that there are 90 political parties, over 100
different languages, and you have conflicts in many of the
areas where we hope voting will take place. So the challenges
of administering an election in this context are extremely
difficult and we are working with the UEC and our partners
there to make it as transparent and credible as possible.
Mr. Salmon. And Mr. Stivers, with the monsoon season,
international observers and organizations expect Rohingya
boats, boat flights to resume, what preparations has the
Government of Burma taken in advance of this, and are other
regional countries such as Thailand and Malaysia expressing
concerns about the possibility of migrant boats landing on
their shores? Has there been a wider ASEAN-level response to
this, and how can the United States hold Burma accountable for
the welfare of its own people given that Burma does not
recognize Rohingya as Burmese citizens?
Mr. Stivers. There are a lot of questions there. I will try
to get them specifically. In terms of the issue with the
Rohingya and the Muslim minorities, that is obviously a concern
and a reason why the election will fall short. And certainly we
are providing assistance to the Rohingya there in Rakhine
State. We are providing assistance as much as possible in some
of the conflict communities, but certainly conducting an
election in those areas is extremely difficult based on those
realities.
In terms of the flooding, we have provided a significant
amount of assistance to help the most vulnerable people who
have been affected, and as that moves forward we will try to
make sure that that assistance continues.
Mr. Salmon. Do we think that their government is prepared
to deal with this, Mr. Russel?
Mr. Russel. To your earlier question, Mr. Chairman, we are
working intensively with ASEAN as a group. I was in Kuala
Lumpur 2 weeks ago for discussions on regional issues and
raised the issue of irregular migration as the rainy season
ends.
We are also dealing directly with governments in the first
instance with the Government of Burma and urging them to
accelerate their efforts in Rakhine State to expand access by
humanitarian organizations to facilitate the peaceful return of
Rohingya and IDPs from camps to their homes, and in the
meantime, to protect their security and to work on creating
economic opportunities. We are also working bilaterally with
the concerned countries in the region, specifically Malaysia,
Thailand, and Indonesia. Secretary Kerry met with the
Indonesian and the Malaysian foreign ministers over the last
few weeks, and our effort there continues.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Chairman Royce.
Mr. Royce. Well, thank you, Secretary Russel. We have
listed only one person, only one person, on the human rights
ground on that list. I wonder why we aren't using this tool to
greater effect. It just seems that the balance is out of skew
given what is at stake and given the magnitude of the human
rights abuses.
Mr. Russel. Mr. Chairman, we work closely with our
colleagues in the Treasury Department and in the intelligence
community, as well as of course through our Embassy and our
activist Ambassador in Rangoon, Derek Mitchell, to try and
identify bad actors, including human rights violators, and
develop legally viable cases for designation. We are actively
on the hunt for candidates and for evidence that will be
adequate, legally, to list----
Mr. Royce. Let me ask you another question then and that
has to do with the ``safe-zones.'' Activists pushed for ``safe-
zones'' in Darfur and in south Sudan, and that was the concept
where places people could go to escape either Bashir's aerial
bombardment or to escape the Janjaweed, and you have the same
debate going on in Syria today: Could we create safe zones to
protect civilian populations from carpet bombing, and in that
case done by Assad, by his regime?
This has been suggested today in terms of Rakhine State.
You have a state here where this minority population is
persecuted and we don't have access for non-governmental
organizations, for humanitarian groups that want to come in and
provide services for people that are in crisis. Is this a
viable option in Burma? What steps would be needed to set up
that safe zone for the Rohingya inside of Burma? Those were
questions I was going to ask you.
Mr. Russel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is important to
take as our starting point that Rakhine State--as poor and as
desperate as it is--is not a war zone and our strategy focuses
on pushing the Government of the Union of Myanmar, the
Government of Burma, to fulfill its responsibilities to its own
people. The people in Burma deserve the full protection of the
government both at the local level and at the national level.
That is what we are pushing for.
The concern that I would have with safe zones, per se, is
the risk of segregation. All people in Burma, all people in
Rakhine State deserve to have their personal safety and
security protected. There is, Mr. Chairman, significant
dialogue now between the two communities. There is a process by
which the Rohingya in the IDP camps are being assisted in
returning safely and securely to their hometowns. I believe
they don't want to be segregated. They want to be integrated
and that is the direction that we are and should be pushing.
Mr. Royce. Well, here is the problem. As I talk to
representatives of humanitarian organizations, of course
Doctors Without Borders was pushed out, but the argument is
that that government is not doing that. It is not protecting
religious minorities. So if you can have a carve-out of an area
where traditionally they have lived there for generations,
where the NGO community can go, that is better than state-
sponsored attacks where the police look the other way. Anyway I
just wonder when they will be reintegrated into Burmese
society. Is the government there giving you some indication? I
assume you are actively pushing for integration, right?
Mr. Russel. Yes, we are. We are pushing hard for the safety
of the Rohingya, and the full access of humanitarian agencies.
Doctors Without Borders and some of the major NGOs have been
allowed to operate again.
Mr. Royce. Well, thank you. I am out of time, but thank you
again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. The chair recognizes Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Stivers, I want to focus a little bit
about your agency's financing of parts of the election. I would
like to know how much money we have spent supporting the
efforts to develop a voter list, and for temporary workers on
election day and the other costs, whether or not we think that
the money we spent to help Myanmar, Burma, develop the election
lists has been well spent. And there is going to be 40,000
supposedly, roughly 40,000 temporary workers on election day.
They are paid for by foreign donors. Does that include us? And
are these 40,000 going to be securing the election or
intimidating the regime's opponents?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you for that question, Mr. Sherman. The
U.S. has provided $18 million to support the election in total,
and I can get you that breakdown between the different
components after this hearing. Those go to our partners, IRI,
NDI, to work on things like party building, voter registration,
and some of the technical aspects of running an election
through the UEC.
I think that when we had this opening and when they called
for an election, we believed that this was a great opportunity
to support the election. There are obviously many flaws, many
challenges, but we have been calling for elections for decades
in Burma. And the support we provide for these technical
aspects shouldn't be looked at as assistance to the government
or some sort of budget support. This is democracy building
technical assistance to our partners to help the government.
Mr. Sherman. I will ask you though from the philosophy
which I support, we paid in part for these election lists. Are
they good election lists, voter lists?
Mr. Stivers. The voter lists are challenged. As I mentioned
before, there are 53 million people in the country. They
haven't had an election like this ever and there are
significant challenges.
Mr. Sherman. Another challenge. They do a good job, they
don't do a good job. Mr. Russel, you seem to have a comment.
Mr. Russel. Yes, I was in Burma when the voter lists were
first displayed, and I think the consensus among the civil
society groups that I met with was that this is a significant
step forward, a huge step forward, both because they were
posted online and because they were posted up in the townships
and the facilities that created an opportunity for people to
find mistakes.
Mr. Sherman. That is good to hear. What about the 40,000
temporary workers?
Mr. Russel. So I also met with the Home Minister who is in
charge of this and pushed hard for him to accept that with
respect to the poll monitors and security people, while we
understood the need to supplement the very sparse police force,
it was important that these people not be seen as agents of the
government and not intimidate potential voters. So they have
now begun a training program, something that we strongly
encouraged. These will be unarmed people with no police powers.
And we are continuing to push for transparency by the
government in explaining the rules and the roles of the----
Mr. Sherman. Have they hired party activists for the
insider party or have they hired people without a strong
political view and record of activism, or do we just not know?
Mr. Stivers. In terms of the observers?
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Stivers. Well, there are both domestic and
international independent observers.
Mr. Sherman. I am talking about the 40,000 domestic
observers.
Mr. Russel. The individuals who are providing security in
the polls? Let me take that question back.
Mr. Sherman. Okay, I will ask you to come back with that
because I have got another one, and this one is more difficult.
The State Department has to have standards to evaluate human
rights. Now there is, as I mentioned in my opening statement, a
tough line between immigration law enforcement on the one hand
and ethnic cleansing on the other. I will give you an extreme
example.
If the country of Romania were to expel its Hungarian
minority on the theory that the Romanians have been there since
the Roman Empire and the Hungarians moved there after the fall
of the Roman Empire and apparently moved there without
documents at that time during the Middle Ages, we would call
that ethnic cleansing. I assume that is clear. But if a country
were to deport a man who is 80 years old who had spent 75 years
living in that country that would be the law of many or most
democracies around the world.
There are a number of countries that deny birth
citizenship, some who deny citizenship to those whose parents
were born in the country. Do we have a standard or is
oppression like the Supreme Court referred to pornography, we
know it when we see it? Do we have a model for what is fair
treatment of ethnic minorities who have lived in countries for
less than 1,000 years?
Mr. Russel. Let me speak to the specific issue of the
Rohingya. Our standard is maintaining the human rights,
dignity, and safety of all residents in Burma. We believe that
particularly after generations of residency in Burma, or all of
the Rohingya should be given a pathway to full citizenship.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Russel, if I could interrupt, not all the
Rohingya have lived in--there are Rohingya who are born in
Bangladesh. One of them might have moved last year without
documents to Myanmar and you would draw a distinction. That is
the distinction I am asking you to draw.
Obviously everyone in the entire world including those that
we deport should be treated with dignity. The question is has
the State Department come up with a U.S. policy on whether it
is a violation of human rights to deport someone who has lived
in a country for one generation, family that has lived there
two generations, a person who has lived in a country 75 out of
their 80 years? Do we have standards or can you just--is it a
matter of, obviously to you and to me, if a Rohingya family has
lived in Burma for three generations it is wrong to deport
them?
Mr. Russel. Well, we are not presuming to tell the Burmese
precisely what standards they must apply in determining
citizenship. What we are saying is that the Rohingya who live
and have maintained families in Burma should be granted a
pathway to citizenship that doesn't force them to self-identify
against their will as Bengali.
Mr. Sherman. But we apply that to those who have been there
a certain amount of time, which is most of them, and we are not
applying that to those who have been there for only a few years
and may have moved from Bangladesh just a few years ago. And we
just don't have a standard, a description of what is and is not
a violation of--a deportation or a deprivation of full
citizenship that violates human rights. We are just kind of
calling it by the seat of our pants.
Mr. Russel. The focus, Mr. Congressman, is on the long term
residents of Burma.
Mr. Sherman. And multi-generational.
Mr. Russel. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. The history of
elections in Burma have been really something that has--it has
been on my radar screen, but it has not been on many people's
radar screen, where they used to say there is a general
election in Burma and that meant all the generals got together
and decided who was going to be boss. And at least we have made
some progress since those days, and we are happy to hear that.
And it has taken a number of--a horrendous amount of effort
on the part of our State Department and other human rights
people throughout the world getting behind Aung San Suu Kyi
even to achieve the progress that we have had. And now we are
hopefully in the home stretch to coming to a point where Burma
could foresee within a period of time to have an acceptable
government to democratic, basic democratic standards. But we
certainly, from what your testimony is, is that we have not
crossed that line at that threshold yet but maybe this upcoming
election if it is held correctly will put us into a position
where we have at least crossed into the line of acceptability.
In the past we have had the Karen and the Karenni and other
ethnic minorities that have been oppressed. Is that oppression
still going on with the Karen and Karenni?
Mr. Russel. Well, thank you, Congressman. First, I couldn't
agree with you more. The military dictatorship spent 50 years
digging itself into a hole and it is going to be an arduous
process for them to climb out of it. One election isn't going
to solve every problem, but we are working, and particularly
our fantastic team in the field led by our Ambassador Derek
Mitchell are working tirelessly to assist the Burmese civil
society and----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Through this process I would hope that Mr.
Sherman's comments about having a definition that we can
actually be creating definitions as we are working through this
process and see what works and what doesn't. And we will be
anxiously awaiting to hear what you have to tell us as this
proceeds.
What about in the--okay, back to the Karen and the Karenni.
Are they going to participate in this free election? And is
there any indication that the repression, the level, the
military activities against them have decreased?
Mr. Russel. Well, the signing of the ceasefire, the
national ceasefire agreement with eight parties represents a
very big step forward. There is still fighting in some of the
ethnic areas. Polling will not take place in areas where
fighting is underway. But all of the groups including the
Kachin, including some of the outliers, have agreed on the text
of the ceasefire agreement. Different groups have different
reasons for not signing yet.
What we are pushing for, Congressman, is for the military
in Burma and for the government to exercise maximum restraint
and to accord, even to the groups that haven't yet signed, the
care that they are according to the groups that have already
signed.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, let me just suggest that signing the
document is okay. It is something we can say, here is a
benchmark.
Mr. Russel. Right.
Mr. Rohrabacher. But it is the actual fulfilling of--I
mean, somebody could have a ceasefire, and from what--I have
sources of information from Burma say there is still a lot of
military attacks going on the Karen. Let me just ask this then,
okay. So we are going to--hopefully there will be the fighting
will go down, there will be some polling going on there.
What about over there with the, I guess you call them the
Rohingya, in the western side with the Muslims from Bangladesh
we have the opposite problem there. And with the Karen and the
Karenni you have government officials and government military
attacking these minority groups, but with the Muslims what you
have is the government stepping aside and watching violent acts
being committed against the Muslim population there in western
Burma. So in one case the government is too anxious to use its
military against its own people, but on the other side not
willing to protect the human rights, basic human rights, of the
Muslim population.
So I hope that if there is any message that we send out
from this hearing and it is to those Muslims who are under
attack, you have human rights. We care about your human rights
as much as we do about the Christians who are being under
attack and the Karenni and the Karen areas of Burma.
And I wish you guys a lot of luck, and I know that our
government, that you and the State Department are very sincere
about trying to bring peace to Burma after all of these years,
and I am anxious to have a positive report a year from now
about how the ceasefire and the election actually has moved
forward in a way that is putting Burma on the right path.
Mr. Russel. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question, I have
two questions, the first one following up about Rohingya. Has
the National League for Democracy and Aung San Suu Kyi
addressed the persecution of Rohingya, and would a government
controlled by the opposition party, would that mean improved
conditions for Rohingya?
Mr. Russel. Generally speaking, the NLD has stayed away
from this issue which is a lightning rod, a hot button issue in
Burmese politics. Burma is a country with over 80 percent
Buddhism, and the subject of Muslims, the subject of Rohingya
is very controversial.
Mr. Lowenthal. You mean everyone is against them.
Mr. Russel. Regrettably, this is not an environment where
any political leaders seem prepared to step up and to speak out
forcefully in defense of the rights of the Muslim minority and
particularly of the Rohingya.
Congressman Rohrabacher put his finger on a paradox, on a
dilemma in Burma, which is that at the same time that the
government and the leaders are putting a tremendous amount of
effort into firming up the union by reaching ceasefire
agreements and ultimately peace agreements with ethnic
minorities such as the Karen and others, they are turning a
blind eye to the prevalence of hate speech and divisive
religious activities that will not strengthen the union but
will in fact divide it.
Now I was gratified when President Obama last visited Burma
and stood side by side with Aung San Suu Kyi in a press
conference. She spoke out clearly in defense of religious
freedom and the responsibility of a democracy to protect
minorities.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I want to ask another, since we
are talking about persecuted minorities, and I want to talk
about the LGBT community. I want to raise that activists in
Burma reported a high level of police abuse against LGBT
persons and transgender people in particular. The State
Department has programs to work with law enforcement in many
parts of the world to help them improve their human rights
records and their criminal justice system.
What I am interested in is how can the United States
Government work with Burmese law enforcement, ensure that they
are not targeting or abusing people because of their sexual
orientation or gender identity? And also, specifically, we have
worked real hard to create a special envoy for LGBT rights,
Randy Berry, in the State Department. Has he been able to
address any of these issues? And specifically, there is the
British era law that criminalizes homosexuality, Section 377.
It is still on the books in Burma. Activists in Burma are
working to get this antiquated law removed. What are we going
to do about this? What can we do about this issue?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal, for that question.
Let me field it first because the protection of LGBTI
individuals throughout Asia is a priority at USAID and
certainly part of our overall human rights initiatives in the
region. In Burma, specifically, we are working with civil
society organizations who are developing the skills to prevent
harassment. They advocate for equal protection under the law
and support activities to give LGBTI individuals greater voices
in their communities. So this is part of our overall strategy
in Burma within----
Mr. Lowenthal. Will we be able to get rid of Section 377
which actually outlaws, criminalizes homosexuality in Burma?
Mr. Stivers. We are empowering civil society voices who are
pushing for a stronger voice and adequate human rights for the
LGBTI----
Mr. Lowenthal. I am almost out of time, but I would like
the report back and I would like, really, how that is moving
forward.
Mr. Russel. I know that my colleague Tom Malinowski when he
visited Burma earlier this year met with various groups and
raised these issues. We will get you an answer.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I am very interested in that. And
I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Without objection, I would like to recognize
Mr. Crowley for a question.
Mr. Crowley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
indulgence here. I served for 12 years on this committee and I
appreciate the opportunity to be back here again. I have
tremendous concern about--I appreciate in particular the
comments by Mr. Rohrabacher who has worked for many, many years
on this as well, and particularly appreciated the comment about
the general elections as both said.
And especially in light of the fact that we look at that 25
percent of all the seats within the Parliament no matter what
happens will still be held by the military. In fact, you would
have to have every seat won by one party or in coalition with
parties to in essence have any possibility of affecting change
in terms of Burma's constitution. Is that right, Mr. Russel?
Mr. Russel. Well, I was in Burma recently and met with Aung
San Suu Kyi, and we took out a pen and pencil and started doing
the math. Yes, the opposition would have to win 66 percent of
the seats in Parliament in order to mitigate the structural
bias built in by 25 percent allocation to the military. But she
believes this is possible. The NLD is determined,
notwithstanding the constitutional ban on her becoming the
President. She said, and she said it publicly that she sees no
bar to her being able to lead and direct the government.
Mr. Crowley. But you would have no problem saying right now
that the cards are pretty stacked, wouldn't you?
Mr. Russel. My starting point in describing elections is to
recognize the structural flaws. I would add, and I did earlier,
Congressman, to that list, the disenfranchisement of Rohingya,
the white card holders, and some of the other shortcomings.
Mr. Crowley. And I appreciate the questioning by my
colleague from California, but I think it is also important to
point out that under Aung San Suu Kyi's leadership, the NLD
voted against all four bills discriminating against the
Rohingya population. Is that not correct, Mr. Russel, or Mr.
Stivers?
Mr. Russel. The four race and religion bills which have
passed--you know what, Congressman, I will have to fact check
how the NLD voted on all----
Mr. Crowley. My understanding is they were the leaders in
the opposition to that legislation. So I think it is important
to point out in terms of the questioning to what degree Aung
San Suu Kyi or her party have stood in terms of--this is a very
sensitive issue, I recognize that, the sensitivity. But they
have taken a courageous stand as a party in opposition to that
discriminatory legislation. I just want to make that. And if
you could get back to us for the record, but I am just stating
for the record, my understanding is they did do that.
And you have talked about what you are doing to deal with
the election day challenges, and you acknowledge the separate
structural deficiencies that we just mentioned like the 25
percent of the seats controlled by the military, but you
haven't said yet what you are going to do, or what the United
States Government through our State Department is going to do
to fix the structural differences. What are you going to do?
What does the State Department plan to do to address the
structural differences--deficiencies to address the core issues
there?
Mr. Russel. Well, Congressman Crowley, the first order of
business for a new government that takes office on April 1st in
Burma is going to be dealing with the problems that the
previous government has exported into the future. The
disenfranchisement of an important segment of Burma's
population, these white card holders, the Rohingya, who have
been allowed to vote--or before, the structural bias in terms
of the 25 percent, the constitutional ban on Aung San Suu Kyi
Presidency, these are among the issues that are going to have
to be dealt with first and foremost by a new government.
Before we get to a new government, sir, we have to ensure
that the results of the polling are honored by all parties
including the military. We have to ensure that the government
formation period and that process is a fair process, a
transparent process. We have to ensure also that the selection
process, the election of the new President which is done by a
fairly arcane system be a credible one as well.
Mr. Crowley. Mr. Russel, do you believe we need to go back
to action-for-action, the policy that was established during
the Clinton time as Secretary of State? Do we need to go back
to action-for-action?
Mr. Russel. Well, to the extent that we respond positively
or negatively to what the Burmese do, I think that that
principle has been sustained. But I do not believe that we are
in a situation that warrants going back to the very basic
point-for-point quid pro quo because of the momentum that has
been built up in Burmese society toward reform and democracy.
Mr. Crowley. Mr. Chairman, I think the President has
acknowledged there has been backsliding, and I think it is a
direct result of abandonment, in my opinion, of the action-for-
action that was effective in moving Burma forward. I am gravely
concerned about this election process. The cards are stacked. I
know that Aung San Suu Kyi and her party are putting on a great
face moving forward, but they know the cards are stacked as
well. I don't believe these elections will really demonstrate
the true intention of the people of Burma in the result of
those elections given the fact that 25 percent of these seats
will be held by the military no matter what. That needs to
change, Mr. Russel, and I hope our State Department gets that
message. Republicans and Democrats agree that there needs to be
change in Burma. I will yield back.
Mr. Salmon. I thank the gentleman. I thank both of the
witnesses for their time. We will dismiss you now and seat the
next panel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Russel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Salmon. We are very appreciative to be joined by a
private panel this afternoon as well. The Honorable Tom Andrews
appears before us as the president of United to End Genocide
and Ms. Jennifer Quigley as the president of the U.S. Campaign
for Burma. Mr. Andrews, we will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE TOM ANDREWS, PRESIDENT, UNITED TO
END GENOCIDE

Mr. Andrews. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
members of the committee. And thank you, Congressman Crowley,
for your passionate and always diligent focus on human rights
in Burma. We really appreciate it.
It is so important that you are holding this public
hearing, Mr. Chairman, at this particular time. As you have
recognized, in 2\1/2\ weeks the citizens of Burma will go to
the polls in what the Burmese authorities are describing as
democratic elections. Those who are fortunate enough to have
the right to vote to cast ballots for those parliamentary seats
that have not been reserved for the military or by a
constitution that cannot be changed unless it is approved by
the military, are grateful for the opportunity to cast their
votes.
But they could be forgiven for being highly skeptical of
the elections that they are now facing. The last time there
were national elections in Burma was in 1990. Aung San Suu Kyi
and the National League for Democracy had an overwhelming
victory, and as a result of that they headed off either to
prison, either to exile, or to house arrest where they remained
for decades. I was elected to Congress in 1990. I went to
Congress, Aung San Suu Kyi went to prison. It was a fundamental
injustice.
Ladies and gentlemen, since that time, the United States
began to exert systematic, economic and diplomatic and
political pressure on the regime. That pressure worked. Five
years ago, the military government agreed to reforms that
allowed for new freedoms. Aung San Suu Kyi went from house
arrest to the campaign trail and then to a seat in Parliament.
I have put in my written testimony where things stand
today. Many of those points were echoed by members of the
committee. I am very impressed with the fact of the level of
awareness of this committee of the disturbing developments
within Burma, but I want to emphasize a few major concerns. One
is that the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, after
sending a delegation to Burma, has concluded Burma is at the
very top of countries in the world, the single top country in
which it is most likely that we will see mass atrocities and
genocide in the coming weeks. Political prisoners are being
newly detained in that country. At least 91 prisoners of
conscience are currently in prison while hundreds of activists
await trial for their peaceful political activities.
Burma continues to be designated as a Country of Particular
Concern under the International Religious Freedom Act. The
movement of extreme Buddhist nationalists, the Association to
Protect Race and Religion, or Ma Ba Tha, is gaining strength
across Burma as it relentlessly pursues a campaign fueling fear
and bigotry against religious minorities.
Now you heard from the testimony today there was a
recognition of some of these problems. But there was also a
good news narrative from the testimony you heard from the
administration. One was that Doctors Without Borders, who the
government kicked out of Rakhine State leaving many, many
thousands of people without health care, I traveled to that
area when that happened. I met these people and their families.
I returned 3 months later, and most of the people I met had
perished because of this governmental decision.
Now the administration says Doctors Without Borders is back
in Rakhine State, but what they won't tell you is that they are
back under severe restrictions. That they don't have--are not
allowed to provide the people with the resources that they have
available to provide their health care. And so more and more
people are going to continue to suffer and die because of that
government restriction on people who are willing to provide
health care who are not allowed to do so.
As you heard, ASEAN Parliamentarians for Human Rights came
to Washington, met with Congressman Crowley and Lowenthal. They
have just released a new report after sending a delegation very
recently into Burma. It is in my testimony, in the written
testimony. It is called Disenfranchisement and Desperation in
Myanmar's Rakhine State: Drivers of a Regional Crisis.
What they are saying is that the U.N. Refugee Agency's
warning that we are likely to see a new wave of desperate
people heading into rickety boats and heading into the sea. A
fleeing from this persecution is likely to occur because we
haven't addressed the core reasons for them leaving and we have
simply ignored the situation. And the only reason that these
boats have not continued is because of the monsoon season, and
the monsoon season is about to end.
In 2012, President Obama made his historic visit to Burma.
The President of Burma, Thein Sein, gave 11 commitments to the
President for reform. The President invited him to the White
House; President Thein Sein reiterated those 11 commitments. He
has failed to keep all but one, including the basic right, the
basic commitment for the United Nations to have human rights
monitors in that country. We have not called him on this. We
have not exercised the various tools that we have available to
hold this government accountable and to hold those who are
guilty of human rights violations accountable. It has been a
systematic failure to do so. And I echo and thank Congressman
Crowley for his comments raising that question.
Yes, there has been progress in some areas, but there has
also been backsliding. We are going in the wrong direction, and
it is incumbent among this Congress and this administration to
take action now. It is a matter of life and death for so many.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Andrews follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you, Mr. Andrews.
Ms. Quigley.

STATEMENT OF MS. JENNIFER QUIGLEY, PRESIDENT, U.S. CAMPAIGN FOR
BURMA

Ms. Quigley. Thank you, Chairman, Congressman Crowley. I
would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak today
about the challenges to democracy, human rights, and peace in
Burma. A week ago today, the Government of Burma touted the
historic signing of a document referred to as a nationwide
ceasefire agreement. It is not a nationwide ceasefire
agreement.
After a multi-year negotiation process, the Government of
Burma refused to allow three small ethnic armed organizations
to sign the nationwide ceasefire agreement. Many of the other
ethnic armed organizations were clear that they would not sign
a non-inclusive ceasefire agreement. Several of the largest
armed ethnic organizations including the Kachin Independence
Organization did not sign the nationwide non-inclusive
ceasefire agreement. While diplomats and media converged on
Naypyidaw to witness the signing of this agreement, the Burmese
army launched an offensive against one of the non-signatories,
the Shan State Army-North, displacing more than 3,000 Shan
villagers, on the same day.
The timing of the signing of the nationwide ceasefire was
more important than the number of participants. The Government
of Burma pushed forcefully for a nationwide ceasefire to be
signed prior to the November 8th nationwide parliamentary
elections. The upcoming election is part of the current
government's strategy to achieve legitimacy as a democratically
elected government.
The government has taken steps to eliminate its chances at
failing to achieve its goal. The 2008 constitution guarantees
25 percent of the seats to the military. With only 75 percent
of the seats contested, the USDP only needs to win 34 percent
of the contested seats to form a government with the backing of
the military. Whereas, Aung San Suu Kyi and the National League
for Democracy need to win 67 percent of the contested seats to
have a simple majority and the potential to form the next
government.
To date, the Union Election Commission has actually
cancelled voting for more ethnic minorities than they cancelled
in the 2010 election. The Union Solidarity and Development
Party government is perverting religion to garner support from
a majority Buddhist electorate. The already persecuted and
oppressed Rohingya minority have been stripped of their voting
rights, disenfranchising approximately 1 million people. Muslim
candidates have been disqualified including U Shwe Maung, a
current USDP member of Parliament from the 2010 election.
Parliament passed the four race and religion discrimination
laws this year to portray the USDP as the protectors and
defenders of Buddhism. The fomenting of religious
discrimination and tension raises grave concerns about election
related violence.
So despite the disenfranchisement of millions of ethnic
minorities, exclusions of Muslims, and disproportionate
advantage for the ruling USDP party ahead of the November 8th
election, the international community has an outsized
expectation for an acceptable election outcome and hope for an
NLD victory. But regardless of the election outcome, there are
significant obstacles to establishing a truly genuine
democratic government in the country.
The primary obstacle is a 2008 constitution. The military's
constitution guarantees the military has veto power over any
constitutional changes. To specify, what normally gets left out
is that you need more than 75 percent of the vote in Parliament
to have a constitutional change, which means every single
elected member as well as at least one member of the military
block of seats.
In addition, the constitution states that the civilian
government does not have authority over the military; it does
not provide for an independent judiciary; it continues the
legal authority of all military junta laws, which means that
that will continue the 1982 citizenship law that denies the
Rohingya citizenship as well as the law Mr. Lowenthal referred
to against LGBT rights. So those cannot be changed without
constitutional change, which means the military has to prove
that change. In addition, it guarantees that the military has
authority over almost all ethnic minority affairs.
The persecution and oppression of the Rohingya minority
continues to grow dire. Earlier this year, President Thein Sein
invalidated the legal status of the Rohingya identification
cards known as white cards. This has led to the Rohingya
leaving Burma and taking to the sea. The United States must
address both the root cause of the Rohingya's plight in Burma
as well as to continue to pressure regional governments to
rescue and accept the Rohingya refugees who become stranded at
sea.
These deep structural and systemic problems should be the
focus of U.S. Burma relations. For too long, the Obama
administration has prioritized building and deepening a
relationship with the Burmese Government in hopes of persuading
through diplomacy, capacity building and investment. This
approach has not worked. Nearly 3 years ago, President Thein
Sein pledged 11 commitments on democracy, human rights, peace
and humanitarian need to President Obama; to date only one has
been fulfilled.
It would be a mistake to predicate the future of U.S. Burma
policy on the signing of a partial ceasefire agreement or a
deeply flawed election. Congress should consider legislation
that is forward-looking to address the problems Burma will face
regardless of who wins the election. Binding benchmarks for
further lifting of remaining sanctions or conditions for
potential future engagement have been sorely lacking from U.S.
Burma policy since investment and financial sanctions were
lifted in 2012. Congress should create a legislative policy
that clearly states U.S. expectations from the Government of
Burma on key human rights and democracy indicators as a basis
for the future of U.S. Burma relations.
In my written testimony I included a list of what they
could potentially include. The Burmese military remains the
biggest obstacle to achieving these key democratic and human
rights concerns. Whether the USDP or NLD wins the election
November 8th and forms the next government, neither will be
able to address these concerns and convince the Burmese
military to change its ways without the international community
and particularly the United States conditioning the future of
bilateral and multilateral relations on these key democratic
and human rights concerns. A genuine democratic Burma is in the
best interest of our two countries. Let's ensure Burma achieves
genuine democracy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Quigley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Just prior to you, we had a chance
to hear from our administration and their policy on Burma. Mr.
Andrews, what is your opinion on the U.S. Government's role in
Burma? How effective has the U.S. been on assisting the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis, the democratic transition, the
ceasefire negotiations, and what do you think the United States
should do? What role should we play in the coming months?
Mr. Andrews. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is an excellent
question. As Mr. Russel pointed out in his testimony, the
administration has given voice to the concerns that he
outlined. That is true. He explained that the administration is
pushing for relief for the horrendous situation affecting the
people in Rakhine, the Rohingya.
But what he didn't specify is what specifically the
administration is doing to push for these changes and these
reforms. The first thing that they could do is give voice, the
President could give voice to the fact that he was personally
given 11 commitments, and only one of those commitments have
they come through on. I mean that was 3 years ago, Mr.
Chairman, and we haven't heard anything about those 11
commitments from the administration.
We can also begin to apply targeted sanctions against the
individuals who are responsible for the human rights violations
in that country. The administration has the authority to do so,
the SDN list. But despite the fact that those human rights
violations have spiked, not a single living human being has
been added to that SDN list. In fact, the only discussion we
seem to be hearing is how people can get off the SDN list.
The administration could also look at issues like military
to military relations, GSP preferences. There is a whole range
of things that the administration could hold out or hold off
depending upon the behavior of the Government of Burma, but it
hasn't. I think that Congressman Crowley's call for action-for-
action approach is exactly what is needed and is exactly what
is missing.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Just last week, we had a number of
arrests of Burmese citizens because they expressed their
political opinions on social media. This is despite the fact
that the Burmese Government has dedicated itself to improving
human rights and freedoms in the country, and despite the fact
that the international community is watching this democratic
transition slowly.
Based on your experience with Burma, how would you assess
the conditions of civil society, Ms. Quigley? Are people free
to express their own political or religious thoughts? And to
me, the recent four race and religion protection laws, which
egregiously violates religious rights and freedom, impedes
progress on this front. The law doesn't just discriminate
against Muslims but other religions as well. How do we respond,
and what will the Burmese Government do about this?
Ms. Quigley. So civil society in Burma would say that there
are, you can call it a tale of two civil societies. Those who
spread hate and Buddhist extremism and nationalism have free
reign. They can hold events, rallies, protests. They can spew
hate online on social media. Whereas, the space for those who
want to show criticism or concern for the national education
law or for the LGBT community or those who want to speak up
against the four race and religion discrimination laws, those
are the ones that find themselves being arrested and facing
charges for violation of some of the new laws that have been
put in place.
And so it is sort of a tale of two very different civil
societies and two very different responses. It is one of the
reasons why there has been an extreme limitation of voices in
the country against the persecution of the Rohingya or against
the race and religion discrimination laws, because they fear
death threats.
There is actually a coalition of women's organizations who
did publicly speak out and call on Parliament and President
Thein Sein to not pass these laws, and the leaders of that have
faced daily death threats as a result of doing that. And so it
is sort of a tale of two civil societies in Burma as a result.
And it is something that our country needs to recognize and
condition our relationship on a change in which you see
prosecution of any hate speech that incites violence and help
to enable civil society to find more space where they are not
prosecuted for exercising what, here, would be fundamental
rights and freedoms.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Crowley.
Mr. Crowley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again for the
indulgence. I really do appreciate your calling this hearing. I
also want to thank and commend both Congressman Andrews and Ms.
Quigley for your own personal faithful dedication to democracy
in Burma, but in particular I want to really point out the work
of the U.S. Campaign for Burma historically as well. Not only
because the guy is sitting behind me, but because I just think
you have all done such wonderful work.
And Tom, you have been incredible in terms of your own
personal safety. Not easy for you to travel, and yet at the
same time you have taken it upon yourself to go to some of the
more difficult areas to diverse in many different ways in Burma
and show great courage in doing that. And I just want to state
for the record that without regard for his own personal safety,
he has done remarkable work in trying to expose the truth of
what is happening the people of the Rakhine region, the
Rohingya in particular. Chairman Salmon, I think if you don't
know it, you ought to know it as well.
Tom, just going back, how much of the geopolitical, or
geopolitics at play at State Department plays a role, in your
opinion, in terms of how they approach Burma? Moving from the
action-for-action, in my opinion, there is almost like a race
to get to Burma. Can you just maybe comment in your opinion in
terms of the geopolitic that is going on?
Mr. Andrews. Well, Congressman, thank you, first of all,
very much for your comments. There was a great battle here in
the halls of Congress, as you recall, when those of us who
believe that economic and diplomatic pressure should be exerted
upon the military regime of Burma.
Mr. Crowley. Looking over my shoulder seeing three of the
portraits that I served under, one in particular had that.
Mr. Andrews. Yes, indeed. And there was enormous pressure
from the business community to not exert this pressure. And
there was also geopolitical concerns regarding China and the
overall region and the positioning of the United States. So the
good news is, is that we overcame those obstacles and we
demonstrated that with pressure you can see progress. The other
good news is that there are some great champions of human
rights and democracy that are working within our government, I
am very, very happy and proud to say, and those voices are
heard inside of the State Department and the White House.
But the fact of the matter is, is that the China card, the
instability of the region, the location of Burma, the fact that
it has such a large population, it is a very significant
country. And so those voices both of economic pressure and
diplomatic pressure remain today, and I think we have to remain
ever vigilant.
Mr. Crowley. Is some of the pressure coming from Europe,
our allies?
Mr. Andrews. Yes. There have been. In fact, it was only
until the United States took the lead in exerting diplomatic
and economic pressure that the Europeans then followed. So
there have always been those voices coming from the other side
of the pond as it were.
Mr. Crowley. Ms. Quigley, how many political prisoners do
you estimate are still in prison in Burma?
Ms. Quigley. So I would say that there is three categories
now as opposed to one big number. One is those who are deemed
political prisoners and that is a little over 100, then there
are those who are pending charges who are not necessarily in
prison but facing charges and that is over 100 as well, and
then there is the Rohingya and it is unknown how many, if we
are looking at only several hundred or if we are looking at
over 1,000 Rohingya who since 2012 have just been detained in
prisons that people do not have access to that we have no idea
what their status is.
Mr. Crowley. Tom, in terms of the 11 commitments the
administration told us that they would hold the Burmese
accountable to in terms of the government, they also said that
they would release all political prisoners. In your estimate,
do you believe they have followed through with that?
Mr. Andrews. No, they haven't. In fact, they are re-
arresting or arresting new political prisoners for speaking
out.
Mr. Crowley. And Ms. Quigley, by your statement you would
agree that they have not fulfilled that promise, have they?
Ms. Quigley. Yes, they haven't fulfilled it, and the one
that seems to get lost in all of this is that they maintain
their criminal records and these are actually just as if they
are out on parole. And so all their original sentences remain
intact, and so if they step one toe out of line they will be
re-imprisoned to serve the remaining sentence from their
original convictions.
Mr. Crowley. Mr. Chairman, as you know there is so many
issues in regard to Burma, the 5 minutes doesn't give enough
time to really expound upon them. But in terms of the ceasefire
that was intimated to, Ms. Quigley, you made mention of, on its
face regardless of the fact that not every party is a party to
it, can you give an assessment of your view on terms of how
strong it is?
Ms. Quigley. It is not very strong. I think that it left a
lot of issues undealt with that they are supposed to deal with
in a political dialogue process that is supposed to start
within 90 days. And so I think the next 90 days will show
whether or not the groups meet with the government and whether
or not they will make progress on huge gaping issues.
The presence of the militaries, demilitarization, all those
issues were not dealt with and so they will have to be dealt
with in the next 90 days, and time remains to be seen whether
they will actually go through with that.
Mr. Crowley. Thank you. I would just point out, Mr.
Chairman, before I yield back the time that irony is not lost
in Burma either. And the fact that those four laws that were
put into place to really discriminate against a particular
population, the predominantly Muslim Rohingya population,
basically making them a people without a country. Not wanted in
Bangladesh, not wanted in Burma, forced to flee because of fear
of death or maybe worse in terms of being put to death,
starvation and depravity.
Where the irony is of this, Mr. Chairman, you might want to
know a member of Parliament of the ruling party, a man by the
name of Shwe Maung, was elected as a parliamentarian. Because
of the change in law his citizenship was withdrawn and was
removed and he was forced out of Parliament, and he is a part
of the ruling party, which I found very ironic.
There is a lot of bad things happening in Burma, whether it
is the Kachin or the Chin region, things that are going on even
with the ceasefire. This upcoming election that is taking
place, and I don't want to describe my feelings as to whether
it will be fair or unfair, we will let the results speak for
themselves. These laws have been put in place to discriminate
against a people, creating more boat people, people without a
country, refugees, children, men and women suffering and dying.
I once again just want to applaud the work of both of you.
And Mr. Chairman, I can't thank you enough for holding this
timely hearing. You don't know what you have done to help this
cause. I think, I suspect, one day you will. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. The Rohingya people live both in Burma but
also in Bangladesh. Some of them from Bangladesh are fleeing as
well. Do they face--the position of some in the Burmese
Government is that the Rohingya are Bangladeshi. What is the
position of the Bangladeshi Government toward the Rohingya? I
realize that is literally just outside the borders of the
purpose of this hearing.
Ms. Quigley. It is horrible the way that the Bangladeshi
Government treats the Rohingya, and that is actually not
something new.
Mr. Sherman. So this is a people that is persecuted on both
sides of the border?
Ms. Quigley. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. And a people that is not only discriminated
against in a predominantly non-Muslim country, they are Muslims
who are discriminated against in a predominantly Muslim
country.
Ms. Quigley. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. And the Burmese Government takes the position
that the discrimination is warranted because these folks are
really Bangladeshi. What does the Bangladeshi Government say
about the Rohingya?
Ms. Quigley. So they say that they are not Bengali. That
they basically in essence are refugees from Burma, and--yes,
yes. This is the position of the Bangladeshi Government.
Mr. Sherman. So the position of the Bangladeshi Government
is that these folks are really Burmese who have fled to
Bangladesh, the position of----
Ms. Quigley. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. Wow. And so the discrimination by the
Bangladeshi Government is more ethnic rather than religious.
Ms. Quigley. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. There are not religious differences, no
doctrinal differences between one type of Islam and the other,
it is purely----
Ms. Quigley. And they view it as an immigration issue.
Mr. Sherman. How does the Burmese Government treat its
Christian minority?
Ms. Quigley. Not well. So for years, the government has
persecuted the Christians mainly because they are from the
ethnic minorities, so you have sort of like the double issue of
being an ethnic minority and a religious minority. It hasn't
reached the level of persecution that it has faced the
Rohingya, but you do have destruction of churches. You do have
human rights abuses that take place against them, and sort of
forced merit making, which is a process in which like they are
forced to give money to build pagodas.
And so it is sort of like--or if you can't afford to go pay
for state schools, Buddhist schools you don't have to pay for.
And so it is more of an attempt to remove Christianity from the
country than it is to persecute them on the same level of
extinction that you would say for the Rohingya.
Mr. Sherman. So Mr. Andrews, they are taxed and they are
forced to pay for Buddhist religious activity?
Mr. Andrews. Yes, and they are literally under siege. One
of the members of the delegation of MPs that came here from
Southeast Asia 2 weeks ago and testified before the Tom Lantos
Human Rights Commission was from Kachin, was Christian, and
testified that in fact they are building Buddhist temples on
Christian church sites.
Mr. Sherman. Are they tearing down the church building or--
--
Mr. Andrews. Yes. They have destroyed the church buildings
and they are replacing them with Buddhist temples. I have
traveled in that part of the world. I have seen entire villages
just completely vacated because of being under siege, literally
under siege by the Burmese military, and seeing the refugee
camps just filled with Christians who are literally under fire
by this government.
Mr. Sherman. Well, Aung San Suu Kyi is a hero to those who
read articles about human rights. Has she or her party stood up
for the Christian minority? We have talked in the first panel
about the Rohingya, but has she stood up for the rights of
these other minorities, ethnic and religious?
Ms. Quigley. I think only through the sense of the catch-
all of sort of like religious freedom and in their opposition
to the four race and religion discrimination laws, most
recently.
Mr. Sherman. The chairman pointed out to me that you need
government permission to have an interfaith marriage in Burma?
Ms. Quigley. It is one of the four laws. Women, Buddhist
women, need to get permission from the government to marry
outside of their faith.
Mr. Sherman. And the opposition party or parties supported
that legislation or not?
Ms. Quigley. No, the NLD was the lead in opposition to
those bills and voted against them.
Mr. Crowley. Will the gentleman yield for just a moment?
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Sherman. I will yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Crowley. I think it is also important to point out that
they paid a price for that. There have been tremendous protests
led by extremists within the Buddhist community, Buddhist monks
who have protested Aung San Suu Kyi and her party. This is an
incredibly sensitive issue. There is diverse discussion within
their own party about it.
But I do think, I don't want to make too much of it to some
degree because of the sensitivity in the elections, but I think
Aung San Suu Kyi has stood for principle, and I think that has
to be mentioned. It may not be as vociferous as some may want
to be, but she has stood and paid a penalty for that.
Mr. Sherman. She has done more than others who have power
in Burma, and at the same time because of her status around the
world we expect even more. And I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. I thank the distinguished panelists for sparing
the time, and I thank the members up here for their interest.
We have got to shine a light on this kind of thing if it is
going to be fixed. We have to get that message out and let the
administration know that we are not happy with the status quo.
And so I really appreciate the time. And without further
objection, this meeting will now be adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Note: The full report is not reprinted here but may be found on the
Internet at http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=104074]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
