- EXAMINING FY 2017 FUNDING PRIORITIES IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING FY 2017 FUNDING PRIORITIES IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-179

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-947PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

----------

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Francisco Palmieri, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Department of State.     4
Luis Arreaga, Ph.D., Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau
of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, U.S.
Department of State............................................    10
Ms. Elizabeth Hogan, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean, U.S. Agency for International
Development....................................................    20

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Francisco Palmieri: Prepared statement.......................     6
Luis Arreaga, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..........................    12
Ms. Elizabeth Hogan: Prepared statement..........................    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    48
Hearing minutes..................................................    49
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California: Prepared statement...............    50
Questions for the record submitted by the Honorable Jeff Duncan,
a Representative in Congress from the State of South Carolina,
and chairman, Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere...........    52
Questions for the record submitted by the Honorable Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida........................................................    55

EXAMINING FY 2017 FUNDING PRIORITIES IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 27, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Duncan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. We will go ahead and get started. A
quorum being present, the subcommittee will come to order.
I would like to now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
We meet today to conduct oversight of the Obama
administration's Fiscal Year 2017 budget request for the
Western Hemisphere, which aims to provide nearly $2 billion to
countries in the region with an increase over what the U.S.
gave in Fiscal Year 2015. The administration has a plethora of
initiatives in the region, all aiming to address economic,
citizen security, and clean energy objectives. However, some
have criticized the U.S. approach to Latin America and the
Caribbean as improvised and lacking a sense of strategic
direction.
Today, when our Nation stands at over $19 trillion in debt,
we have no business giving any foreign assistance, unless the
administration can show a compelling vision and a clear
strategy for how that aid will advance U.S. national interest
in the region, tangible objectives that have measurable
benchmarks for success, and evident political will from our
partners to tackle the hard issues of corruption and impunity
that threaten the effectiveness of U.S. assistance and the very
economic growth of the hemisphere that we all hope to see.
As Representatives of the American people, the U.S.
Congress has the responsibility to ensure that every single
taxpayer dollar spent on foreign assistance furthers U.S.
national interest, not those of foreign governments or
international organizations. We must further work together to
root out waste, fraud, abuse, and inefficiencies within the
U.S. programs to prevent duplication and overlap and, instead,
achieve success by outcomes. So with that in mind, I want to
take a moment to highlight a few oversight areas that I believe
require attention and adjustments.
According to congressional watchdogs, the Government
Accountability Office, or GAO, they currently have six reports
with open recommendations that the U.S. State Department or the
U.S. Agency for International Development, USAID, have not
fully implemented. Moreover, according to USAID's Office of
Inspector General, as of April 25, USAID had 157 open and
unimplemented recommendations relating to programs in the
Western Hemisphere. These include 59 recommendations that have
a potential cost savings of almost $11 million.
When we see such clear low-hanging fruit for achieving
efficiency and cost savings, I do not understand why these
recommendations remain unimplemented. Thus, I urge State and
USAID to act immediately to address the GAO and OIG
recommendations in a satisfactory manner.
Of the nearly $2 billion requested for the Western
Hemisphere in the Fiscal Year 2017 budget request, the
administration has prioritized more than $628 million for
development assistance programs and over $15 million for global
climate change initiatives within the region. While I am
encouraged to see the administration reverse its cuts in
security displayed in last year's budget request, the State
Department's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement chose to request less for Mexico in order to first
address the outstanding pipeline issues by spending what they
still have from previous years before asking for more money.
And that is a good thing. That is a good sign showing smarter
financial management decisions and stewarding of American
taxpayer dollars.
But I am concerned with the heavy emphasis on development
assistance rather than economic support funds. Thus, I want to
hear the administration's rationale for shifting the emphasis
of U.S. assistance and the administration's plan on how to
prevent country dependency on those funds.
Nearly $744 million of the budget request would go to
Central America. I believe it is critical for the American
people to see tangible proof of U.S. assistance in the region
and achieving our objectives before we provide another large
tranche of money. However, I understand that State and USAID
have not yet spent the $750 million appropriated by the U.S.
Congress last year.
While I am supportive of the need to address the root
causes to address the migration issues to the U.S., I want to
ensure that we are not simply throwing more money at the
problem. What analysis has the administration done to determine
if previous U.S. funding is yielding results? What commitments
have Central American governments made to provide matching
funds and to tackle the massive corruption problems plaguing
the region? And what safeguards does the U.S. have in place to
protect American investment in the region from abuse?
The administration has also requested a major increase in
funding for Colombia, the single largest recipient of U.S.
foreign assistance in the hemisphere. Colombia is an important
U.S. ally in the Western Hemisphere, and during the past 15
years, it has transformed into a respected leader in the
region. Given U.S. long-term support for Colombia, the U.S.
maintains a considerable stake in the outcome of the ongoing
peace negotiations.
I am supportive of Colombia's efforts to achieve peace.
However, I want to know that the U.S. is supporting a peace
deal that is good for the Colombian people, the jointly hard-
won security gains of U.S.-Colombian forces, and the U.S.
interests in the region.
Given the request for $391 million for Colombia, I would
like to hear about how these funds will support the Colombian
Government's efforts to verify the demobilization and
disarmament of the FARC terrorist members and address the
growing drug eradication and interdiction challenges.
In addition, for most years since Fiscal Year 2009, the
U.S. Congress has given $20 million annually to support
democracy and human rights in Cuba. However, the
administration's budget request proposes cuts to U.S. efforts
in these areas. At a time when the Castro government is
demolishing churches, arresting pastors, imprisoning human
rights dissidents at record numbers, I can't comprehend why the
administration would seek to reduce U.S. support for human
rights and democracy by 25 percent.
I would also like to understand the rationale for the
administration's request for $218 million for Haiti, given
GAO's reporting of multiple cases of cost overruns and delays
for reconstruction projects. Similarly, I am concerned to see
the administration's request of an additional increase of
funding for countries like Nicaragua, while cutting U.S.
assistance to our friends like Argentina, Chile, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay.
Having recently led a congressional delegation to the
region with the express intent of showing our partners in the
region that the U.S. is a reliable friend, I believe these cuts
and assistance send the wrong message about the U.S. interests
in the region. At a time when Iran, Russia, and China continue
to increase their activities in the Western Hemisphere, the
U.S. needs to continue to convince our friends to make the U.S.
their partner of choice.
Finally, I want to ensure that U.S. assistance to Inter-
American organizations support U.S. interests. I am concerned
about the outsized share of U.S. support for these
organizations, the limited numbers of U.S. personnel working in
these organizations to support United States objectives, and
seemingly low level of influence the United States has, given
the amount of money that the American people provide.
So I will look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
on all these issues.
And with that, I will turn to the ranking member for his
opening statement.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
And thank you to our witnesses from the State Department
and USAID for being here to talk about the administration's
Fiscal Year 2017 funding priorities in the Western Hemisphere.
Today's hearing occurs at a time of complex foreign policy
challenges in the region. Yet U.S. assistance to Latin America
and the Caribbean has declined over the last several years.
Without U.S. leadership, regional challenges, such as the flow
of unaccompanied children from the Northern Triangle countries
to the U.S., political violence in Haiti, the Zika outbreak,
corruption scandals in Brazil, and the polarized political
situation in Venezuela, could reach dangerous levels of
instability.
I am pleased that the administration's Fiscal Year 2017
budget requests include more than $1.7 billion in aid for the
region, representing a 10 percent increase in funding. It is
critical that we assist our regional neighbors in their efforts
to achieve peace and security, good governance, and economic
prosperity.
In Cuba, we continue to see the Castro regime brutalize its
people and forcefully stomp out any attempt at free speech, a
free economy, and free expression. Drug trafficking and
transnational criminal organizations plague Central America and
wreak havoc in the region, posing a direct security threat to
the United States. Every year hundreds die trying to reach our
southern border in a desperate attempt to escape the violence.
Poverty and corruption run rampant in several Latin American
countries.
In Colombia, the Santos government is seeking to end its
52-year internal conflict and implement a sustainable and
inclusive peace. Working together in a bipartisan fashion, we
can ensure that this proposed Fiscal Year 2017 budget is used
efficiently and with proper oversight.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses as they
lay out U.S. priorities and the importance of American
engagement in the Western Hemisphere. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. It was almost like you had a missing page
there, wasn't it?
Mr. Sires. Yeah, well----
Mr. Duncan. It happens.
You all have testified before. I am not going to have to
explain the lights. You get 5 minutes to testify. I will look
forward to hearing the testimony.
Mr. Palmieri, you are recognized. I enjoyed our meeting the
other day, very insightful and very informative. And thanks for
being here today. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. FRANCISCO PALMIERI, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Palmieri. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member
Sires, and other members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
this opportunity to testify on the Fiscal Year 2017 foreign
assistance request for the Western Hemisphere, and thank you
for your ongoing support of our diplomatic assistance efforts
in this hemisphere.
The administration's approach to the region seeks to
improve security, strengthen the rule of law, promote democracy
and human rights, advance partnerships, and promote prosperity
and inclusive growth for all citizens. U.S. assistance is a
critical tool that supports these goals.
In our request for Central America and Mexico, we seek to
address the underlying conditions driving migration from
Central America through Mexico and to the United States. The
request also includes increases to support Colombia's
implementation of an expected peace agreement, marking the end
of the hemisphere's longest running conflict. The request
maintains support for key U.S. partnerships with Peru, Haiti,
and the Caribbean.
The Fiscal Year 2017 foreign assistance request for our
strategy in Central America continues support for prosperity,
governance, and security, particularly for Central America's
Northern Triangle in recognition of the acute challenges these
countries face. The U.S. assistance through the strategy
complements the investments Northern Triangle governments are
making through their own development plan, the Alliance For
Prosperity.
The countries themselves plan to spend $2.6 billion of
their own money this year to support their own plan. Continued
U.S. support will be vital to Colombia's success as it seeks to
implement a peace accord.
Our partnership with Mexico remains an important priority
for the United States and includes a range of issues that
benefit both countries, including trade and investment, energy
and security. The Merida Initiative continues to provide the
framework for our bilateral security cooperation at both
Federal and State levels.
Our request includes essential democracy assistance for
Cuba and Venezuela where the United States will continue to
provide assistance that advances universal human rights and
supports vibrant civil societies. Promotion of democratic
principles and human rights remains at the core of U.S.
assistance to Cuba.
Our request for Haiti continues investments in
infrastructure, agriculture, economic growth, basic education
and health, expanded governance, democracy activities, and
security. A sustained U.S. commitment in Haiti is essential to
build on the past gains of U.S. efforts in Haiti and to build
its capacity to respond to citizens' needs.
Improving security and development in the Caribbean
directly benefits U.S. interests. The Caribbean Basin Security
Initiative complements the Caribbean's own efforts to reduce
crime and violence, strengthen the rule of law, and address the
factors that put youth and marginalized communities at risk of
insecurity.
U.S. counternarcotics assistance complements investments
made by the Government of Peru and maintains our strong
partnership in eradication and alternative development to coca
cultivation.
I urge the U.S. Congress to fully fund this request for the
Western Hemisphere, as it advances our national security
interests and wisely invests our limited resources where they
can have the most significant impact. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palmieri follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
And, Dr. Arreaga, is that how you pronounce that?
Mr. Arreaga. Arreaga. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF LUIS ARREAGA, PH.D., PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Arreaga. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member Sires, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you to discuss our Fiscal Year 2017 budget
request for the Western Hemisphere. With your permission, I
have a formal statement which I would like to submit for the
record.
In 2017, the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs, or INL, is requesting $489 million to
support some of America's most effective and important foreign
assistance and partnership programs. This includes the Central
American Regional Security Initiative, the Caribbean Basin
Security Initiative, the Merida Initiative, and programs in
Colombia, Haiti, and Peru.
As this committee knows, our Nation's prosperity is closely
tied with our neighbors in the region. From the Rio Grande to
the Andes Mountains, the hemisphere is in the midst of major
change. Countries are changing governments peacefully. People
are standing up and fighting corruption, and their voices are
being heard. Some of the most notorious narcotrafficking bosses
have been captured, and in Colombia, peace talks hold the
promise of expanding the rule of law and marginalizing the drug
trade.
However, some changes have not been positive. Despite a
recent fall in homicide rates, Central America's Northern
Triangle still has one of the highest murder rates in the
world. While Peru eradicated record-breaking amounts of coca
last year, cultivation remains high. Colombia has witnessed a
nearly 100 percent increase in coca cultivation in the last
couple of years. And while Mexico has achieved many notable
successes in fighting drug cartels, the amount of poppy being
grown has increased 65 percent since 2014.
INL programs are particularly important at this juncture
because they are agents of change. They tackle the threats and
leverage the positive changes I just described. The investments
we are making will benefit our country and the people of the
region.
In Central America, we are partnering with USAID and others
to leverage our model police precinct programs. We are adding
prevention and comprehensive assistance components, which
together compromise a place-based strategy that targets the
areas most affected by violence. This approach is already
reducing homicides and increasing the public trust in law
enforcement institutions.
Many INL initiatives rely on sister Federal agencies, as
well as many local, State, and international partners. Among
the most effective of these is our partnership with Colombia,
which has gone from being a consumer to being a supplier of
security assistance in the region. Today, this includes joint
U.S.-Colombian training and advising in many areas like border
security, special operations, police reform, and drug
investigations.
INL's programs cover the entire range of the justice
sector. In Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, and South
America we are strengthening justice systems and expanding
their reach.
Many nations in Latin America are moving toward an
accusatory criminal justice system, which is broadly similar to
our own. We are training prosecutors and judges to function in
this new environment and helping them make their judicial
process more efficient and fair. Equipment and training
provided by INL also helps us by helping our neighbors secure
their borders and by strengthening relationships with U.S.
border agencies.
A more democratic and prosperous region is in the interest
of our country, and with your support for our programs, we can
achieve the outcomes that we desire, which is nothing less than
strengthening the security of our hemisphere and our country.
Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member Sires, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Arreaga follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much for that testimony.
Ms. Hogan, welcome back. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. ELIZABETH HOGAN, ACTING ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Hogan. Thank you very much.
Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member Sires, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
testify today.
I am pleased to present the plans for USAID's work in Latin
America and the Caribbean for Fiscal Year 2017. Our request of
approximately $970 million will promote the interests of the
United States, while also significantly improving the quality
of life for those we help.
We have identified five priorities for our assistance.
These are: Prosperity, good governance, and security in Central
America; promoting a sustainable and equitable peace in
Colombia; long-term development in Haiti; advancing democracy
and human rights across the Americas; and addressing
environmental threats to livelihoods.
One of the highest priorities is Central America,
particularly the countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras. We see prosperity, improved governance, and security,
the objectives of our Central America strategy, as
interdependent. We know that providing opportunity for
marginalized citizens, especially youth at risk of gang
recruitment or migration, will bolster our efforts in security
and lead to freer, more prosperous societies.
Our efforts to grow prosperity are only sustainable in an
environment where democratic values and institutions flourish,
human rights are respected, and civil society and the media can
play their rightful roles. And ultimately, it will be difficult
for our prosperity and governance efforts to take root in
societies that are plagued by insecurity. That is why our work
in Central America addresses all three interrelated challenges.
Our programs include efforts to create jobs, reform
institutions to root out corruption, strengthen civil society's
ability to hold governments accountable, foster a culture of
respect for human rights, and create safe community spaces.
With sustained commitment on part of the United States and host
government institutions, we will help the Northern Triangle
develop into a safer, more prosperous region for all those who
live there. Sustained commitment and strategic patience yield
results, as we have seen with the notable strides made in
Colombia.
For Fiscal Year 2017, USAID is requesting $187 million to
expand upon current programming to help the Colombian
Government establish a stronger presence in former conflict
zones, provide post-conflict reconciliation and justice,
promote inclusive rural economic growth, and sustainably manage
the country's vast natural resources. These programs will build
upon current successes, especially for marginalized
populations, including Afro-Colombians and indigenous peoples.
Along with Central America and Colombia, Haiti remains a
high priority for USAID. Our Fiscal Year 2017 request will
continue our efforts to help Haiti grow into a stable,
economically viable country. We remain focused on promoting
economic growth, job creation, and sustainable agriculture,
providing holistic basic health care and education services,
and improving the transparency of government institutions.
While much remains to be done, we are committed to supporting
the Haitian people as they build a more prosperous and secure
future.
Throughout the region, our democracy and human rights
programs address fundamental issues, including anticorruption,
promotion of press freedoms and the rule of law, and support
for civil society. USAID works to assure that government
institutions are open, accountable, use public funds
responsibly and effectively, and deliver critical services to
citizens. Underpinning all of these efforts is support and
protection of a strong and vibrant civil society that can hold
governments accountable.
Another challenge facing the region is the negative impact
of extreme weather events. Our mitigation and adaptation
efforts help reduce devastation to life, property, and economic
activity. We are also speeding the development and deployment
of advanced clean energy technologies and helping to create a
favorable legal and regulatory environment to reduce the cost
of energy.
We have one goal in mind with everything that we do: To
empower countries to assume responsibility for their own
development and grow beyond the need for international
assistance. We use science, technology, innovation, and private
sector partnerships to find new solutions and scale up what
works. For every dollar we spent in this region in 2014, we
mobilized five times that in private sector resources.
In conclusion, I want to assure this committee that USAID
is committed to being good stewards of the funds you entrust to
us. We take our responsibility to the United States taxpayer
seriously, and we are committed to accountability,
transparency, and oversight of our programs.
I thank this subcommittee for its interest and support of
USAID's programs, and I look forward to collaborating with you
as we address longstanding challenges and new opportunities for
reform. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hogan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
I thank all the panelists for their testimony.
I will take a page out of Rob Bishop's playbook as chairman
and defer till the end.
And I will go first to Ron DeSantis for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Palmieri, in Fiscal Year 2009, Congress appropriated
$20 million in ESF annually to support democracy and human
rights in Cuba. The Fiscal Year 2017 request, $3.8 million for
the Embassy in Havana, but cuts U.S. efforts to support human
rights to $15 million, and yet Cuba remains the only country in
the Americas ranked as not free by Freedom House. Of course, we
have seen, since the administration changed policy in December
2014, political repression has increased.
So what is the administration's rationale for the 25
percent reduction in Cuba democracy and human rights funding?
Mr. Palmieri. We remain very concerned about the human
rights conditions inside Cuba, and in our most recent human
rights report signalled that the arbitrary detentions have
increased, that the Cuban people do not have the ability to
elect their own leaders----
Mr. DeSantis. So why are you cutting the funds?
Mr. Palmieri. And we take that issue and that concern very
seriously. However, as we are working toward a more normalized
relationship in Cuba and expanding our engagement in the
region, we have other tools that are available to us. We have
more authorized travel to Cuba by American citizens who are
engaging directly with the Cuban people. We have exchanges that
are publicly----
Mr. DeSantis. Wait. Let me ask you that, though. When you
say ``engaging,'' so say there are Americans that go to Cuba,
they stay in hotels, they pay. I mean, is that direct
engagement with Cubans on an economic basis, or is that a
direct engagement with the regime in Cuba who controls the core
sectors of the economy?
Mr. Palmieri. The 50 percent increase in authorized travel
over the last year has enabled Americans to more directly
engage in people-to-people activities with the Cuban people,
which is the goal of our policy. Yes, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. I think by that answer, you acknowledge,
though, that the economic transactions are transactions with,
effectively, the Cuban Government, the military, the
intelligence services?
Mr. Palmieri. The travelers have to follow strict
accountability measures in pursuing their authorized travel.
They may be staying at different types of accommodations,
including Airbnb activities that we think promote
entrepreneurial activity inside Cuba as well, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. So the human rights situation, you spoke to
it initially in your answer, but you acknowledge that the human
rights situation is still very poor in Cuba. Correct?
Mr. Palmieri. President Obama said so on his trip.
Secretary Kerry has said so, and our human rights report did
not pull any punches, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. I wonder, because they have been very honest,
the Castro dictatorship, about we are not changing. I don't
know what you guys--we are going to take any concessions we can
get. We need credit. We are going to get the credit and
whatnot. But they have been very insistent that they are not
changing.
So I just wonder. We are reducing the request to try to
promote democracy. We are doing much more engagement now with
the regime. I wonder whether we are going to see fruits of
that, because I think, right now, most of us who were skeptical
of this predicted that the regime would be pocketing these
concessions, and I think, unfortunately, that is what happened.
Let me ask you this. The regime has been harboring JoAnne
Chesimard, who is on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted Terrorists List.
What is the status of that?
Mr. Palmieri. In November of last year, we had our first
round of a bilateral law enforcement working group where we did
raise, as we have consistently raised, our desire for the
return of fugitives from U.S. justice. We will continue to
raise that case and other cases of fugitives, and we hope to
have another round of talks with the Cuban Government in the
months to come, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. The results of those talks, has it just been
for Cuba to deny releasing anybody, though, correct?
Mr. Palmieri. I am sorry. I didn't----
Mr. DeSantis. The results of those talks, while you guys
may have been well-intentioned, the result of those talks has
been that Cuba has simply denied releasing anybody. Correct? No
fugitives have been released up to this point. Right?
Mr. Palmieri. No, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. What about confiscated property?
Because we have had a number of people come before this
committee, some of the other committees, who had property
confiscated illegally by the Castro dictatorship in the early
1960s, and they have certified claims. We say that we are going
to be changing these relationships, and you would think that
that would be one obvious way where the Castro regime could
show, hey, you know, we are going to change by providing some
recompense.
But to my knowledge, I have not seen any information come
out that there has been anything done in that respect. So let
me ask you, has the Cuban Government made good on any claims
that are existing out there regarding illegally confiscated
property?
Mr. Palmieri. In December, as part of the process of the
normalization of the relationship, we had a team that went down
and engaged in direct discussions about these claims, and we
continue to pursue another round of talks related to making
progress on claims resolutions.
Mr. DeSantis. But no claims have been resolved favorably
for American citizens or Cuban exiles in America, correct, at
this point?
Mr. Palmieri. At this point, I am not aware, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. Mr. Chairman, thank you for doing this. You
know, we have been in a situation where, you know, the Castro--
change policy, then change it to help the Cuban people, but
don't give an inch to the dictatorship. And I just fear that
these changes have helped the Castro brothers solidify their
power, and I don't think we have seen it yet with freedom for
the Cuban people.
Mr. Duncan. No argument with me there.
Mr. Sires, 5 minutes.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What type of assistance does the U.S. Government provide to
the Venezuelan people to promote democracy?
Ms. Hogan. USAID has a $6.5 million program in Venezuela,
and the purpose of the program is to help document human rights
abuses, to strengthen civil society organizations, and to
promote the free flow of information within the country and
between the country and the outside world. And so this year we
have also helped with the training of domestic election
observations that took place in the last legislative elections,
which as you know, brought a new opposition to the majority in
the Parliament. We are poised to assist this new Parliament, if
and as asked, but for right now, we are assessing those needs
because we know that there are other donors that are also
interested in that space and we don't want to duplicate
efforts.
Mr. Sires. And in terms of our efforts to release some of
the political prisoners, what are we doing with that?
Mr. Palmieri. The Department continues to call for the
immediate release of political prisoners in Venezuela. Just
earlier this month, Assistant Secretary Jacobson met with
Liliana Tintori, the wife of Leopoldo Lopez. The Department
also renewed a statement calling on the government to enact the
bill that was passed by the national assembly calling for the
release of political prisoners. We will continue to push for
that as a critical element of improving the internal political
situation.
Mr. Sires. And, Dr. Arreaga, what is the reason that there
seems to be more production of drugs in places like Colombia
and some of the other places? How did this spike up?
Mr. Arreaga. There are a number of reasons, sir. First of
all, I think a lot of the farmers and the narcotraffickers got
smarter and realized that if they concentrate a lot of their
cultivation in large areas, it would be more susceptible to
aerial eradication. So you see a dispersion of cultivation in
areas where airplanes have more difficulty arriving and
spraying. And, of course, the end of aerial eradication also
played a role. So those are some of the major factors.
And we understand from the Colombian Government that the
FARC actually encouraged farmers to plant more coca in
preparation for the peace plan, but we have no confirmation of
that.
Mr. Sires. And are some of the other countries, the same
reason?
Mr. Arreaga. Well, I think you have seen in Peru, the areas
where coca cultivation has increased are areas where it is very
difficult to access by the government, the VRAEM area in the
south. So the government is planning very much to eradicate,
but it is a bit of a catch-up for them because they need the
resources and they need the mobilization, which they do not yet
have.
Mr. Sires. And, Mr. Palmieri, I know one of the reasons
that we are engaging in Cuba is because we always have problems
with all the other countries in the region. What are we doing
for those countries to speak up about the abuses in Cuba?
Because there hasn't been one country that has said
anything about the conditions in Cuba and how they have become
worsened, how they have imprisoned more people, and how they
have cracked down. And I would think that by now, some of these
countries that were so pushy on us to have some sort of
relationship with Cuba, they just clamped up and don't say
anything.
Mr. Palmieri. I think we continue to encourage our partners
in the hemisphere to engage on the human rights situation and
conditions within Cuba. And we urge them to speak out and to
take a more definitive, proactive stance to encourage the Cuban
Government to address these problems of arbitrary detention and
the lack of freedom of association and assembly. And we will
continue to push those governments to be a more authoritative
voice.
Mr. Sires. You know, the chairman and I took a trip through
five countries. We raised that very issue, and quite frankly,
we didn't get a reaction that any time soon they were going to
say anything about what is going on. Some of these countries,
one of the more vocal countries in terms of the United States
reaching some sort of an accord with Cuba. So we didn't get any
kind of a response, basically, that they are going to do
anything in the future.
Mr. Palmieri. I can assure you, Mr. Sires, that as part of
our ongoing diplomacy in this hemisphere, we do engage
countries from throughout South America, Central America, and
North America to speak more forcefully and more definitively
about the abominable human rights conditions inside of Cuba.
Mr. Sires. The only country that spoke up about human
rights abuses, in Venezuela, was Macri, just recently elected.
But nobody else has said a word.
Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the ranking member.
And I am going to go now to Mr. Yoho from Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate you three being here.
I too was on that trip to South America, and I did find it
interesting that everybody said that we need to normalize
relationships with Cuba; it was the right thing to do, you
know, close Guantanamo because it was a mark on America and it
wasn't a good sign. And my member--my friend, Albio Sires,
brought that up over and over again. You know, what about what
is going on in Cuba? How come you are not denouncing it? And I
just found it hypocritical. And it just didn't bode well that
here we are trying to help the Cuban people out, and you were
talking--I think it was you, Dr. Arreaga--you were talking
about the entrepreneurs in Cuba, that this was going to allow
them to expand businesses. Can you explain what an entrepreneur
in Cuba is compared to America?
Mr. Palmieri. There are a number of activities underway
that, through some regulatory changes the administration has
made, that allows us to help Cuban entrepreneurs, whether they
are----
Mr. Yoho. What administration? This one or the Cuban
administration?
Mr. Palmieri. President Obama's regulatory actions that
have enabled Americans to more directly support Cuban
entrepreneurs, whether they are small restaurant owners. We now
allow Americans to provide remittances to these entrepreneurs
to help their private sector activities. We now permit
microfinance, training activities, and we also allow for the
export of certain materials to the small but growing Cuban
entrepreneurial class.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. So now, if I am a Cuban business owner and
I am getting these microloans from an American counterpart and
I am going into business in the country of Cuba, what freedom
do I have with these regulations and executive privileges that
President Obama has extended to the people of Cuba? What
privileges do I have as a Cuban business owner that I don't
have to worry about the Cuban Government come and confiscating?
Are they going to limit how much I can make?
Mr. Palmieri. There has been over the last 5, 6 years a
growing number of licenses issued by the Cuban Government to
individual Cubans to pursue exactly these kind of private
activities that we think our regulatory actions will allow
Americans to more directly support. They range from activities
in restaurants, as I mentioned, Airbnb activities, private
transportation activities. The sector has grown over the last 6
or 7 years.
Mr. Yoho. Does the Cuban Government dictate how much they
are going to make a day or an hour, on the employees?
Mr. Palmieri. I believe that--my understanding is that
Cuban private sector entrepreneurs earned far, far above or
much more, I should say, than the average public sector wage,
sir.
Mr. Yoho. All right. We will follow that. The reports I
have say it is not true. You know, the Cuban Government is
there. They have a heavy hand, and they confiscate whatever
they want because everything belongs to the Cuban Government.
Moving to Haiti real quick here, Ms. Hogan, how many homes
have been built down there since the earthquake, through USAID?
Ms. Hogan. USAID built 750 homes. However, we have turned
our strategy toward housing finance rather than construction.
And so as a result we are able to link residents with low-
income properties to microfinance institutions that will allow
them to----
Mr. Yoho. Are we financing that through the American
Government and the American taxpayers?
Ms. Hogan. We are. We are helping.
Mr. Yoho. What is their failure rate?
Ms. Hogan. The failure rate of what, sir?
Mr. Yoho. Of the loans.
Ms. Hogan. Zero, thus far.
Mr. Yoho. Zero. What is the average size of the house that
they are building down there, square foot?
Ms. Hogan. Well, again, we are not building houses anymore.
Mr. Yoho. But we were previously.
Ms. Hogan. But we were building houses.
Mr. Yoho. What was that size?
Ms. Hogan. I believe they are about 500 square feet.
Mr. Yoho. 400 was what I have.
What was the average cost of those homes?
Ms. Hogan. The average cost----
Mr. Yoho. Construction, construction cost.
Ms. Hogan. Right. The average cost of those homes was about
$15,000, I believe. I have to double-check those numbers.
Mr. Yoho. That is a pretty high cost of construction, I
would say.
Ms. Hogan. Which is why we----
Mr. Yoho. About $300 per square foot. They must have used
the CFPB for their remodeling.
Ms. Hogan. Well, that is the----
Mr. Yoho. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am listening and I would think that from what I am
hearing, we must have regressed in Central and South America.
But from what I understand, for the last 10, there has been
vast improvement in Central and South America, and our
investments and our commitments, especially post--you know,
Cold War is over--has tremendously helped the entire region,
the entire hemisphere, that when you look at what has taken
place as far as democracy throughout the Central and South
America is definitely going in a positive direction.
When you look at still far too much poverty, but poverty
reduction in the area, it is going in the right direction. When
I look at the number of individuals or people who are--you
know, as far as democratic institutions, not where we want to
be yet, but we are moving in the right direction. Would you all
agree with that statement? Much better than it was 15, 20 years
ago, for sure. Now, things don't change overnight, but we are
doing much better than we had been doing.
And before I ask my question, the other piece is because we
all want to make sure we do right by the Cuban people, I know
that, but we have had one policy for 57 years, and none of the
things that I am hearing has changed in 57 years. So for 57
years with one single policy that we have continued to have and
nothing has changed, it would seem to me reasonable that we
should have some kind of change to see if something else might
work, because we know for 57 years it has not worked.
And I think, Mr. Palmieri, what you are telling me is
that--and I have had the opportunity, I was very happy to be
with the President on his historic trip to Cuba where I heard
him, with Raul Castro present, being very critical about human
rights, et cetera, and said the United States will continue to
insist that we move forward. But I think that you were trying
to articulate the interaction of American citizens so that when
people, when business folks get to moving, that they can
determine for themselves, those that live there, how to make
sure they move and change this government. Is that the policy
that you were intimating?
Mr. Palmieri. Yes, sir. I think we believe that by
expanding people-to-people ties and business opportunities and
access to information, we can more effectively support the
Cuban people. In addition, I think we believe that American
citizens are some of the best Ambassadors we have for our
values and ideals, and that level of people-to-people contact
will also help us make progress.
Our enduring objective in Cuba remains that it be peaceful,
prosperous, and democratic, and that the Cuban people have the
ability to choose their leaders and their own future.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
I need to jump to Ms. Hogan for a second because you
mentioned in your opening statement something that is very
important to me. You talked about Peace Colombia and the
effects of African-Colombians, which is really important as we
get to peace because many of the folks will return back. I know
the President is there. Will you tell us a little bit more
about that, how that will work?
Ms. Hogan. Thank you very much for that question. In fact,
Afro-Colombians is a very important target group for us. In
fact, we have invested in the workforce development of over
9,000 African-Colombians who are now working in modern economy
jobs. More than 8,000 of them who have come through our
training program have been hired for well-paying jobs in a
variety of sectors.
We continue to invest in Peace Colombia, which is a
rebranding of Plan Colombia, in order to help the government
extend its presence into these ex-conflicted zones. We are
currently working in 40 municipalities. With the peace
agreement and with Fiscal Year 2017 funds, we will be able to
move out into another 20 communities to help the government
establish its presence, but more than anything, in addition to
help incentivize economic development and investment in those
areas to create jobs for the people who are going back there.
We have a great example of a partnership we have with
Starbucks Coffee, which is working in these ex-conflicted zones
to help these indigenous populations and others who are coffee
growers increase the quality of their coffee and attract
additional investment from other companies that see that those
investments are having a good return on the money. There are
about 25,000 coffee growers who are benefiting from that one
partnership. And, of course, we are also helping reconciliation
and justice for victims of the conflict. And finally, looking
to licit value chains like coffee for people who had been
growing coca and try to get them into the other profitable
areas of coffee, cacao, dairy, and rubber.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. I am out of time.
Mr. Duncan. And Raul Castro said, you can't ask me about
political dissidents. It is wrong, improper for you to ask me
about political dissidents.
So anyway, the Chair will now recognize the gentlewoman
from Florida, the former chairman of the committee and now
chairwoman of the Middle East and North Africa Subcommittee.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And dovetailing on the direction of Latin America, I wanted
to ask you how you see the direction of some countries in Latin
America. Is it really going the right way as we would like?
When it comes to the rule of law, when it comes to press
freedom, when it comes to individual freedom of expression,
when it comes to separation of powers, leaders who get elected
and then change the Constitution to stay in power, would you
say that Ecuador under Rafael Correa is moving in the right
direction? Simple question. Rather simple.
Ms. Hogan?
Ms. Hogan. We have a program in Ecuador----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Would you say that it is moving in that
direction toward greater freedom?
Ms. Hogan. I think people are feeling the suppression of
human rights.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes. Thank you.
How about Bolivia under Evo Morales, moving more toward
press freedom, freedom of expression, a separation of powers,
rule of law, would that be a direction that we think should be
emulated and that we herald?
Mr. Palmieri. The referendum in February was a clear
expression of how the Bolivian people feel about the situation.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I am talking about the Evo Morales
government. Would you say that they are moving toward, you
know, the arc, the famous arc, is it moving toward what we
would consider democratic, fundamental principles of democracy?
Mr. Palmieri. I would like to let the Bolivian people speak
for themselves.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay. Thank you.
How about Venezuela under Nicolas Maduro, would you say
that that government is more toward the rule of law, freedom of
expression, press freedom?
Mr. Palmieri. Those are all areas that we remain deeply
concerned about.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Deeply concerned. How about Nicaragua
under Daniel Ortega? How about Cuba under Raul Castro? I mean,
we could put on our rose-colored classes and say everything is
peachy keen in Latin America, or we could look at it as the way
it really is. And it is a problem. It is a fixer-upper. A
fixer-upper. And talking about Cuba, you know, we talk about
55-plus years of a policy that does not work. How about the
changes in Cuba in these 55 years? In those years, have the
Cuban people been able to vote once in a free, fair, and
internationally supervised election that would pass any
criteria by any human rights organization? One?
Mr. Palmieri. No. They have not.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. No. How about have they been able to form
political parties? By any stretch of the imagination, have they
been able, in these 55 years of a policy that hasn't worked in
the United States, I know we have a blame-America-first crowd,
but how about, let's look otherwise. Have they been able to
form political parties?
Mr. Palmieri. I would never blame America first.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. No. I am not saying you----
Mr. Palmieri. But what----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. But let me ask you, how many political
parties are allowed to operate in Cuba? How many political
parties?
Mr. Palmieri. There is only one political party.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay. Thank you. And how about freedom of
the press? Would you be able to start your own newspaper, your
own TV network, your own--you know, what press freedoms are
there in these 55 years?
Mr. Palmieri. Press freedom is a significant----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. A fixer upper. Yeah. And by any stretch
of the imagination, this policy that hasn't worked from the
U.S. side, gee, when you look at the Cuba aspect of it, it
hasn't gotten a whole lot better for the people of Cuba what
Castro has been doing to them. Now, what have we seen since the
President's change in diplomatic relations? Has there been, or
has there not been a massive exodus of Cubans fleeing the
island, not getting the memo that everything is great there?
Have there--because I know, I represent South Florida, so I
know what is going on there. Has there been what you would call
an exodus? We just got back from Guantanamo yesterday.
Mr. Palmieri. President Obama has said that the change in
the relationship will not come overnight and that
normalization----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. But has there been an increase? Because
if not, we have other U.S. agencies like the Coast Guard, and
like the Red Cross, who tell us that there has been an 80
percent increase in this past year since the President's
diplomatic relations to now. Has there been an exodus of Cubans
fleeing the island?
Mr. Palmieri. We believe that the people-to-people
exchanges that we are pursuing in the policy----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I don't know. So the answer is yes. For
the people who count the bodies, they know that there has been
a massive exodus of people. And when I look around and I see,
gosh, what has really changed in Cuba since all of this has
happened, one-way concessions, pleasing the dictator, getting
very little out of it.
But let me just ask you one question about Venezuela. Since
we passed the bill, I had the bill here with all of my
colleagues. Marco Rubio had it in the Senate. How many
individuals has the Obama administration sanctioned in
Venezuela for human rights violations? That means that they
can't come to the United States; we freeze their accounts; you
know, they can't do any commercial dealings, buy property.
There have been massive human rights abuses in Venezuela. There
were originally seven or eight. How many have been since cited
on that list?
Mr. Palmieri. We did sanction individuals last year after
the legislation was implemented.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Last year. So since that time, when there
have been such massive human rights abuses, Leopoldo Lopez, the
mayor of Caracas, who is on house arrest. I mean, I can't even
list how many political prisoners there have been. Has any of
those people involved in the persecutions and the prosecution
of these human rights activists, have they been sanctioned?
Mr. Palmieri. We did sanction people when the legislation
was first implemented.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Anyone related to the Leopoldo Lopez
trial? Anybody sanctioned?
Mr. Palmieri. I would have to get back to you with----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The answer is no. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Excellent line of questioning.
We will now go to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank
the witnesses for being here, and for your testimony.
I want to follow up on some of these issues about--I am
kind of interested in the relationship between our aid and our
budget and human rights and rule of law. I want to focus on
Mexico. Recently, a number of us submitted a letter to the
Secretary of State regarding the disappearance of the 43
Mexican students and the investigation, and now, just recently,
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, this group of
experts, has just returned and issued a report. And that
report, in part, I think in large part, said that there was no
cooperation between the Commission and--there was a problem in
the relationship between the Commission and getting cooperation
from the Mexican Government. How does that impact our aid? When
we are seeing kind of this Commission report talking about the
lack--you know, the lack of cooperation, does that impact at
all the amount of aid that we give to Mexico? Or do we
condition aid on at least cooperation?
Mr. Palmieri. We did take note of the April 24 Inter-
American Commission human rights report of the expert--of the
independent expert. We commended the Commission's work and--
which was initially requested by the Government of Mexico.
Mexico should consider the report's recommendations and fully
evaluate the suggested actions to address forced
disappearances, to provide more support to the victims, and to
begin to bring the perpetrators of that tragedy to justice.
In the broader sense, we work closely with Mexico on a wide
range of human rights issues, and encourage it to improve its
human rights performance.
Mr. Lowenthal. Do you think, following up on the
Congresswoman from Florida, do you think human rights are
improving in Mexico?
Mr. Palmieri. The human rights situation in Mexico is a
very complex issue. In some respects, as Mexico moves to
implement the constitutional reforms to reform its justice
sector, they are making progress in improving the human rights
conditions in the country. But, at the same time, when you see
a report like this that details with specific recommendations
on how they could do better, it is clear that Mexico should
review those recommendations.
Mr. Lowenthal. Should it have any impact upon our foreign
aid? Our aid? I would like to hear from any of the witnesses.
Ms. Hogan?
Ms. Hogan. Right. The assistance that we are providing
Mexico is intended to help them develop a very strong human
rights regime and response.
Mr. Lowenthal. But I am not seeing that happen, and we have
been giving this assistance. I am seeing a report that just
came out this week that really details the lack of cooperation
between the investigators. How does that impact our aid?
Ms. Hogan. Well, one of the things that USAID is investing
in is the human rights protection mechanism in Mexico, which
has allowed the Mexican Government to establish a rapid
response capability to protect human rights of those who are
threatened, an emergency response capability to support victims
of human rights, and to create networks of human right
defenders, and particularly journalists. And I can say that 2
years ago, we had 40 people who used the system. Last year, we
had 400 people who have used the system.
Mr. Lowenthal. Are you not appalled by the investigation
and the loss of those 43 students who have never been
identified where they are?
Ms. Hogan. Terrible. Terrible series of events there. And
yes, absolutely.
Mr. Lowenthal. Anybody else want to comment on----
Mr. Arreaga. Yes, sir. We, of course, recognize that there
are challenges in Mexico, and that is the reason we are there,
and we are pouring quite a bit of resources in strengthening
the justice sector system. They are moving toward the
accusatory system. You are moving the entire--not only the
Federal system, but as well as the States. And it is a huge
challenge. It is a huge challenge that is going to take very
many years. But we have our best and brightest working with the
Mexicans to build that system, and it is going to take some
time. But we are there because they asked for our help and we
are happy to give it to them.
Mr. Lowenthal. I just also wonder how--I want to--how do we
help these--an independent investigation like the Inter-
American Commission, who is having difficulty? How do we help
them with the Mexican Government, or do we, in terms of their
getting cooperation and being able to have the Mexican
Government actually assist in this investigation rather than
seem to stonewall the investigation by pointing their fingers
at everyone else who has done it, but not really providing the
support to the investigative team? I mean, how do we help them?
We are giving them a lot of money.
Mr. Palmieri. Through the Merit Initiative, we have
expanded broadly U.S. law enforcement cooperation. We have
helped professionalize their police and security forces----
Mr. Lowenthal. Do what?
Mr. Palmieri. We have an ongoing bilateral human rights
dialogue with them where we raise cases like this case.
Mr. Lowenthal. Well, I am just saying I hear you, all that
you are doing, but I am terribly disappointed in this, in what
is taking place and our lack of response to what is going on. I
yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal.
We will go down now to Mr. Donovan from New York.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for appearing today before us.
Approximately--and I will be short, Mr. Chairman, because I
know the vote could be called any moment. A couple of weeks
ago, I had the pleasure of visiting the CDC, and because of the
attention now to Zika, and coming from South America,
particularly Brazil and the Olympics being performed there this
summer, I was shocked about the amount of cases we have of
malaria in the United States. There is over 1,200. I think it
is the highest number last year that we have had since--in 40
years.
So I was just wondering about some of the efforts to combat
mosquito-borne viruses in South America, particularly malaria.
The World Health Organization had said that they could probably
eradicate malaria in about 20 countries in the world by 2020. I
think eight of those countries are in South and Central
America. So I was just wondering if you could talk a little bit
about the efforts that--down there to eradicate the malaria and
to control the Zika virus.
Ms. Hogan. Certainly. Well, thank you for the question. In
fact, we have graduated all of our countries in South America
now from health assistance because we have--over the years,
investing in those systems, they are now standing up and able
to take care of their own basic health needs.
However, we continue to help on infectious diseases, and
malaria. We currently have a cooperative agreement with the Pan
American Health Foundation to--excuse me. PAHO. Pan American
Health Organization, right, to help countries develop systems
to combat malaria. We are also working now on Zika, thanks to
the approval of USAID's CN that will allow us to stand up
behavior change communication programs, so that people will
become aware of how they get the Zika virus and how to respond
to it.
We are investing vector control methodologies. We just
issued a grand challenge last week for $30 million to try to
incite innovative ways in which we could do more research and
development and the development of diagnostic tools for Zika.
And, of course, we are prepared to help governments design
programs that would provide the care and treatment for women,
pregnant women, and infants who may be affected by the disease.
Mr. Donovan. Any other--is there--all right. Thank you very
much. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
You all have answered a lot of the questions that I had
about Cuba and about Venezuela, and some of the money there. So
I want to shift gears a little bit.
We were in Paraguay, and we had a conversation about--give
you an example. Rio de Paraguay is a huge shipping channel from
Bolivia all the way to where it runs into Rio de Uruguay, and
then on to the Atlantic Ocean for barges, shipping containers
that make their way all around the world.
But in the capital city of Paraguay, they need to do some
dredging. It will cost about--the way we heard, about $10
million estimated. You know, if you think about what a shot in
the arm that would be, U.S. assistance to a country like
Paraguay, to help with that sort of thing, that really, I
think, is something that we ought to be considering when we
talk about Western Hemisphere State Department budget and
working with our friends and allies. We hear a lot about USAID
programs, micro loans and that sort of thing, micro financing.
Just give you one example where you get a lot of bang for the
buck, I think. Maybe more so than $10 million dropped in
Nicaragua over the years and that sort of thing. So just throw
that out there.
Do we give any assistance to Uruguay because they are
handling the--or took the GTMO prisoners, their Uruguay 6? Do
they receive any additional funding from us for that? That is a
question I don't know the answer to.
Mr. Palmieri. I will have to talk to the coordinator's
office. I believe there was some re-settlement funding
provided. I don't know if it is being done on an ongoing basis.
Mr. Duncan. All right. You know, they are a strong human
rights defender. And there is another country that I consider
we would get a lot of bang for the buck if we considered
helping them in that area. And they did take those prisoners.
So I had a meeting last week in the office with members
from the Dominican Republic, and they shared with me in some
ongoing efforts between Haiti and the Dominican Republic along
the border. One is an economic zone, one is an energy zone, and
one a shipping zone. Does the United States play any part of
that? Because I do see a lot of benefit, at least for the
Haitians as well as the Dominicans, on those projects. All
right? Is that included--is that USAID involvement? Is there
any State Department dollars or U.S. dollars going to help
Dominican and Haiti with those type programs or projects?
Ms. Hogan. USAID is helping Haiti rehabilitate a port in
Cap-Haitien that would allow for the import of container ships.
So it will ultimately be an economic incentive in Haiti because
it will increase the amount of trade that they are able to do
along their northern border.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. And I appreciate that. I do--when they
were speaking last week, a light bulb went off. What a great
way to impact so many lives with consistent jobs, economic
improvement, and it is bilateral. Is the U.S.--my question is
the U.S., and should the U.S. be partners in that in some way
because giving a lot of money to Haiti to rebuild, and there is
hints of corruption and hints of money not getting to where the
rubber meets the road. But I can point to these projects going,
hey, that is a pretty good idea.
Wasteful spending in the Fiscal Year 2017 budget. So Fiscal
Year 2017 request is for $324,000, 57.6 percent of the Pan
American Institute of Geography and History budget priorities
listed in the Fiscal Year 2016 budget request for the same
amount of money included spending taxpayer dollars on creating
an atlas of climate change in the Americas, and publishing the
history of America to further the concept of Americas as an
interconnected unit. This seemed to be a waste of U.S. taxpayer
dollars when we are over $19 trillion in debt. And when the
region struggles with having such high rates of crime,
violence, tepid economic growth, and the list goes on because
the questions have already been asked. So was U.S. taxpayer
assistance used last year to create this atlas and this
history? Mr. Palmieri.
Mr. Palmieri. I will have to take that question back, sir.
I am not familiar with that specific appropriation and that
program, but we will get you a full answer on how that money
was used.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. Because I personally th ink that money
could be better spent fighting crime and narco trafficking,
helping Colombia and the things we talked about instead of
spending our taxpayer dollars creating a history that may or
may not be accurate of the Americas and a climate change atlas.
I don't believe my constituents would want to see their dollars
going to that when we have drug running coming out of Central
America and Latin America to the U.S. We have got issues of
judicial graft and corruption in a lot of countries. You see
what I am saying? We could better spend these dollars. And it
kind of reminds me of National Institutes of Health putting
shrimp on a treadmill. Don't spend our tax dollars putting
shrimp on a treadmill for whatever your trumped-up reason is.
Spend them where they are effective. Okay?
You wanted to say something?
Mr. Palmieri. Yeah, I do, sir. I agree that we need to
maintain our investments in the security sector. But we also
are seeing an enormous drought that is affecting Central
America right now. And to the extent that we can better
understand the patterns of that drought, we might be able to
direct more effectively agricultural assistance and other forms
of development assistance so that the conditions of people who
are at increased food security risk can be more quickly
addressed, thereby removing a push factor for them to leave the
region and their home communities.
So there could be a reason why a better understanding of
the impact of climate change in Central America could help us
protect U.S. interests and prevent undocumented irregular
migration by more effectively directing our aid.
Mr. Duncan. So what you are saying is an atlas of climate
change would have predicted the El Nino effect that caused the
drought in Central America that led to the migration crisis. By
having that atlas, we would have been able to foresee this
climate change that is driving people north.
Mr. Palmieri. As I said, sir, I am not familiar with the
particulars of the atlas. But I do think more effective
understanding of climate change in Central America could help
us better direct assistance----
Mr. Duncan. I think taking that money to help with drought
assistance by USAID, going in after when the drought does
impact the region and helping, is a better use of taxpayer
dollars than trying to predict the climate. The weatherman
can't tell you what the climate is going to be tomorrow. And we
are trying to predict climate in a region. Nobody saw the
drought coming. The climate scientists didn't see the drought
coming. So, anyway, my time is up.
Gentlemen and Ms. Hogan, I do appreciate you all coming
today. This is insightful. This is part of the oversight that
is necessary. Members may have additional questions.
Well, I am going to defer to the former chairwoman who has
a follow-up question.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Just a question on democracy.
Mr. Duncan. Votes have been called, so quickly.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I know
we have votes.
Ms. Hogan, has USAID fallen back to its--to the paths when
USAID was not committed to democracy funds in Cuba? And I ask
this because we know the history of it. In 2013, USAID decided
to cut itself out of the democracy funds. And then in 2014,
Congress followed by zeroing out USAID for Cuba as well. So now
USAID has been allowed to access the Cuba funds for Fiscal Year
2015. And in October 2015, USAID sent their Congressional
notifications to the Hill for $6.25 million for Cuba, and the
notification was for two programs, humanitarian and human
rights.
In November 2015, the notification cleared Congress. In
January, USAID issued publicly a request for proposals for the
humanitarian assistance portion, and we are almost at May
already, and yet, this money has not been obligated. If you
could give us a picture of what is going to be happening, and
do you still have to request proposals for the human rights
portion of the notification? Is that correct? And I wanted to
know why there is a holdup in humanitarian and human rights
program when they are so desperately needed in Cuba right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the chairwoman for her continued
leadership on the Cuban issue. And, again, I thank you guys for
coming. Everyone has been--very valuable insight, and the
questions have been, I think, robust and spot on today.
Members may have additional questions. We will submit those
and ask that you provide answers within a timely manner. And
any member that has statements they would like to submit for
the record, we will leave that open for 10 days.
Without objection, we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
