- MIGRATION CRISIS: OVERSIGHT OF THE ADMINISTRATION'S PROPOSED $1 BILLION REQUEST FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MIGRATION CRISIS: OVERSIGHT OF THE
ADMINISTRATION'S PROPOSED $1 BILLION
REQUEST FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 30, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-43

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-390PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015
_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
Until
5/18/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
Until
5/18/15 deg.
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Scott Hamilton, Central America Director, Bureau of Western
Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Department of State...................     7
The Honorable William R. Brownfield, Assistant Secretary, Bureau
of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, U.S.
Department of State............................................    13
Ms. Paloma Adams-Allen, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Latin
America and the Caribbean Bureau, U.S. Agency for International
Development....................................................    21
The Honorable Alan D. Bersin, Assistant Secretary and Chief
Diplomatic Officer, Office of Policy, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security..............................................    29
Lieutenant General Kenneth E. Tovo, USA, Military Deputy
Commander, U.S. Southern Command, U.S. Department of Defense...    42

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Scott Hamilton: Prepared statement...........................     9
The Honorable William R. Brownfield: Prepared statement..........    15
Ms. Paloma Adams-Allen: Prepared statement.......................    23
The Honorable Alan D. Bersin: Prepared statement.................    31
Lieutenant General Kenneth E. Tovo, USA: Prepared statement......    44

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................   114
Hearing minutes..................................................   115

MIGRATION CRISIS: OVERSIGHT OF THE
ADMINISTRATION'S PROPOSED $1 BILLION.
REQUEST FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock p.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Duncan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Duncan. The hearing will come to order.
We will get through our opening statements and then we will
begin the opening statements from the panelists, and when we
get to a stopping point to go vote we will do that and we will
come back and resume shortly after votes.
So thank you, guys, for being here. I want to thank the
general for a briefing recently with SOUTHCOM that was very,
very helpful.
And so today we meet to conduct oversight of the
administration's Fiscal Year 2016 $1 billion budget request for
Central America, which would roughly triple the amount of
funding for the region.
According to the administration, this funding would support
the U.S. strategy for engagement in Central America to promote
prosperity, security, and good governance.
It would also assist the Central American governments in
implementing their Alliance for Prosperity plan.
These efforts aim to address the massive influx of migrants
we saw at our Southwest border last summer in which over 68,000
unaccompanied children sought admittance to the United States,
75 percent who are from the Central American countries of El
Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, also known as the Northern
Triangle area.
As a result of this migration crisis, U.S. engaged in media
campaigns to discourage migration, conducted law enforcement
operations to dismantle human smuggling networks, and created a
new in-country refugee parole processing pilot program to
provide a safer way for children and their parents to migrate
in the United States.
Under this program, parents living in the United States do
not need to be U.S. citizens or in lawful immigration status to
qualify for their child and spouse living in Central America to
gain admittance to the United States.
Instead, lawful immigrants who have benefitted from the
presence of executive overreach on immigration are now also
allowed to unify their families through this program.
This is appalling to me, and while I agree that we need to
do all in our power to prevent another migration crisis, I am
baffled as to how this program would achieve its goals since it
is a welcome mat for a broader border surge and does nothing to
deter Central America migration to the United States since it
only furthers the narrative of family reunification--it is late
in the afternoon, I guess--that many Central Americans seek.
Nevertheless, I do want to commend the leadership that
governments in the region have shown to address the migration
crisis.
Earlier this month, I led a congressional delegation to the
seventh Summit of the Americas in Panama and our delegation met
with the Presidents of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras to
discuss their Alliance for Prosperity plan and how it will
address the root causes of migration.
It was a fruitful discussion and I told them that their
plan is a good first step in the right direction. However, I
also emphasized that money alone would not be sufficient to
solving these problems.
Similarly, I would like to--I want to commend the actions
of Mexico on increasing its immigration enforcement efforts
which are critical to U.S. border security.
Last year, Mexico's ministry of interior reported that it
removed over 104,000 Central American migrants and Mexican
agents conducted more than 150 raids on northbound trains that
previously transported 500 to 700 migrants through Mexico to
the U.S. border three times a week.
This is a significant change from Mexico's past practice
but I also acknowledge that much more work needs to be done.
Some believe that these efforts have been successful to the
point that we will not see high levels of migration this year
that we saw last year.
I don't share that optimism, given the increasing numbers
of Central American migrants we are seeing at Mexico's southern
border on the way to the United States.
According to Mexico's National Institute of Migration,
Mexico is catching the highest number of Central American
migrants so far to date with numbers nearly double what they
were last year compared to the same time frame.
During the first half of 2015, Mexico has apprehended
almost 60,000 migrants. This month alone Mexico apprehended
almost 14,000 migrants as opposed to 8,000 in April of last
year.
Furthermore, according to polling by the State Department,
it appears the desire to send children to the United States has
actually increased in all three Northern Triangle countries
since the peak of the crisis last year.
Thus, the potential for another migration crisis this year
at the U.S. southern border is real and we must have a secure
U.S. border and strong relationships with the regional
governments.
Today, we have five witnesses from the administration here
to testify to their proposed whole government approach to the
$1-billion request and U.S. strategy for the region. According
to the latest available statistics, the U.S. has provided
roughly $24 billion in 2012 dollars to El Salvador, Guatemala,
and Honduras since 1946.
Yet, the administration's U.S. strategy for Central America
clearly states that current U.S. and regional efforts to
address the challenges in the region have been insufficient.
So I ask, how will $1 billion more achieve different
results from what we have seen so far? Will this be like Plan
Colombia, which I fully support, which was originally a 6-year
strategy but ended up requiring a stronger commitment and
eventually almost $10 billion from Fiscal Year 2000 to 2014.
And if so, is the administration strategy planning for that?
In addition, the U.S. strategy also recognizes that success
of the strategy depends on Central American governments
themselves. We have seen some progress on this front with
several public commitments and El Salvador's adoption of an
investment stability law, Guatemala's extension of the mandate
of international commission against impunity in Guatemala, or
CSIG, and Honduras' cooperation agreement with Transparency
International to combat corruption.
However, I believe that we must see more significant
political will in these countries and greater involvement of
local civil society, private sector and religious organizations
in the implementation and monitoring of their Alliance for
Prosperity plan if they are to achieve accountability and
lasting sustainable results.
For instance, all three governments could also take steps
to require the completion of corruptions tests across the
entire police force, share with the U.S. their concrete plans
for addressing judicial reforms including completion of
homicide investigations and successful prosecution of criminal
offenders.
Each sign an agreement with the Transparency International
to combat corruption, each agreed to work with an independent
organization similar to CSIG in Guatemala to address the
impunity and each show a clear prioritization of using their
own funds to address the communities experiencing the highest
rate of out migration to the United States.
So in conclusion, one issue I believe should be raised more
often by the administration to countries that receive U.S.
foreign assistance is their voting record with the United
States and multilateral organizations such as the United
Nations and OAS.
Specific to today's hearing, I am concerned that El
Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras do not vote with the United
States at least 50 percent of the time in the United Nations.
If these countries were going to receive more in U.S.
taxpayer dollars, shouldn't we ask that they support the United
States position more frequently in multilateral organizations?
So with that, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses
and I will now turn to Ranking Member Albio Sires for his
opening statement.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon and thank you to our witnesses for being
here today. This time last year we saw an unprecedented number
of children fleeing to the U.S. from Central America, in
particular, the Northern Triangle countries of El Salvador,
Guatemala, and Honduras.
The cost in violence fueled by gangs, lack of security,
weakened institutions, and poverty are creating such a sense of
desperation that families and young children risk their lives
on this treacherous journey with the small hope that they may
be able to escape their realities.
Congress must ensure that U.S. authorities manage the
processing and treatment of detained children migrants as
humanely and transparently as possible, respecting their human
rights and legal protection--their basic human rights and legal
protection.
In turn, the Northern Triangle governments must acknowledge
the factors driving these mothers and children from embarking
on this dangerous journey.
Over the past year, U.S., Mexico, and Northern Triangle
countries have all put forth effort to deter desperate children
and families from undertaking such a risk and began crafting
plans to combat the root causes of migration.
Messaging campaigns have taken place to inform families of
the life-threatening dangers involved in the journey and dispel
any misconception regarding U.S. migration policies.
Northern Triangle countries have banded together to craft
the Alliance of Prosperity, their regional approach focusing on
long-term development in strengthening institution and reducing
violence.
Compared to this time last year, the rate of apprehensions
at the U.S.-Mexico border has dropped. However, according to
many reports, including the Pew Research Center analysis, this
drop counts as a result of huge increase in Mexico
deportation--the increased deportation of Central American
children traveling alone by 56 percent during the first 5
months of the fiscal year.
We must be careful not to consider a drop in U.S.
apprehension as a drop in migration from the region.
Furthermore, we must work together to make sure Mexican
authorities are processing these children with the same respect
for human rights that we would expect at our borders.
Reports indicate that migrants are increasingly subject to
widespread incidence of extortion, kidnapping and other abuses
committed by both criminal groups and Mexican police officials.
This crisis has not emerged halfway across the globe. It
has unfolded at our own doorstep and underscores the need to
pay attention to our own hemisphere.
The U.S. should support a regional strategy that will
increase economic opportunity, strengthen the rule of law,
improve the integrity and effectiveness of police and security
forces, and undermine the conditions that give way to gang and
family-related violence.
I call upon the region's governments to work with the
United States and do their parts to find the solution to this
growing humanitarian crisis, provide a safe environment for
these children, and address the underpinning of what is
compelling these young children to abandon their homelands and
risk their lives to come across to the United States.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists on how we can
address this unfortunate crisis and I thank the chairman for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Duncan. And I will thank the gentleman. It is an
unfortunate crisis but we need to remember we are also a
sovereign nation and we can determine a lot of things about our
border.
I would like to just turn to the former chairwoman of the
full committee and the subcommittee chairman of the Middle East
and North Africa for a brief opening statement.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Sires. Thank you for holding today's important hearing, and
as you had said, Mr. Chairman, from Fiscal Year 2008 to 2014
Congress has appropriated over $800 million for the countries
of Central America but that did not prevent the incredible
flood of migrants who came to our border last summer.
So what is different about the President's new proposal of
$1 billion? I don't believe that throwing money at the problem
without a comprehensive strategy will help to fix the crisis.
I have concerns about the capacity of our Embassies in
Central America to oversee this money and whether the host
countries can be prepared to receive such a large influx of
assistance as well. And many of us have been advocating for
such a long time that the hemisphere needs to be a higher
priority. But we have got to be careful about how the money is
spent. The President's Central America strategy is lacking a
strong security component.
Drug trafficking in the region continues to undermine
political stability in the area and we cannot successfully
strengthen these government institutions and root out
corruption unless drug trafficking is curtailed and the
security environment is improved.
We have had many successful interagency and international
cooperative operations in the transit zone including Operations
Martillo and Anvil. But drug interdiction efforts continue to
be hampered by resource limitations.
General Kelly has been clear in that SOUTHCOM, our great
facility down south, lacks the assets and ISR support to really
help our neighbors in Central America to have a larger security
impact.
And even when we do have assets in the region, such as JTF
Bravo in Honduras, we are not allowed to use these assets for
security purposes, only for humanitarian missions. That doesn't
seem to make much sense, Mr. Chairman.
We should also provide more foreign military financing to
help build the capacity of security in law enforcement sectors
in Central America. And these are not new concepts. We have
done them successfully in Colombia and in Mexico, and they are
championed success stories.
So why not imitate these initiatives for all of Central
America? And as we look at the $1-billion request from the
administration my concern is less, Mr. Chairman, about the
amount of money but where the money will be put to use and what
benchmarks we will use to gauge success.
And with that, I would like to welcome to our subcommittee
hearing Captain John Madril of the United States Forces Japan,
Navy Reserve Headquarters Unit Commanding Officer. So we thank
you, sir, for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
I will recognize the ranking member for a second.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Chairman, I see that Congresswoman Norma
Torres has arrived. I ask unanimous consent that they be
allowed to participate in this hearing after all committee
members have had their opportunity to question the witnesses.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, without objection so ordered.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Castro from Texas for 1
minute.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman.
And first, Chairman, let me say that I was very proud to
join you and others, many from this subcommittee--Foreign
Affairs Committee--who represented the United States at the
Summit of the Americas. I think that you did a wonderful job
and hopefully we represented our nation well down there.
I thank all of your for testimony and for being here today,
and to the administration for putting forward a proposal to
help the countries in the Northern Triangle do better by their
children.
I think each of us convey the message to the Presidents of
these countries that many of us want to be helpful but, as
others on this committee have said, we also want to make sure
that the money is well spent, that it improves the lives of
these children, and improves society in each of the countries.
That said, I agree with my colleague, Albio Sires, that as
we have asked Mexico to be better about making sure that they
cut off the pipeline of children coming to the United States,
there is a concern for human rights that comes up.
Many folks have been cut off from riding what is known as
the Beast--the train that ultimately leads them on the path
toward the United States. And so I am going to have to leave a
little bit early for a meeting at the White House on trade.
But what I would like to see going back through the
testimony that you all give is an understanding of how we are
doing that with a respect for human rights or understanding the
cost of human life because I have read several accounts now
that describe the desperation and, quite frankly, the deaths of
many people who have tried to get through Mexico who have been
essentially shut off from riding that train and who have
perished, and whether Mexico and the United States are
cooperating to make sure that this is done in the most humane
way possible.
And so I hope that you all can shed some light on that
subject. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman and thank him for his
participation at the summit--a valuable member of the
delegation.
I remind other members that opening statements may be
submitted for the record and I would like to explain the
lighting system.
I am going to give each of you 5 minutes for your opening
statement. When we get close to 5 minutes if you could just
recognize the lighting system will go from yellow. At red that
means cut it off and we will move on.
We are going to try to stay on time. Votes will be called
so short of that I am going to go ahead and recognize Mr.
Hamilton. I am not going to read your bios. They are provided
for our members in the books.
And so, Mr. Hamilton, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. SCOTT HAMILTON, CENTRAL AMERICA DIRECTOR,
BUREAU OF WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Hamilton. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sires, members
of the committee, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, let me first of all thank you directly for
your leadership in leading a delegation to Panama at the Summit
of the Americas.
I think it was the delegation that met the most Presidents
in 24 hours that we have ever seen and we appreciate that very,
very much. And thank you, sir, for the opportunity to testify
on U.S. strategy for engagement in Central America.
This strategy, in our judgement, offers a compelling way to
address the severe challenges facing this region, especially
the Northern Triangle part of it. It prioritizes physical
security for a good reason but it also includes governance and
prosperity objectives because without all three, in our
judgement, we cannot succeed in a sustainable way.
It notes that security must be accompanied by what
businesses call juridical security, or the rule of law. It
notes the importance of vocational training and jobs, and it
notes the importance of transparent and accountable government
institutions.
It concludes that only in this way together will we be able
to ensure that the 1.7 million people in this region between 14
and 25 who do not work and who do not study, and the 6 million
of them who will enter the job market in the next 10 years will
do so in their own countries trying to pursue the Honduran
dream, the Guatemalan dream, and the Salvadoran dream instead
of coming north.
And Mr. Chairman, your comments and those of the other
members indicated you want to know why it is different today--
why are we investing or proposing that we do so. I would
suggest, sir, that there are four principal reasons.
The first is that political conditions in the Northern
Triangle are substantially different today than they have ever
been. Women and children fleeing a country send a very
different message than young men fleeing for a right of passage
to work.
Women and children fleeing send a message of no confidence
in the society. When that happened last year, it sent political
shock waves through the region and was, frankly, humiliating
for a number of leaders in the Northern Triangle. It is a wake-
up call to them and they understand that.
Second, those leaders are prepared to be held accountable
for the first time by external entities. In Honduras, we are
talking Transparency International in the Office of the High
Commission of Human Rights from the United Nations.
We are talking in Guatemala the Commission against
Impunity, also from the United Nations. In El Salvador, we are
talking about the Millennium Challenge Corporation and the
Partnership for Growth.
These are strong indications for the first time that we
have seen that they are prepared to be held publically
accountable not just for what they say but for what they do.
Going forward, that accountability is absolutely fundamental
and we strongly endorse it.
Third, for the first time in a generation, countries which
are not necessarily always closely aligned have come together
to prepare a collective plan for the region's development.
This collective plan, the Alliance for Prosperity, is one
of the most impressive we have seen in the sense that it is
combined and collective and represents the commitments and the
goals of all three countries together. This is unusual and
worthy of noting and, frankly, we have seen in the Colombia
context that when a country comes together to take ownership of
its situation and does not point fingers toward the United
States, we have an opportunity to make a difference and that is
what we see today.
And finally, we have learned ourselves, as an Interagency,
from experiences we have had in Colombia, Mexico, and Central
America we know what works. We know how to scale it up and
scale it out and we know what we need to invest in.
In fact, we have spent so much time together that Assistant
Secretary Brownfield almost speaks with a Scottish accent,
which he will demonstrate, I am sure, when he speaks.
Mr. Chairman, all investment necessarily involves
calculated risk. We assess that conditions now exist for
transformation.
Our task, of course, is to ensure with you that political
will is sustained in the region, that civil society is engaged
and supported, and that the private sector is energized and, of
course, that our partners are coordinated.
Our inaction, I would suggest, invites far greater risks
for the United States. The cost of investing in this region now
is, frankly, going to pale in comparison with the cost of
annually addressing migration surges to this country.
We very much look forward to working with you on this
committee and in other committees to assess the most effective
way we can assist the region and protect the security and
prosperity of the United States.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hamilton follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you, and I will now welcome back to the
committee Ambassador Brownfield, who was in Colombia when Plan
Colombia was being implemented. I hope you will touch on the
successes of that at some point today.
Ambassador, welcome back. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE WILLIAM R. BROWNFIELD, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Brownfield. Mr. Hamilton, a mild Texas accent is
sometimes confused for a Scottish accent but they are distinct
accents.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sires, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss with you
today our Central America engagement strategy.
We meet to discuss the future of Central America but we
filter our thinking through our experience last summer when
tens of thousands of Central American migrants and children
arrived at our southwest border.
We learned then that the solution to the migration crisis
is not at our border but, rather, in Central America itself and
the root causes that drive migrants north.
To address those root causes, we developed a three-prong
strategy--prosperity, to give Central Americans a stake in
their own futures; governance, to give them confidence in their
own governments; and security to protect their families in
their own communities.
We do not start this exercise from scratch. Since 2009, my
INL bureau has provided hundreds of millions of dollars in
support and assistance through CARSI, the Central America
Regional Security Initiative.
Some suggest there is little to show for this effort. I
respectfully disagree. Operations Martillo and Anvil brought
drug smuggling by air through Honduras down by as much as 50
percent since 2012.
Maritime drug seizures--our best measure of drug flow--fell
40 percent in Costa Rica and 60 percent in Panama. Seventy-two
major traffickers now face justice in the United States. The
homicide rate in Honduras dropped more than 20 percent between
2011 and 2014.
Migrant detentions at our southwest border are down as much
as half from last year, thanks largely to Mexican and Central
American law enforcement efforts.
I do not apologize for CARSI, Mr. Chairman. I am proud of
it. But if CARSI were completely successful we would not be
here today.
The President has requested $1 billion for Fiscal Year 2016
to support this strategy. The INL request is $205 million,
which is 25 percent more than last year. The committee--the
subcommittee has a right to ask what more would it see for this
25 percent.
First, a new bottom-up and top-down approach. Bottom-up, we
will support local anti-gang, drug demand, and community
policing programs that link communities with their own police.
We will also support national police, prosecutor and
judicial training, and capacity building programs to reform
institutions from the top down and we will support specialized
vetted units and task forces to produce immediate operational
results.
Second, we offer a new programming approach that links
USAID's community programs with INL's model police precincts.
We call it the place-based strategy.
Jointly, we identify communities, age groups, security
threats and root causes, and then design comprehensive
statistics-driven programs to address them.
And third, we expand those CARSI programs with a successful
track record and draw down or modify those without.
Members of the subcommittee, we knew when we started CARSI
in 2009 that we were in this for the long haul. We knew we
would learn from programs that worked well and from others that
did not.
We knew we would accomplish only as much as regional
governments' political will would survive and support. We have
delivered results. Central America is a better place today and
the United States is safer due to our efforts. But we surely
have more to do.
I look forward to working closely with the subcommittee to
get it done. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to
your comments and your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brownfield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Ambassador.
And the Chair will recognize Ms. Adams-Allen.

STATEMENT OF MS. PALOMA ADAMS-ALLEN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN BUREAU, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Adams-Allen. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Sires and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
invitation to testify today.
I am grateful for your interest in Central America and am
pleased to have this opportunity to update you on your plans to
address the underlying causes of the region's migration crisis.
As you know, social development and economic growth in
Central America have been stymied in recent years by dramatic
rise in crime and violence, particularly in the Northern
Triangle countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, one
of the consequences being the migration of thousands of
unaccompanied children to the United States last summer.
To help Central American governments create an environment
in which the smallest and most vulnerable citizens can survive
and thrive, we must effectively address the root causes of this
migration.
As Vice President Biden said in January, the cost of
investing now in a secure and prosperous Central America is
modest compared with the cost of letting violence and poverty
fester.
The administration's Fiscal Year 2016 budget request for
Central America represents an investment now that we believe
will save us money later.
To ensure their investment pays off, the administration
will implement the U.S. strategy for engagement in Central
America, a coordinated whole of government effort that takes a
comprehensive view of the region's challenges and banks on a
true partnership with the countries of the region, strong host
country political will, and increased private sector
investment.
It directly addresses these root causes by advancing three
interrelated objectives--improved prosperity, security, and
governance. With additional funding we intend to spur greater
prosperity with the North Triangle countries by supporting
broad-based economic growth and anti-poverty programs.
Our investments are intended to create jobs; expand the
business, employment, and educational opportunities available
to the groups most likely to migrate; and, ultimately, reduce
poverty in their communities.
In all three countries, we will invest in clean energy
programs and trade facilitation measures that promote regional
integration. Cheaper, more reliable energy will improve the
competitiveness of the business sector while enhancing energy
security.
Reducing the time and cost to move goods across the
region's borders will make it easier for private businesses to
capitalize on market opportunities. Expanding economic and
educational opportunities for the poor is crucial to
consolidating security.
The heart of USAID's security work continues to be youth-
focused crime and violence prevention programs designed to keep
youth safe, provide avenues to better education and job
training, upgrade community infrastructure, and build trust
between communities and police.
We have been testing these approaches, many which have
proven effective in U.S. cities in the region's most dangerous
communities. Last fall, a Vanderbilt University impact
evaluation confirmed that these programs work.
At the 3-year mark, the final results showed a 51-percent
decline in reported murders and extortion, a 25-percent
reduction in reported illegal drug sales, and a 19-percent drop
in reported burglaries in neighborhoods benefiting from USAID
programs as compared to the control group.
With additional resources we will partner with national
municipal governments to push for the reforms and investments
needed to scale up and sustain successful programs. We will
also implement in tandem with State INL a new place-based
strategy in the region's most dangerous communities with
marries our youth and community development programs with INL's
programs to build trusted and accountable police. Ultimately,
our success will depend on strong and effective governance in
Central America.
Prosperity and security gains are only sustainable in an
environment where democratic values and institutions flourish,
all people have access to basic social services, impunity is
reduced, and civil society and the media can play their
rightful roles.
With additional resources, we will push for and help the
countries implement reforms needed to enhance the effectiveness
of their institutions. New programs will seek to increase their
transparency and accountability by professionalizing the civil
service empowering civil society to serve as watchdogs and
strengthening the institutions charged with administering
justice.
To foster greater local revenue generation, we will
strengthen their tax administration and financial management
capability. We will only be successful in this endeavor if the
region's governments commit to making tough reforms. As such,
we intend to calibrate our assistance in response to real
reform efforts. We believe it is important to send the message
at the outset of this process that resources will follow reform
and not vice versa.
Mr. Chairman, we believe that the conditions in the region
are ripe for us to successfully tackle poverty, insecurity, and
weak governance that compels children to migrate and help our
partners in Central America create the secure, peaceful, and
prosperous region we all desire.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Adams-Allen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much. I apologize. We got tickled
during your comments but I want to thank the United States Army
for stepping in and dispatching a pesky fly that was flying
around the table down there.
Mr. Bersin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ALAN D. BERSIN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
AND CHIEF DIPLOMATIC OFFICER, OFFICE OF POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, in light of
the opening statements of my distinguished colleagues, let me
be brief and summarize.
As Barry Gordy, the founder and chief owner of Motown
Records was asked to sit in a university hearing of a Ph.D.
candidate's thesis and before the candidate could launch into
an hour-long discussion, Mr. Gordy looked at her and said, ``I
just need the answer to three questions--what is your
conclusion, how did you reach it, and why does it matter.''
So let me try to provide brief summary answers to each of
those. The causes of the migration surge of the summer of 2014
are clear. We know the push factors out of the Northern
Triangle--poverty, violence, educational concerns, the need for
family reunification, the role of smuggling networks.
These are not disputed by anyone. Why do we think that this
time around this investment will yield a different result? The
fact is that we did not address the pull factors that pulled
people out of those countries, and Congress was given an
opportunity to do that and declined to do so.
We ask that you accept the conclusion that we need to deal
with the push factors, otherwise we should not expect a
different result. The reason we can expect a different result
is that, as my colleagues have indicated, there is a strength
of will in Central America that has not before existed on which
we can build on the successes that Ambassador Brownfield has
outlined that we have seen over the last 5 to 7 years.
We have administrations there with political will, with a
plan of their own developed in connection with the Inter-
American Development Bank, the Alliance for Prosperity that
shows a difference in the domestic context that is new and
different.
Equally important, there is a strategy in the United States
Government that Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Brownfield and Ms. Adams-
Allen have outlined. There is a coherent strategy to address
security issues and economic development concerns.
How do we know this? What is the method we use? With regard
to the push factors there is no dispute. We hear this from the
migrants themselves. We hear it from the general--the GAO. We
hear it from the leaders of Central American countries.
Why do we think that we would see a different result with
this investment? We see a different result because we have seen
it happen in Colombia, we have seen it happen in Mexico in
terms of dealing with the security situation until the economic
conditions and the economic investments that are there are able
to take root and we begin to see the push factors diminished.
What happened in Colombia and what happened in Mexico is
unique to the circumstances in those countries but the key
principles of governments' will and the United States
Government with an assistance strategy that holds together, I
think, the determining factors.
The third question of Mr. Gordy--why does it matter. It
matters because in fact this is an issue that if we do not deal
with it at the site we will deal with it on our own border. If
we do not deal with it in the context of the investment that
has been requested, we will pay three times as much in dealing
with the consequences of it without affecting at all the
factors that have led to the crisis in the first place.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, that is my answer to the
these questions on behalf of Secretary Johnson.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bersin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much.
Votes have been called so we are going to go ahead and let
General Tovo have his opening statement and then we will break
after that.
General, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL KENNETH E. TOVO, USA, MILITARY
DEPUTY COMMANDER, U.S. SOUTHERN COMMAND, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

General Tovo. Thank you. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member
Sires, distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify here today.
Instability and insecurity in Central America are a direct
threat to our national security. The criminality, violence,
corruption, and weakening of institutions that accompany drug
trafficking have created an atmosphere of hopelessness.
We experienced some of the impact of that with last year's
migration crisis. The illicit pathways that allow the movement
of drugs, people, weapons, and bulk cash can also provide
opportunity to those with more nefarious intent.
Therefore, it is in our nation's interest to help our
partners in the region develop the capacity to disrupt these
pathways. I also believe we have an obligation to support our
partners as they seek to address the root causes of insecurity
and instability that threaten their nations.
After all, it is our nation's demand for drugs that at the
very least has exacerbated Central America's many challenges.
Combatting these challenges will not be easy. It requires a
comprehensive and coordinated approach that advances security,
good governance, and economic development in equal measure.
This balance is critical.
Security gains will not be maintained if institutions are
weak. Migration flows will not be stemmed if economic
opportunity is non-existent and democracy will not flourish
when the rule of law is fragile.
From the SOUTHCOM perspective, we are working closely with
our partners across the U.S. Government, especially with State,
INL, DEA, and the Department of Homeland Security, as well as
our partners in Central America.
Our goals are to disrupt the flow of illicit trafficking,
dismantle the networks, and improve border security. Our
primary focus right now is on the Northern Triangle--countries
that have been dealing with citizen security crises in recent
years--and we have seen some remarkable progress there.
But we shouldn't lose sight of the fact that challenges
like illicit trafficking, violence, and poverty are regional
issues--they affect all of Central America. Many countries are
understandably concerned about the balloon effect that may come
with improvements in security in the Northern Triangle.
We need to make sure that the success we have in the
Northern Triangle doesn't come at the expense of the rest of
the Caribbean--the rest of Central America or the Caribbean.
Mr. Chairman, these challenges are significant. It will
take resources, hard work, and a long-term commitment to see a
Plan Central America become a reality in the region. The good
news is that we have a window of opportunity. Our Northern
Triangle partners have developed their own plan to work
collectively toward their shared objectives.
They are investing in their own security and economic
prosperity. Organizations like the IADB and the Millennium
Challenge Account Corporation are lending their support.
In short, we are seeing real political will in the region.
This is perhaps the most promising sign of all. We only have to
look to Colombia to see the payoffs that come from a committed
partner and sustained U.S. engagement. With our support, I am
optimistic we can see the same sort of turnaround in Central
America.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Tovo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Duncan. General, thank you, and let me just take the
opportunity on behalf of the committee to thank you for your
service to the United States military in defense of our great
nation.
We are going to pause and recess until after votes. I ask
the committee members to come back 10 minutes after the
beginning of the last vote. That will give us 10 minutes to
vote and come on across after the last vote.
So with that, we will stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Duncan. We will go ahead and reconvene the hearing and
I appreciate y'all's patience as we worked through votes. We do
have some other members coming but I am going to recognize
myself first for some opening questions.
First off, I am glad we are getting out ahead of this. In
anticipation of a repeat from last year at some level I am glad
we are having this hearing now so that we can start addressing
some of the issues and I think that opening statements were
great and provided a lot of information to us.
One thing that concerns me is how the unaccompanied
children tax the resources not only of the Federal Government
with manpower that has to be used to secure the border or deal
with the number of children and watching over those but also
the Federal resources, but at the state level.
We are seeing state resources being taxed as well in Texas
and the border states. And even right now we are talking about
relocation of some of these children to interior states like
South Carolina and others. And so you are going to end up
seeing those states recognize the taxing of their resources.
When I was in Panama at the Summit of the Americas, I had a
chance meeting with President Obama after the opening ceremony,
and at that meeting he and I had a chance to talk and one of
the things that we talked about was the fact that I am probably
one on my side of the aisle that support the financial
assistance request of $1 billion.
But I told him and I said, Mr. President, there has got to
be accountability, and he agreed. He said, absolutely there has
to be accountability. And I think what we were both talking
about when we talk about accountability is making sure the
money gets to where the rubber meets the road--that it is not
taken off in some amount at the top and with the governments
there--that it is actually getting to where it is going to be
the most--do the most good.
And that is why I think, Ambassador, that the Plan Colombia
model is a great one when we talk judicial assistance and rule
of law and addressing confidence in the population in those
countries with their judicial system and that, you know, they
are not going to have to pay a bribe to get out of jail, that
there is actually going to be rule of law enforcement. I think
that is so important. So I think accountability is important.
What I would like to address first off is potential
vulnerabilities with what we are seeing as the Central America-
4 Border Control Agreement originally signed in 2006, but
implemented between Guatemala and Honduras just recently.
So open borders--open borders between those countries and
what that may mean for law enforcement--and so I am going to
address my first question to General Tovo about--I get open
border and the free flow of goods and commerce and people among
those countries, but I think it creates some impediments to law
enforcement and I want to see how we are--how we are thinking
about those impediments if you have got those open borders for
illicit drugs and smuggling of all kinds and what that may or
may not do to our law enforcement and to our national security.
So if you could address that and then I may come over to
another gentleman. But General?
General Tovo. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Certainly, the more open borders the risk is that you can
ease the flow for all, not just trade and commerce. One of the
things that we have been doing in conjunction with others on
the team here, particularly with the Guatemalans and Hondurans,
is getting them together in what we call IATF's--Interagency
Task Force--on either side of that border to get them to
cooperate more closely on intel sharing, procedures and that is
coming along.
It is part of the recent agreement between the two
Presidents that they would have a shared mechanism. So IATF
Chorti in Guatemala and then a similar JTF across the border in
Honduras are now doing cooperative security work to open the
border, yet control the border.
And so I think while we are at the nascent stages of that,
I think that is a good sign that they recognize the potential
vulnerability, they are taking steps to control the border in a
proper manner, and then, of course, we are supporting their
efforts through advice and assistance.
Mr. Duncan. So do you think that potential enemies such as
ISIS would try to exploit any of that open border across the
whole Latin America, Central America region to some degree?
General Tovo. Chairman, I can't speak specifically to ISIS.
You know, at this point I don't think we have any information
that says that they specifically want to exploit these
pathways.
But it is our position at SOUTHCOM that, given the pathways
that exist--the illicit pathways that move people, drugs,
money, guns, et cetera, in multiple directions that it is
certainly a vulnerability that we ought to figure out how
address and that we are addressing.
That is part of what we do with our partners is help them
develop their capacity to monitor and improve their ability to
maintain domain awareness and then disrupt the networks with
appropriate capabilities.
Mr. Duncan. Right. Okay. While I have got you, a different
topic. Mr. Bersin, I am coming to you in just a second. But
General, the 250 Marines that are going to be stationed that I
have read about, are they going to be under SOCOM's control?
General Tovo. Under SOUTHCOM.
Mr. Duncan. In SOUTHCOM?
General Tovo. They are under the command and control of our
Marine component MARFORSOUTH and they will working closely with
JTF Bravo in Honduras.
Mr. Duncan. How are they going to be used?
General Tovo. Well, they have got several different
elements. The ground element is going to be providing training
to our partners in the region, things such as rivering
operations, marksmanship, small unit training. The air element
will provide general support and then the logistics element
will be doing a series of humanitarian assistance projects--
working with our partners to repair schools and other
facilities.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Bersin, let us go back to the open border issue and the
question is what efforts DHS has taken to mitigate any
exploitation of Central America's loose border security
measures and so I would love to hear your take on that.
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, the way in which we used to look
at borders in the past were strictly the lines on the map, the
lines that separate one country from another and the notion was
that you do inspections at the line where the sovereignty
shifts.
I think what we understand about borders today, and we
apply in a lot of our actions and we expect the Central
Americans to do the same in the context of the Guatemalan and
Honduran agreement, is to secure the flows of goods and people
that are going back and forth.
And it is not so much the inspection point at the
sovereignty line but it is the ability to exchange information
and, in a layered security fashion, to be able to intercept
high-risk or malefactors who are crossing.
So this is not about a free pass but it is about
recognizing that the Maya Chorti, of example, has a zone from
20 miles south of the sovereignty line, 20 miles north into
Guatemala and the idea is to exchange information and
coordinate, and with the work that DHS is doing with the
support of INL in Honduras, for example, with the Goetz Group
which is training border patrol agents, in effect--our border
patrol agents training Guatemalan border--Honduran border
patrol agents, we expect to be doing the same in Guatemala, and
we think that this notion of securing the flow of people and
the flow of goods in a layered security is going to be as
effective as having an incomplete inspection point right at the
line of sovereignty.
Mr. Duncan. Right, and I appreciate those efforts. I don't
mean to come across as negative for what Honduras and Guatemala
are doing. I am exactly opposite of that. I appreciate them
working together in a bilateral agreement to facilitate trade
and all that.
I think that will benefit both countries. Just to follow
up, though, Mexico has increased their border security on that
Guatemalan border. Are you all involved in that and how do you
see that? I think it is effective, from what I have read. How
do you see it?
Mr. Bersin. So in effect then, just to carry the point
further on the Guatemalan-Honduran border using Mexico as an
example, actually Mexico's efforts on its southern border--
Guatemala's northern border--involves giving a pass to Central
Americans to go up into the--into Mexico for a certain period
of time under a border crossing card arrangement. Where there
is a line drawn and the checkpoint and the security is that the
Isthmus of Tehuantepec--there are other checkpoints--but at the
Isthmus of Tehuantepec, the narrow part of Mexico, is where
people are not being permitted to go further north.
We have been working very closely with our Mexican
colleagues in a whole variety of methods with regard to our
southern border--Mexico's northern border. Many of those
techniques in terms of technology, in terms of layered
security, in terms of training and capacity building actually
have been adopted by the Mexicans in their efforts that have, I
think, shown great results on the Guatemalan border.
Mr. Duncan. Right, and I think it has been effective. I
want to applaud the Mexicans for recognizing that and stepping
it up. I think the layered approach of Guatemala on their side,
Mexico on their side to stop it before it ever gets to that
Texas-U.S. borders is very vital.
I want to ask the State Department will any of the billion
dollars for Central America be targeted to addressing this
issue and preventing exploitation of the loose border security
measures by bad actors?
Mr. Hamilton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are collaborating very closely in the interagency on
exactly those questions. We spent about--about 18 months ago we
started talking about this subject and we determined with DHS,
with INL, with Justice, with others, how we might seek to
address border security and also achieve the goals that we set
for ourselves. And with Mr. Bersin and his team, we are working
very closely to try to identify exactly what those programs
will be. So it is very much an integral part of what we are
doing.
Mr. Duncan. All right. I appreciate that.
You know, last year at the peak we witnessed a Guatemalan-
Mexican river crossing. People were paying 80 cents to hop on a
pallet on top of inner tubes and be paddled across into Mexico
and there were Guatemalan police that were right there.
I mean, the videos were very, very clear, and it was less
than $1. It was a very nominal fee. You saw people exploiting
that situation to make money but the porousness of that was
very alarming to folks in my district. And so I hope we--I hope
we see a very active effort on behalf of--on the part of
Guatemalans and Hondurans and El Salvadorans and Mexico, which
I think we are seeing.
So I am over my time but we are going to come back for a
second round. I am going to recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I have been on this committee now 9 years and I
have always been an advocate for this region of the world ever
since I was not even a congressman.
But, you know, it is very frustrating to me when people
come before this committee and they tell me how well things are
working and what improvement we are making in this part of the
Western Hemisphere.
You know, from my view, you know, I look at Venezuela as a
mess. Brazil is embroiled in probably the biggest corruption
scandal of history. You have Bolivia, who is acting like a
rogue nation, and you have Ecuador. Then you have, obviously,
Nicaragua now--Ortega wants to perpetuate himself. He has found
capitalism now.
You know, I look at--we were in Argentina, the former
chairman and I. I mean, I just don't see, you know, this
improvement, and I look at Guatemala, El Salvador and I see
where they have their society problems with these children, and
to me they look at these children going to America as a
pressure releasing valve that they have within their own
country.
And I really don't know what their full commitment is to
really stop this. You know, the Presidents ask for $1 billion.
We are never going to get $1 billion. That is just a figure
that they threw out there. We will get some, you know--you
know, an amount that we will get.
But where are we headed with some of this stuff? I mean,
Ambassador, I know you have been before me half a dozen times
and you are always going to say the same thing. But go ahead,
say it again.
Mr. Brownfield. I would never, ever argue or disagree with
the distinguished gentleman from New Jersey. May I--may I--may
I start by agreeing with you and actually laying out my own
personal experience?
Mr. Sires. I guess I am frustrated. That is my----
Mr. Brownfield. I am with you, and let me share that
frustration at the start and then give you some more positive
stuff at the end.
I am one of the most kind of experienced Latin America
hands, I guess, that has ever had the job that I currently hold
as assistant secretary for INL.
I came in actually committed big time to plussing up what
we were doing because when I arrived in this job less than 25
percent of my entire budget was focussed on Latin America.
That was a function of Iraq and Afghanistan but it was also
a function of concentration elsewhere. To my intense
frustration, I spent much of my first 2 years shutting down INL
sections.
I shut down the INL section in Bolivia. I shut down the INL
section in Ecuador. I shut down small INL programs in
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Venezuela we had shut
down even before I got to the job, for rather obvious reasons.
I was quite frustrated. I was then and I am now. In South
America I have exactly two INL sections in place--Peru and
Colombia.
So I start with the same frustration you had, which is to
say due to circumstances that, in my opinion, were beyond any
of our controls, we did not have these programs.
Central America I did say to you, and I said it somewhat
defensively but I do say it again, CARSI has not solved all
these problems but I do emphatically assert that both Paloma
from the USAID side and me from the INL side have spent 5 years
putting infrastructure in place.
We have got people on the ground now that can actually do
these programs, learning lessons between stupid programs that
obviously did not work and programs that did work, and figuring
how we can go from here.
And finally, reminding everyone--and you hear it from me
every time I come and appear before this committee--we have got
to think long term. This is not a problem--a problem that has
been created over decades is not going to be solved in a matter
of days.
But let me go back to the chairman's question. For example,
border stuff--what are we doing on border stuff? First, don't
forget that on the other side of Central America is Mexico.
This year I am going to put $90 million of INL programs
into the Mexican southern border. Now, is this going to have an
impact on Central America? Of course, it is going to have an
impact on Central America for all the reasons that Mr. Bersin
just laid out.
Second, we are supporting these joint interagency task
forces, police and military, that are to work the borders
themselves. They are tied into the open border concept, Ranking
Member and Mr. Chairman, the theory being if you open the
border basically for the regular crossing points people will no
longer--who are doing legitimate business will no longer avoid
the highways because they will move more rapidly along the
regular places and the criminals will be the ones who are
trying to cross at the non-authorized crossing points for which
you have the Joint Interagency Task Forces to identify and grab
them.
Will it work? I guess I would say it cannot possibly work
any worse than we have had for the last 5 years. Sorry, Dr.
Sires, I got carried away.
Mr. Sires. Well, thank you for making me a doctor. I didn't
realize that. You know, I think part of all this refocus on the
Western Hemisphere--last year was a wake-up call but also, I
think, China is scaring a lot of people in this country with
the influence that they are having in all these countries. So
all of a sudden we have to refocus on the Western Hemisphere.
And I am looking for signs that there really is a commitment by
these countries that they are going to do what they need to do
to stop this flow of people coming over because, really, at the
end of this those children are the ones that suffer.
I mean, they are abused. They get taken advantage of and,
you know, just from the humanitarian point of view somebody has
got to make a real commitment.
If we are going to give them money--and I would like to see
some money go there--but I also like to see transparency. You
know, I think those days where we just gave them money and
forgot about it are over.
So Mr. Hamilton, can you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Hamilton. Certainly. Thank you, Mr. Sires.
Two things I would say about. First, last summer when the
unaccompanied children started to arrive, the countries took it
very seriously. Their public commitment was matched by their
actions and the numbers slowed down significantly.
They also took the very difficult political decisions for
them to take back flights of women and children in addition to
the, in the last fiscal year, over 100,000 young men who were
deported from the United States to those three countries.
So this was a challenging time for them but they did it.
They did what we asked, and they did it for their own reasons
because those kids belong in those countries and they
understand that.
In November, following up on that type of decision, they
worked with the Inter-American Development Bank to create a
plan that essentially said to the rest of us we own this
problem--it is our problem and we want to address it with your
assistance. That, again, is new and worthy of attention and
respect.
And third, in March of this year they came up with an
elaboration of the plan which is very, very programmatic and
very strong clear detailed goals and commitments that they have
entered into.
Now, what are those commitments that they have achieved so
far? In Honduras, where we have seen significant action, they
have invited in Transparency International, and those of you
who know that entity know that it is not an entity easily
bullied by politicians.
It is independent, it is credible and very serious and they
are going to be auditing the countries' government departments.
That is something that is creative and new and worthy, I think,
of attention and respect.
They increased their tax revenues by 21 percent in the past
year in part by being more efficient and trying to invest in
their own society, knowing very well that that is the only way
they can make genuine progress.
They negotiated a new agreement with International Monetary
Fund in order to get their budget house in order so they can do
this over the long term as well--again, quite serious.
Only a few days ago, they passed a new law to protect human
rights defenders and journalists, something that has been a
continuing concern in Honduras for some time. And as Secretary
Bersin said, they have inaugurated the two task forces on the
border that we consider to be very serious and effective.
So in general, Honduras has done a lot. They even invited
in the Office of the High Commission for Human Rights--again,
an organization that is independent in every respect and will
help them achieve progress in that area, too.
Guatemala's decision a few days ago to renew the mandate of
the Commission Against Impunity was absolutely fundamental to
that country's future.
Without an independent investigative body like that,
without the ability to investigate, indict, arrest, and
hopefully allow the system to convict bad actors, the country
simply cannot progress.
And only a week ago they indicted 22 members of the tax
administration who had committed fraud, one of whom is a
fugitive--the personal secretary of the Vice President, in
fact. Again, a very serious effort by the CSIG entity to move
forward on correcting impunity in that country.
Guatemala also has extradited to the United States over ten
major criminals in the past year, Honduras over seven--taking,
again, very seriously their obligation.
In El Salvador, they have launched an anti-extortion task
force designed to crack down on gangs who are intimidating
young small-business owners. They also passed a law to ensure
that legal stability of investments.
So a number of things have happened in the past 12 months
that represent, in our judgment collectively, a serious effort
to address these impunity and accountability issues that you
quite properly raise and we will absolutely intend to ensure
that they follow through on those and many other commitments
that they have made.
Mr. Sires. Is Salvador the biggest recipient of money from
us with the Millennium Challenge money and everything?
Mr. Hamilton. I think if you add the Millennium Challenge
account it is very close. But Guatemala also receives
significant Feed the Future assistance from USAID. But I think
Paloma might know more than I do about that.
Ms. Adams-Allen. Am I on? Yes.
Yes, Guatemala receives significant assistance from us for
their food security and agricultural development efforts in the
western----
Mr. Sires. And they have been receiving this money prior to
the children coming across?
Ms. Adams-Allen. Yes. They have been for about 3 years now
and we are seeing----
Mr. Sires. And El Salvador also?
Ms. Adams-Allen [continuing]. We are seeing great results
with it.
Mr. Sires. We are seeing great results? I mean----
Ms. Adams-Allen. Yes, we are seeing the results in the
western highlands in linking farmers to markets, moving people
out of extreme poverty, getting nutrition intervention to youth
under five. These are the big pieces that we have seen in the
western highlands of Guatemala.
We would like to and are working with the government to
expand those investments through their Pacto Hambre--their
national food security plan.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, I thank the gentleman.
I want to go now to the chairman of the Asia Pacific
Subcommittee, former chairman of this committee, someone who
followed this issue, worked very diligently on it last year and
I commend him for that--Mr. Salmon from Arizona.
Mr. Salmon. Well, thank you, and first of all, Mr.
Chairman, thanks for holding this incredibly important hearing.
I am very apologetic that I wasn't here for the testimony,
but I am chairing an Asia Pacific Subcommittee on Bangladesh on
an upper floor and somebody is relieving me because this issue
is so important to me.
I wanted to come and be able to ask some questions. I do
want to make a couple of observations both about the hearing
and the subcommittee.
First observation is I have a really hard time masking my
affinity for Ambassador Brownfield. I wish there were 1,000
like you. I think that this country would be in a lot better
shape.
Mr. Brownfield. My wife disagrees intensely with that
statement, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Salmon. I might be able to talk her into something. And
then my other observation is that if every subcommittee in this
Congress had a ranking member like Mr. Sires, who is so darn
cooperative to work for and just cares about doing the right
thing, we would solve a lot of problems in this country. And I
really appreciate--I really--you are just a gem to work with
and mean that.
Mr. Duncan. I second that, by the way.
Mr. Salmon. Yes. So my question would be to Mr. Bersin, and
because I spoke so fondly of one of your members doesn't mean I
don't like the rest of you. I just really have such a strong
affinity for Ambassador Brownfield and I think he knows that.
But to date, Mr. Bersin, how many individuals, both adults
and children, have been brought to the U.S. under the new in-
country refugee/parole processing program? That is my first
question. How are they arriving in the U.S. is my second
question.
Third, once in the U.S., how many of the program
participants are minors and how many are adults? And if you
don't have any of those answers you can get them to me. I would
really appreciate it.
Fourth, how many of the--well, why don't you start with
that because I have some other questions I would like to follow
on with that.
Mr. Bersin. After observing that I am in accord with your
assessment of Brownfield--to know him is to love him--I will--
--
Mr. Salmon. You just rose in my estimation so that is good.
Mr. Bersin [continuing]. To answer your question, which is
that in fact none to date have been admitted to the United
States because the applications--approximately 500 have been
received, but the interviews with regard to in-country
processing of refugees status has not begun.
Mr. Salmon. Okay. Then my--so we really don't have any that
have qualified under the terms of this new--or this
arrangement, this agreement?
Mr. Bersin. To date, that is correct, sir.
Mr. Salmon. How--but they are actually coming to the
States, we are understanding. How are they getting here?
Mr. Bersin. There is a--there is a--as you know, there is a
refugee admissions process that covers the entire world----
Mr. Salmon. Right.
Mr. Bersin [continuing]. And there are protocols that
pertain to how refugees are brought to the United States after
it has been ascertained that they are refugees.
Mr. Salmon. Right.
Mr. Bersin. That has not yet applied in the Central
American context.
Mr. Salmon. What do we know about the applicants? Or do we
have any information?
Mr. Bersin. I know, sir, there are 500 of them. I have not
looked at any of the files.
Mr. Salmon. You don't know a breakdown yet of whether they
are adults or children?
Mr. Bersin. That is--I will get--if you leave the record
open we will supply that.
Mr. Salmon. That would be very helpful, and how many have,
you know, applied for parole status. Here is my next question.
Out of that 500 that we know of, how many of the individuals
who applied on behalf of their relative for refugee or parolee
status are in the U.S. on a deferred action?
That would be my next question. Can an applicant here in
the U.S. petition to bring in a parent or another relative
under the program? Let us say that they are granted asylum
status or parolee status.
Can they apply then for chain migration? Can they bring a
parent? Can they bring another relative, and if--do we know
whether they have done that yet? Do you know anything about
that?
Mr. Bersin. So with regard to the latter case, I can state,
consistent with previous responses, that it has not yet begun.
Therefore, you would not have those results.
With regard to the two questions on legal eligibility, we
will provide that. I, myself, am not an expert on the refugee--
--
Mr. Salmon. Okay. I would just like to know if they are
here under deferred status whether they can then be the sponsor
or whether--yes.
Mr. Bersin. I understand the inquiry.
Mr. Salmon. Okay. And then are any of those who are
applying on behalf of the relative in the U.S. under deferred
action as put in place by the President's November 2014
action--that is my other question.
One other question that I have is more in regards to I
witnessed what you talked about. I was with General Kelly about
a year ago on the Guatemala-Mexican border. I personally
witnessed those people coming over on those barges or rafts or
whatever you want to call them.
I saw it happening. I saw the law enforcement people
turning the other way, not doing anything about it, and I would
note that one of my perceptions about this whole diminishment
this year--the numbers have gone dramatically down of those who
have come to the border, surrendered themselves, both
unaccompanied minors as well as accompanied minors--but I think
a lot of that is in part to Mexico's stepped up participation.
They are interdicting either at the Mexican border or in
Mexico.
And, I mean, it is not that we are catching these people.
At least, that is my understanding, because many of them are
surrendering. It is not like we are apprehending them. They get
to the border and they surrender themselves and so I don't know
that we have really stepped up anything, have we?
Mr. Bersin. So, first, with regard to the situation and all
of us--many of us have seen the situation on the Mexican-
Guatemalan border on the river--let me--if I can put that in
context.
Until 2 years ago, there was absolutely nothing going on on
the U.S.-Guatemalan border. Zero. So what you are seeing is
actually not so much--there are cases where people are crossing
with the intention of going to the United States. But actually
most of the activity there is the intercommunity border
economic activity that goes back and forth. The difference is
that that is not where Guatemalans or Hondurans or Salvadorans
are being stopped anyway by the Mexicans. They are being
stopped further up----
Mr. Salmon. Right.
Mr. Bersin [continuing]. Into Mexico.
Mr. Salmon. Into Mexico.
Mr. Bersin. And what we see in terms of the ziplines and
tubes is actually a intra----
Mr. Salmon. Commerce.
Mr. Bersin. It is a commerce. It is a commercial
relationship that has existed for decades and decades. But that
isn't what is leading to the change you notice, which is the
enforcement effort ten miles, 20 miles and then 50 miles----
Mr. Salmon. By the Mexico--yes.
Mr. Bersin [continuing]. By Mexico and there is significant
activity going on.
Mr. Salmon. They are doing an amazing job. I think they
have really stepped it up. As to, you know, what we are doing
on our borders I think that when they come and they claim
credible fear or whatever, you know, the line de jour is that
they are then brought into the country and taken through the
process.
So I don't know that we are doing anything to thwart it. I
know we did some public service announcements and things like
that in country about how difficult the journey is and how
dangerous it is and those kinds of things.
But, ultimately, one of my hopes and desires was that, you
know, we would get them back in country as quickly as possible
to show that that $5,000 or $8,000 they paid to the coyotes was
wasted money and that you do it again it is going to be wasted
money.
Mr. Bersin. Congressman, again, you know, with all due
respect, that was the point of the request for the
appropriations to deal with the pull factors. Until we have an
enforcement mechanism and an immigration court that is properly
resourced here, we will not see the turnaround that you
suggest.
When there is the ability to do so, we are actually
returning people in short order. But as you note, when you
claim asylum there is a process which our country has
recognized and I think we should be proud that it does
recognize it.
But we don't have the ability to actually conduct that
process with the--with the speed and rapidity that a properly
resourced immigration court would permit us to do.
Mr. Salmon. The asylum statues are valid. I mean, they
are--I think asylum is a worthy policy for legitimate folks
that qualify for asylum.
I think there are a lot of people that are maybe not so
honest about why they are really crossing the border, and they
have figured out that by claiming that your chances are a lot
better.
But with the Mexican minors we had a lot more flexibility
in the past than we do with Central American kids because of
legislation, and our hope was to try to streamline that process
through a series of questioning that maybe some of these
adjudication processes might be averted. And is that happening
or can it not?
Mr. Bersin. So with regard to the Guatemalan, Honduran,
Salvadoran councils, on those cases where we can get
cooperation, get travel documents----
Mr. Salmon. Where they will voluntarily deport, they can
still do that?
Mr. Bersin [continuing]. That is actually--yes, yes, and we
are getting significant cooperation from the Northern Triangle
countries with their in U.S. country-based personnel.
But again, sir, the problem is we respect the asylum
process as you do and--but there is not adequate machinery to
make this function in a way that gets rapid hearings which
would permit them a disposition of the case, one way or the
other, and then a return to the country of origin for those who
don't qualify for asylum.
The problem is that decision is not being made in real
time.
Mr. Salmon. I just--my final comment, Mr. Chairman, but we
passed a bill--we in the House passed a bill last summer that
would have addressed this and would have sped up the asylum
process and would have provided judges and courts, and Senate
never took it up.
Mr. Duncan. It is time to pass it again and I thank the
gentleman for his efforts on this. And perception is reality.
We talked about the rafts and people being across, but the
fact is people in New Jersey and people in South Carolina saw
that newscast or saw that YouTube video or whatever it was--saw
the Guatemalan law enforcement standing right there, saw the
interview with the people that were actually trying to migrate
to this country weren't just normal commerce across that river,
and they believe that is the reality there--that law
enforcement is looking the other way.
Guatemala can change that perception and ultimately change
the reality in the minds of the American people, who are
looking at the request for an extra billion dollars to be
spent. And so we have got to change that perception in order to
justify that expenditure to our constituents.
So with that, I will yield to the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Torres, who has joined our committee for the
day. Thank you.
Ms. Torres. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member, and also to the rest of the committee members for
giving me an opportunity to participate.
I absolutely agree that we must do everything that we can
to stabilize Central America. I think it is a critical partner
for the Americas and for our country.
I do want to commend you, Mr. Hamilton, your comments and
what you said earlier regarding the outreach that has been made
to the Northern Triangle countries about the difficulties and
the dangers of travelling to the U.S.
I was--had the opportunity to travel to El Salvador and
Honduras recently. Spoke to civil society groups and many,
many, many youth groups.
What they said was that they got the message that it is
very dangerous and that the effort for the U.S. to provide that
community outreach to them about the dangers that they are
facing walking 1,000 miles to the U.S. is real.
I wonder if you know anything about the--what appear to me
that it was somewhat a coordinated effort of two for one
smugglers.
That was what they were offering last year, and I recognize
that it was a political year--an election year. But the fact
that, you know, they were sort of going out there and pushing
people to come to the U.S. seems almost surreal to me.
I want to ask three specific questions. I know I have
limited time. Number one, you said that the Northern Triangle
countries are prepared and want to see change. I saw--I saw
that in El Salvador. They are working with civil society
groups. I did not quite see that in Honduras.
I wonder will this money, this aid--will it include
technical assistance to ensure that there is transparency on
how this money is going to be spent, that my community is going
to be able to go on some website and be able to see where our
tax dollars are going, who is receiving them and how are they
being--are they being effectively directed to where it is
needed.
The other thing is what are your views on establishing
CSIG-like commissions in El Salvador and in Honduras and how
much of or what percentage of law enforcement funding will be
directed to support institutional reforms?
We heard it over and over and over again in these two
countries--corruption within the ranks of the police
department, corruption within the ranks of the military. They
are not trustworthy organizations.
The community can't go to them to report a crime.
Oftentimes, they are victims of these two organizations. And,
frankly, they are starving their police forces. You have to
look at their wages and their salaries and you have to bring
them to par with the rest of the Central American communities.
And lastly, it alarms me that 500 people have requested an
asylum and we have not been able to process those applications.
I would like to see, you know, what process do we have, or
should we be investing some of this money in ensuring that
these three countries have some type of victim assistance
programs and relocation within their countries?
Mr. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman Torres. Excellent
questions, and we agree, of course, completely with you that
criminal smuggling networks should not be allowed to determine
the immigration policy of the United States, and we were very
active in seeking to make sure that did not happen last year
and will not happen in the future.
With respect to your question on transparency and
accountability, we could not agree more. If we do not ensure
accountability and transparency and, frankly, crack down on
impunity, we will never succeed in the region.
We know that. The strategy is designed exactly around those
principal factors. We are trying to ensure that all of the
principal government institutions--the tax system, the justice
sector, the public procurement departments--are transparent and
accountable in every way.
The governments themselves have committed to do that and,
as I mentioned earlier, have brought in external actors to
assess and to monitor themselves. That is, frankly, quite
unusual and suggests to us that they are serious.
They can't hide from those institutions. They can perhaps
pull the wool over people's eyes in past administrations by
doing it themselves, but outside actors are unlikely to allow
that to happen. So we are quite confident they are serious and
we intend to move forward on that.
We have a very, very serious monitoring and evaluation
program built into what we propose here, three different
levels. One is a political level--the political requests or
asks that we will make of those governments and they have
publically committed to any March 3rd statement or jointly
authored with the Vice President of the United States.
Second, there is a programmatic evaluation effort, which
will be U.S. programs--how we seek to achieve certain goals and
how we measure benchmarks along the way.
And third will be national level trajectory benchmarks--
how, with a lag over time, do we see success. Those benchmarks
will be shared and discussed with the Members of Congress on a
regular basis because that is the only way we can move forward
together--by being open and transparent and honest about this
process.
With respect to CSIG in Guatemala, we are very strong
supporters of it, as you know. We would very much welcome
consideration by other countries of a similar entity in their
societies.
CSIG succeeds because it is independent. It is not
susceptible to manipulation by anyone, and to the extent that
Guatemala can help persuade Salvador and Honduras that these
are valuable interventions we would very much support them in
doing so.
Institutional reforms in the police and military are
critical. Ambassador Brownfield will talk about that in more
detail. But fundamentally, we agree completely with you that
police forces have been under resourced and misused for a long
period of time and all three governments are committed to
changing those processes.
In Honduras, in particular, they propose to train and hire
6,000 new police officers in the next 3 years precisely in
order to create a credible police force that people do not
fear, and that can then replace the current military police who
are patrolling the streets in the absence of a credible
national police force. So we very strongly agree with you on
all of those factors.
Mr. Brownfield. And Congresswoman, let me flesh out in
detail a little bit in terms of police institutional reform in
terms of how we are trying to attack this problems set.
Because you are, obviously, absolutely correct--that until
the law enforcement institutions are in fact reformed,
purified, improved they will never be able to perform the
function that we are--that we are asking as their commitment to
this Central America strategy.
As I said during my opening statement, we have a bottom-up
and a top-down approach. Bottom-up, in a sense, means linking
the communities with their local law enforcement. But that is
not reform per se. Top-down is exactly that and that is what we
can do to professionalize and reform the law enforcement
community.
In no particular order, we are supporting, and in fact
providing, a great deal of assistance monitoring and
participation into police academies and police training in each
of the three Northern Triangle countries, in addition to a
regional police academy that we are operating and working in
Panama for the entire region.
Second, we are establishing--trying to establish,
encouraging them to establish with us an IAD--internal affairs
division or inspector general sort of office or function in
each of the police communities.
In other words, duh, somebody who will police the police.
Until you have that, you know that you will not be able to
control the problem within the institution.
Third, we are working with the three governments in terms
of establishing and passing the legislation--the statutory
basis that allows the removal of individuals legally for
abusive or corrupt behavior.
Fourth, we are working in what in Mexico we have come to
call los controles de confianza, which is to say the system,
the structure, by which you can vet and remove, at least if not
from the entire institution from individual units, those people
who for whatever reason are found to have been penetrated or
corrupted.
And finally, as our requirement from each of the three
governments, we will insist that they themselves meet salary--
minimum salary requirements.
You know as well as I do that a big part of the problem is
if a police officer is paid so little that he or she cannot
support his or her family, that police officer will supplement
the income in other ways and that becomes part of the problem.
Ms. Torres. Can I--can I ask a follow-up on that? Can you
go more into detail as to what are those requirements, and does
that include background checks on the current officers that are
there?
Mr. Brownfield. That is where we are headed. But I am going
to break this out into--briefly, Mr. Chairman, into a couple of
different areas.
One is for specific units, what we call the vetted units
that are designed to do specific functions. They are intensely
vetted and when I say background checks I mean not only do
they--is there an assessment of where they are from and what
has been their track record while in the police, but also they
are then polygraphed on a systematic basis and asked, quite
frankly and bluntly, have you engage in activity that is
corrupt or illegal and the polygraph will produce an outcome.
Obviously, that is a time-intensive approach that cannot be
applied to the entire police force and, quite frankly, in many
countries part of the statutory or legal problem you cannot
compel a police officer to submit to a polygraph.
You can say you may not join this particular unit if you do
not agree to a polygraph--you will not receive the salary
stipend and the additional equipment. That you can do but you
cannot necessarily compel them to do polygraphing.
So on a more nationwide and national basis, the principle
of vetting, which has been worked through, by the way, both in
the Plan Colombia experience in Colombia and the--and the
Merida Initiative experience in Mexico is to have an office and
professionals who will do basic vetting--where did the human
come from, talk to the community in terms of what he or she has
done in the past, go through the actual personnel and official
records of those individuals after they have joined the police
force, and, to the extent that there is something there that
does not work, you have the extreme option to separate them
from the police force.
A less extreme option: Move them into other areas in the
police that do not necessarily make them as attractive to those
who wish to purchase their services because they are not in an
area where they can influence. In other words, put them in some
place where they are not in direct engagement with the
community.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady. Her time is expired.
And the Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Yoho, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, panelists,
for being here.
Lieutenant General Tovo, I appreciate the service to your
country and everything you guys are doing in the Southern
Command.
I know people personally that are in the Coast Guard in the
south Florida area and I hear stories of what they go through
and I commend you for what you guys are doing.
And I hear a resounding theme over and over again from
everybody that has been up there--talking about the corruption
in countries in Central and South America, and I think
sometimes we can maybe even look at our own Government--not to
point fingers at anybody without pointing at us.
Saying that, with so much corruption in Latin American
governments and the police forces, what is your recommendation
in working effectively through the corruption in order to get
the results we want? Because what I am hearing from you,
Ambassador Brownfield, is that we need to ask for a minimum pay
for the police officers in their country.
But I am looking here in El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras that we have given--not we, the American taxpayers,
has given the equivalent of $23.6 billion--$23.6 billion and we
have to tell them how much to pay their police officer?
What in the heck have we been doing since 1946, and why do
not the governments of those countries want the desire to fix
that problem? And again, I shared this story--my mom wanted me
to play the piano. I didn't want to play the piano and I sat
down there to take lessons, and I still don't know how to play
the piano.
At what point and what do you do to make them want to do
that or we walk away and get stronger on our border security?
And I want to talk to all of you about border security.
I would just like to hear what else do we need to do to get
the message across that we are not playing?
Mr. Brownfield. Let me start with that, Congressman.
Mr. Yoho. And I apologize for my tone. I am generally calm.
Mr. Brownfield. Not to worry. There is nothing that excites
me more than an appropriately warm conversation. First, I would
suggest to you that we are--as I have said a couple of times
before, we are dealing with an issue that is now embedded in
culture, society and----
Mr. Yoho. Exactly.
Mr. Brownfield [continuing]. Communities for decades. We
are not talking about a problem that started last year or the
year before last. We are talking about a situation that has
endured probably for more than 100 years.
Mr. Yoho. Let me interject here, because since 1971 when
the infamous War on Drugs was announced by President Nixon we
have spent about $2 trillion, again, of the American taxpayers'
money. I want results. You know, I want--go ahead.
Mr. Brownfield. And I will--I will suggest to you two quick
thoughts and then I will let other jump into this as well. You
are absolutely correct that if we cannot get something as
fundamental agreed to by governments such as paying a basic
salary that is sufficient so that the individual member of the
police does not need to go into corruption and accept bribes in
order to survive, then we should not be walking down this road
for enhanced expenditures.
Mr. Yoho. I agree.
Mr. Brownfield. But what I believe this means is this is
one of the--I won't even call it an ask--one of the
requirements that we will impose before we would expect you
all, the United States Congress, to respond positively to a
substantially enhanced or increased support for Central
America.
That is a given. And by the way, I have heard this from
several other people as well. It is an absolutely fair point.
That said, ladies and gentlemen, may I suggest to you as
well that we are dealing with the following situation. We have
a world that we want to get to and we call can define that.
Call it nirvana, call it whatever you wish. We know, roughly,
what we want in Central America.
We have the world that we currently live in, which is
today's world on the 30th of April, 2015. Our challenge--mine
from the executive branch, yours from the legislative branch--
is to figure what we can do, what programs, what resources,
what policies, what strategies that will deal with the world in
which we currently are that will move us into the direction of
the world that we want.
Because if you are telling me we should not do any of this
until we have reached that more perfect world, I am afraid you
are condemning us to get nothing accomplished.
Mr. Yoho. Well, you know, saying that I am going to revert
to a story my daughter told me when she wanted to go jogging.
She was 10 years old and I wanted to jog with her. We got up at
6 o'clock--well, she got up at 6 o'clock and I didn't.
And after about 5 days of she had to come and wake me up
she went out on her own one day. And I said, Katie, how come
you didn't wake me up. She said, Dad, if you really wanted to
jog you would have been ready.
And I think it is the same thing--that philosophy--and I
would like for us to be who we are as a country to go to those
countries and say, if you really want our help you will do
these things.
And then I don't know at what point you walk away and,
certainly, we don't want to walk away and leave a vacuum
because when you leave a vacuum somebody will fill that.
I want to switch over to the Southern Command. With our--
the announcement of the policy change December 2014 with our
policies toward Cuba, have you seen a ramp-up of illegal
immigration in the Caribbean Basin when we said we were going
to relax our Cuban policy?
General Tovo. Congressman, I would prefer to hand that one
over to Secretary Bersin. I think they track the actual
numbers, I believe, on----
Mr. Yoho. All right. That will be fine. And again, I wanted
to ask you, I know you guys need more cutters and fast response
boats, right?
General Tovo. We could certainly put more resources----
Mr. Yoho. About 17 of them, I think, was what I read.
Mr. Bersin. You are referring to assets of the Coast Guard
in the Caribbean?
Mr. Yoho. Right, but I want to know about the increase in
immigration--illegal immigration in the Caribbean Basin since
President Obama and this administration relaxed--the narrative
of relaxing policies to Cuba.
Mr. Bersin. With respect to migration from Cuba, we have
seen an increase. I am not in a position but will supply the
actual number in terms of Cuban migrants leaving Cuba on their
way to Ecuador and to places in South America.
What we have seen in terms of the Caribbean itself is,
since we have the same policy in effect, we will return those
that are encountered at sea and, as you know, not do so with
those who make it to land.
I cannot give you the specific number that have been
encountered since December but we will----
Mr. Yoho. I will help you out here, because I checked, and
the increase is 265 percent from December 2014 to the middle of
March, and that was tracked through the U.S. Coast Guard and
the people I talked to up here.
Mr. Bersin. The absolute number would also be of help,
Congressman, in that respect, because I recognize two and a
half times is great but the number, as you know, had fallen to
historically low numbers in the preceding years. So I think it
would be helpful to get the----
Mr. Yoho. But we saw an uptick is from what I saw. Let me
move on. Do I have more time, Mr. Chairman? Yes.
Mr. Bersin, I read a report that said--stated America is
known around the world as a country with a global immigration
policy of unenforcement. Do you feel this is accurate?
Mr. Bersin. No, sir.
Mr. Yoho. All right. The report went on to say that if you
get to the Southwest border or any border you get in, and if
you get in you might get picked up but they are not going to
deport you and that you can--the narrative is that you get--
that you may get a work permit, you will get free education,
free food, and we are seeing that with the people I have talked
to.
Mr. Bersin. No, sir. If you apply for asylum and you are
given asylum, then you get those benefits. But you do not walk
up to the border and have the right to enter legally and work
in the United States. No, sir.
Mr. Yoho. With the President's policy--his policy of the
executive amnesty, I will reserve my question and will submit
it to you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
other gentleman from Florida, Mr. DeSantis.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been bouncing
around in different hearings so I apologize for not being able
to hear your answers to the previous questions.
I was--earlier this week I attended a summit down in Miami
with representatives from Latin American countries, people who
are also serving in those parliaments and congresses, and we
were discussing the Middle East and unifying in support of
Israel's security and with the situation that is going on there
and the discussion, obviously, turned toward the role of Iran.
Of course, in the Middle East they are pursuing a nuclear
weapon. They are fomenting jihad in the Gaza Strip. They are
fomenting jihad in Yemen, Iraq, in Damascus, and whether they
pursue the nuclear weapon it is, obviously, a critical issue.
But we discuss the extent to which Iran is seeking
influence in Latin America and I think this is something that
is a concern to, I know, the chairman and, certainly, to me.
So General, what can you say about Iran's influence in
Latin America?
General Tovo. In an open forum, Congressman, I think we can
say that the Iranians have some number of cultural centers----
Mr. DeSantis. General, is your microphone on?
General Tovo. It indicates that it is on. We can say at
this level of classification that the Iranians have some level
of cultural centers. They have seen an increase over the last
decade in number of Embassies and outreach.
As far as their level of political or diplomatic influence,
I defer to the State Department to evaluate, and as far as
their intentions in what I would call network development, I
think we would have to do that in a classified setting.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. And the same question, again, what you
can say, if anything, in an open forum about Sunni Islamists in
the Western Hemisphere--in Latin America.
General Tovo. I think we can, in this forum, safely say we
have seen--you have probably seen reported in open source that
some number of personnel from this region have gone to fight
jihad--have been radicalized largely through Internet and other
means much like we have seen out of our own country and out of
Western Europe.
It is certainly not near the numbers that we have seen out
of other parts of the world, certainly out of Europe and North
Africa.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank God. So, I--and I have--I know you have
discussed this in closed forums that I have been at and I
appreciate that.
But I--and we obviously want to respect that, what is open
source. I think it is important to educate the American people
on that because I know a lot of people are concerned.
The child exploitation issue, and this may be for the State
Department--last year, when they had the border crisis, I mean,
you had a situation where minors were being sent with these
human smugglers, with the drug cartels.
You had a situation where many of them were being abused,
and it was just a really awful situation that some of these
kids were put through, that I know there was a lot of concern
that the incentives that they were seeing out of our own
Government was that hey, as long as you are under 18 if you get
here you are never going to be sent back.
And, obviously, I think, to see that policy outcome where
you have people being--paying these criminal groups to smuggle
people in that, clearly, is not something that we wanted to do.
So what is the status of the cartels and the smugglers right
now and, you know, have we seen a significant decline from last
summer?
Mr. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman. Of course, we
completely agree that the level of sexual and gender violence
in the region itself is appalling and needs to change.
The level of sexual violence on the dangerous journey was
equally appalling. In fact, we had numerous stories of young
girls using birth control in order to get through the journey,
knowing very well or anticipating what they might face on the
way. Those stories were shocking to every normal person.
The criminal networks had, obviously, misled a vast number
of children that they would be allowed to stay in this country,
and that is something that they did repeatedly and successfully
for a short period of time.
It was our determination that criminal networks do not
control U.S. immigration policy that led us to crack down in
the way that we did. The messages that we went were not just
about dangerous journeys which, frankly, the people in the
region know very well, as their precautions would suggest.
But, frankly, they were being misled by people who were
just wanting to steal their money. This is a process that
involves legal immigration and only legal emigration. So we are
very, very aware of this.
The strategy that we are imposing includes significant
elements that are designed to protect women and children in the
region both in their own countries and in any other--any other
way.
The desire that we have is that people in those countries
build for themselves what they consider to be the Salvadoran
dream or the Guatemalan dream or the Honduran dream and not
seek to take advantage of their impression of the American
dream, and I think USAID and other entities have specific
programs that address gender and sexual violence against girls
which, again, is a critical issue.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. Yes. No, look, I think that this is
something that is really heartbreaking when you really start to
study it and, you know, some of these poor kids are just put
through terrible, terrible circumstances and I think that we
have to be foursquare our policy 100 percent--has got to
disincentivize anyone from putting themselves in that position
but, obviously, also be very hard about people who would--who
would take advantage of them.
I mean, some of these groups are just the worst of the
worst. So I thank you for that and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I want to thank the gentleman for bringing up
the Iranian threat in the Western Hemisphere, something that I
have been following.
We did have a classified briefing last week, wasn't it,
General? And I apologize that you weren't able to make that. I
would ask the committee to try to facilitate maybe something in
a little more intimate setting than what we had, even if
General Kelly can't come to brief some of the members, because
I think the threat is worth it.
I am going to skip myself for just a minute. The ranking
member has a meeting in his office so I am going to recognize
him for a last question.
Mr. Sires. I just want to thank you for being here and I
also want to thank the former chairman for his kind words, and
the current chairman. It is a pleasure to work with people like
I have on my right and my left. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman--a great ranking member
and I am glad for the working relationship we have.
Just want to get into another round, and if the members
want to stay--the gentleman from Florida, if you want to change
out I am going to come back around if you would like to
continue. I apologize for cutting you off.
But I will recognize myself for another round of questions
and I will direct this to the State Department. What we saw out
of Plan Colombia was the original time frame and then an
extension of that, because it was working, right?
How many years of elevated levels of U.S. assistance will
be necessary to sufficiently improve the socioeconomic and
security conditions in Central America?
Mr. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Duncan. Look into your crystal ball and tell--no.
Mr. Hamilton. A terrific question. This situation did not
arise overnight, clearly--two decades or even longer to fester
in the way that it has and we need to understand that, too.
The Alliance for Prosperity plan that the Northern Triangle
has developed has a 5-year horizon and a $20-billion price tag
which--70 to 80 percent of which they intend to invest
themselves either directly or through the private sector.
So they have a 5-year horizon. That, frankly, may be
slightly optimistic.
I understand that in our strategy process we are looking
at, I anticipate, a 3-year plan to try to help them and
leverage U.S. assistance to achieve the results we are all
seeking.
You are quite right. Plan Colombia started in a certain way
and expanded. It was heavily focused on security, for obvious
reasons, in that country.
But it, clearly, also included economic development
assistance pretty much immediately after the FARC had been
cleared out of areas.
The FARC had often been cleared out but come back again and
local people were very unclear as to who they should support
our ally with because the state was never present. It was only
when the state came in behind the military with doctors and
clinics and teachers and presence of the state----
Mr. Duncan. But it was broader than just the FARC. It was
the cartels and drug trafficking and all of that, pushing
everything to the border, dropping down their percentages of
drug production and what not.
Mr. Hamilton. That is right. One of Colombia's tremendous
advantages was they already had a tremendously deep
institutional quality.
They had politicians, attorney general's office, Congress,
Supreme Court--all of which were very mature, very democratic
and very well organized. Those are things that Central America
does not currently have and need to be built in order for them
to take advantage of the types of things that we are talking
about.
So there are some similarities with Plan Colombia but some
significant differences. You have functionally state weakness
in the Northern Triangle that Colombia did not suffer from.
Colombia also had a very much larger economy, able to
invest much more much more quickly and a large territory where
the economy could continue even while the war was being fought
with the cartels and with the FARC.
So they have many more advantages and, frankly, as well
united political leadership over two consecutive terms of
President Uribe.
In the Northern Triangle, it is much harder because each of
those countries has a divided legislature and it is harder to
cobble together agreement to move forward. But they are doing a
much, much better job than they have ever done.
Mr. Duncan. But wouldn't you agree they have got a
geographical advantage because the countries are a lot smaller?
Mr. Hamilton. They do. El Salvador and Honduras are--well,
Salvador is small. Honduras is quite large and Guatemala is
very large as well. They also have a lot of----
Mr. Duncan. I guess compared to Colombia, I guess. Yes.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes, absolutely yes.
Mr. Duncan. Okay.
Mr. Brownfield. Mr. Chairman, may I? Because I have
probably delivered 20 speeches.
Mr. Duncan. And I am coming to you with the next question.
Go ahead.
Mr. Brownfield. I will wait patiently because I do have
some Plan Colombia observations which, in fact, would be
applicable, I believe, to Central America. But let us see if--
--
Mr. Duncan. I am coming right now. So I would like you to
answer that, Mr. Ambassador, but I would also like you to
answer what would be the likely outcome if Congress failed to
appropriate this money for the region?
If we didn't give them $1 billion, what--so incorporate in
your comments what would the likely outcome be?
Mr. Brownfield. In fact, let me--it is a smooth conclusion
to what I want to suggest to you. You and I have both been
involved in Colombia--in Plan Colombia for a number of years,
in my case since 1999.
Some quick lessons learned--one was you are going to have
to adjust along the way. As you correctly noted, we started out
in Plan Colombia as a 5-year plan and we basically stretched it
out for about 12 to 14 years before we declared that we were
done.
Second, sequencing--as Scott has mentioned, we started
security heavy with the expectation that we would eventually
move from security into economic development. We did, although
it ended up taking longer to do it than we had originally
thought.
Third, political will and buy-in by the host government--as
Scott points out, we got either three or six or seven
governments that we need to work with in Central America, more
complicated than just one in Colombia.
Third, fourth--fourth, holistic, meaning you are trying to
address all of the issues, not just security, and you are
trying to bring in all the parts of the United States
Government to work the issue.
Sixth, connections to the United States--if we cannot
convince the American people that there is a direct impact on
them in terms of what is happening in this country, you, the
representatives of the American people and the controllers of
the purse strings, are not going to move the money down there.
Monitoring and evaluation--as you have correctly noted, we
have to be able to report on what is actually happening in
these programs and in these countries.
Finally, end gage and shut down--you almost never have a
good plan. You know you are going to say we are going to end it
when we have accomplished the mission. That doesn't work.
At some point--at the 5-year mark, the 7-year mark, the 10-
year mark, you have to be in a position to say to you, the
members of this committee, here is when we are going to
conclude this exercise and go to some sort of sustainable
program.
Now, what is the impact? If, previously in Colombia, now in
Central America, we don't, in a sense, perform these programs,
implement these programs, and implement this strategy--we kind
of have seen the impact.
I would argue that is what we were watching last July,
August, September on our Southwest border. But you will see
others as well. The cartels that do not just move drugs--they
also move people, firearms, counterfeit goods and basically
anything that will produce income--will have a better base from
which they can operate.
We will see more gang activity in Central America that is
tied, literally and directly, to gangs in the United States of
America. The truth of the matter is what the impact is is a
very easy argument for me to make.
The question that you legitimately ask is so how much--how
much is the right amount of money, what are the commitments we
have received from these governments in advance and can I give
you a reasonable time line in which you are going to see the
results. That is what we are correctly discussing today and
will continue, I suspect, for months to come.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
The last thing I will say, and I will go to the new ranking
member, but in response to something Mr. Yoho said, when I was
in Panama we met with President Varela and he said that they
have an issue of police officers who are making $300 a month.
It is very difficult to stop the corruption when that same
officer could either look the other way and be involved in
taking a bribe or whatever of an extraordinary amount of money
to be able to provide for his family and what not. That is a
dynamic that we can't overcome.
I don't think we can provide enough money to pay those
officers. I don't know that the countries can. It is a--those
officers have to come to the mind-set that they are doing what
is right for their country and ultimately for their family and
their children by ending this corruption and not taking the
bribe to provide financially but understanding a broader
picture that they are improving their country for all Hondurans
or all Guatemalans by not taking that bribe and actually
enforcing the rule of law and providing stability and that is a
cultural mind-set.
And I hope that the programs that we are talking about are
programs that will do that. I also heard that understanding
from President Hernandez and that understanding from President
Molina.
So at the top that understanding is there. It has got to
get down to the police officers and it has got to get down to
the judges. Because we see it in Mexico as well.
When we visit with the foreign ministers there and we visit
with the civil society there, bribery and other things, and
understanding that you are not going to have to pay a bribe to
get out of jail--that the judge is actually going to look at
the facts of the case and make a decision to either rule you
guilty or innocent and get you out of jail in a timely manner.
So, you know, it is much broader than just money, and I
said that to the President at the trilateral meeting with the
Northern Triangle countries. So we need to continue that.
I want to applaud you for this hearing and the information
you provided. This isn't the last one we are going to have,
unfortunately. I will turn to Ms. Torres.
Ms. Torres. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and just a
quick comment on this salary issue because it is--I think it is
such an important issue that we need to address to
professionalize these police departments.
Just quick math--in El Salvador, it is $5 million
investment to bring them to that $600 median income level. I
don't think that is, you know, a big, big number and what we
could get out of that is so important.
While we were in El Salvador and Honduras, we had an
opportunity to visit with the Ambassadors there in El Salvador.
She is wonderful. You know, she--I don't think we could have
chosen a better person. She is in the trenches visiting and
talking to civil society, to community groups, and I was--I was
very happy to hear about the work that she is doing there.
But from your perspective, are they prepared--do they have
the personnel that it will take to ensure that we are able to
process these resources and that we are able to follow the
money?
Ms. Adams-Allen. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that
question and statement. We believe that we are prepared. We are
not looking necessarily to put additional funding through any
governments and so we will be working with the partners that we
currently have who are delivering the kinds of results that we
need and building up our stable of partners in the region.
It is really a matter of scaling out the numbers of
partners that we have and we have the mechanisms in place and
the systems in place to do that. So we believe we have the
capacity to absorb this and to do that well.
Ms. Torres. So does that mean scaling up current programs
that have proven to be successful?
Ms. Adams-Allen. Yes. We would start with current programs
that have proven to be successful in the security realm, in the
governance realm and in the prosperity realm, and in the
interim design new programs.
But we know the partners out there who would run those
kinds of programs. So we believe we have enough partners to run
current programs and to scale those but also to manage our new
programs.
Ms. Torres. Okay. So the Embassies are staffed to that
level?
Ms. Adams-Allen. We are staffing up our missions as USAID
to do that--to be required to do that.
Ms. Torres. Going back to a question I asked earlier, I
don't know if I heard the answer to it, and do--are there
resources to help victims of crime, to help them relocate
victims of crime within these three countries?
I am talking about shelters that are secured. So if a
victim of domestic violence or a child victim of, you know,
sexual abuse is needing to have--to be protected from their
abusers, where do they--right now, I don't know where they go
and right now they can't go to their government and say, you
know, this is a crime that I am reporting--can you help me
relocate to another place where I am safe other than the U.S.?
Ms. Adams-Allen. Currently, USAID does support centers
specifically for women and children in Guatemala, Honduras and
El Salvador. We can get you details on how many and how many
victims we believe they reach.
Ms. Torres. I would like to have some information on that
because we heard just the opposite in these two countries.
Ms. Adams-Allen. Will do.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady. I will turn to Mr. Yoho
from Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just for Ms. Torres and you, Mr. Chairman, you were
talking about the money and you said $5 million in El Salvador
would solve that problem.
Think of the money we have spent--$2 trillion since '71,
$23 billion in equivalence that we have spent. I mean, that
would pay a lot of military and law enforcement, and that may
be a better way to solve this problem.
I want to direct this question to Mr. Hamilton. Since this
hearing is on the billion-dollar request proposed for Central
America, where is that $1 billion coming from? What pot of
money is that coming from? Do you know?
Mr. Hamilton. About half of the funding request is for
development assistance and economic support.
Mr. Yoho. No. But where is it coming from? Is it coming out
of USAID or maybe one of the Embassies is getting shorted or--
do you know where the money is coming from that the President
requested? Is it allocated? I mean, has it been authorized?
Mr. Duncan. That is a great question. We haven't
appropriated the money yet and if the--I would say--I think
that is a great question for State. Where is this money coming
from?
Mr. Yoho. I would like if we can get them to submit where--
because it says here are there Embassies or USAID missions in
the regions that will experience budget cuts so that the money
can be redirected to fund the $1-billion extra increase.
Mr. Brownfield. I think I can answer that question for you.
Mr. Yoho. Yes, sir.
Mr. Brownfield. It is--it is the President's budget request
for Fiscal Year 2016. It has gone up to the United States
Congress. The breakout is roughly the way Mr. Hamilton was
describing it. The INCL money, which would be that which would
be--we would reallocate it or appropriate it to INL that is
$205 million. I believe there is some FMF, which is--which is
foreign military funds and assistance. But the overwhelming
majority and I believe it is somewhere in the vicinity of $600
million, would be ESF and development assistance. It is not
taken from anywhere. At the end of the day, it will be the
United States Congress' determination, a plus up or not plus
up.
Mr. Duncan. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Yoho. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duncan. I guess what he is asking are any programs--
existing programs now going to suffer----
Mr. Yoho. Right. That is what----
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. From a shifting of resources or is
this going to be a new appropriation where status quo for all
the existing programs an additional amount of money.
Mr. Yoho. That is kind of--is somebody going to be shorted
in the end and if you don't have time to--you know, if you have
to check into that, that is fine.
I want to kind of redirect to Lieutenant General Tovo. To
what extent was the Department of Defense involved in
developing the new Central America strategy?
General Tovo. The initial strategy we were provided input
through the OSD and then since that time we have been very
actively involved in the sub-IPC process ongoing that really
has focused on how do we execute--how do we, you know, kind of
take the broad strategy that has been developed and get into
the programmatics. So we have been involved in all of the
various meetings and conferences.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
General Tovo. And then down on--additionally, of course, we
are down with our partners helping them develop and implement
their strategies and so we, you know, I think are involved kind
of both sides of this process.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Thank you. And that $1 billion--the extra
request is from the administration, how much of that is marked
for the Department of Defense?
You know, I read a report and I think you guys are short 17
rapid response boats plus you are looking at decommissioning
the 50-year-old boats from the Navy. I don't know if that is a
wise investment.
General Tovo. Congressman, at this point my understanding
of the $1-billion proposal is that that is primarily going to
State for the programs as discussed with the idea that we have
already got money going against--sufficient money going against
the security line of effort, and that most of the money would
go into governance and prosperity lines of effort.
But I think I will turn it back to State. They have got
the--I think that Mr. Hamilton is on the money.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Hamilton.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes, sir. There is a significant amount going
to foreign military finance and IMET programs, which we
consider to be especially effective in ensuring the integrity
and professionalization of the regional militaries and that is
very much part of--DoD manages that, of course, on behalf of
the State Department. The strategy also includes the very
significant plus-up on security lines of action which are
consistent with a lot of the things that General Tovo and
SOUTHCOM have been doing.
In addition, it includes the governance and prosperity
angles that, in our judgement, sustain the security gains and,
again, very consistent with General Kelly's recent posture
statement on the importance of those factors in ensuring that
any gains we make are sustainable over time. We talk a lot to
business men and women as well and we ask them what do you
need.
Their answer to us is, we can buy physical security--we do
that all the time. It is a cost of doing business for us. What
we cannot buy is the rule of law and juridical security and
that is what we implore you to try to ensure.
Mr. Yoho. And that is what I think we really need to work
on because we can throw as much money at this problem as you
want, but if we don't get to the basic problem we are treating
symptoms when we need to get to the underlying diagnosis and
cause of that.
Mr. Chairman, I had one quick--one other question. With the
problem we have in our country with drug use, do we need to
refocus attention on our drug laws, maybe decriminalizing some
things and look at reducing the threat or the penalty on these
things? Say, marijuana, for one--it keeps coming up in meetings
I go to. People say if you decriminalize it it gets rid of the
foreign trade of marijuana coming into our country. And I am
certainly not advocating that. I am looking to gather
information.
And the other thing--instead of having the War on Drugs,
refocus on the war on gangs, both the domestic and foreign, in
this country, and maybe it is time for an Eliot Ness moment
from the old days and put more emphasis on running these people
out of this country, and if you are going to do that you are
not doing it here in our country. Just thoughts? If I have
time, sir. Anybody want to weigh in on that?
Mr. Brownfield. Would the chairman like to have a response?
I don't see anyone else leaping for the microphone at this
particular point in time.
Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, I would remind
you that we all have kind of the international or outward
looking responsibility.
We are not those that are responsible for domestic law and
domestic policy. So therefore, in a sense, we don't have a
right to give you a formal position on domestic drug law
modifications.
That said, I will offer you 36\1/2\ years of experience in
this business in terms of the argument that legalization
somehow is going to solve this problem. And not to use too
diplomatic an expression, I think that is just so much horse
manure to suggest that one single step is going to make the
entire problem go away.
That has not been our experience overseas. That has not
been our experience here. It is quite clear that in this
country as well as in the entire world there is a debate, a
discussion going on in terms of how we should modify, adjust,
change our drug control policies and strategies.
That is fine. I think everyone on this side of the table
agrees with that. But we should perhaps avoid these simplistic
suggestions that if we just arrest everyone who uses it--that
is one extreme--or legalize the entire process--that is the
other extreme--that will solve the problem.
The solution must be found somewhere in between those two
extremes and I would like to think that at some point in time
we will move in the direction of those solutions.
Internationally, we have a U.N. General Assembly special
session scheduled for April of next year where the entire world
is going to address these issues.
We have laid out our own position which leaves open
possibilities to discuss public health as an issue, criminal
justice reform as an issue, legitimate issues to discuss, but
perhaps veering away from the more simple solutions to this
problem.
Mr. Yoho. Well, I know there is not a simple solution but I
think a redirection of where we are going. And have you seen an
increase of drugs into the Caribbean from, say, South America,
of all types?
Mr. Brownfield. Yes, but with the following caveat. First,
dating it and I would date it from about 2007, 2008, Congress,
and second, the direction in which the stuff is moving, and
this is to a certain extent a little noticed but fairly
important point.
The product that is moving from South America is
decreasingly coming to the United States of America. Cocaine
consumption in the United States of America since 2007 has
dropped nearly 50--that is 5-0 percent.
So what we are seeing in terms of increased movement
through the Caribbean is actually movement that is headed east
and it is on its way to new markets either directly in western
Europe or via western Africa on its way to western Europe.
Now, this isn't particularly good news for the Caribbean.
They are still victims of criminal drug trafficking through the
region. But it actually is not bad news for us.
Mr. Duncan. And I agree with you. The gentleman's time has
expired. We heard that when we were in Peru. We heard that when
we were in Colombia. The gentleman from Florida was on the
CODEL Royce with us where we heard some of that as well.
I want to remind the gentleman from Florida some of the
things we heard in Mexico and Colombia and Peru about the rule
of law and the need for getting that graft and corruption and
bribery issue out and why civil society down in Mexico is so
important.
So we have put the witnesses through an extraordinary
amount of time today due to votes and all that.
Mr. Yoho. We did. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I want to thank you guys for--and ladies for
being here. This is probably the first of several hearings we
are going to have on this issue because we anticipate, as we
heard today, an increase in unaccompanied children.
This problem isn't going away overnight. I agree with
Ambassador Brownfield that this is a long-term issue--that it
needs a decade-old mind-set on Members of Congress but also
those on the ground that are working on this. So I agree with
you on that as well.
I want to thank, again, the general for your service to the
country and our staff--committee staff--will be in touch with
SOUTHCOM about the classified briefing maybe. But I am going to
get commitments from members to be there. I am not going to
waste your time.
I am going to make sure that they have a commitment to come
because the briefing is so important because it is something
that I have been following, as you know, for a very long time.
So I want to thank the panelists, all of you, and with that
we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:43 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
