- THE UNFOLDING CRISIS IN BURUNDI

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE UNFOLDING CRISIS IN BURUNDI

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-90

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-635PDF                WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS,                    AMI BERA, California
Tennessee

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 6/2/15 deg.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Michael Jobbins, director of global affairs, Search for
Common Ground..................................................     4
Elavie Ndura, Ph.D., professor of education, George Mason
University.....................................................    12
Ms. Alissa Wilson, public education and advocacy coordinator for
Africa, American Friends Service Committee.....................    23
Mr. Steve McDonald, global fellow, Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars............................................    31

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Michael Jobbins: Prepared statement..........................     7
Elavie Ndura, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..........................    16
Ms. Alissa Wilson: Prepared statement............................    25
Mr. Steve McDonald: Prepared statement...........................    36

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    58
Hearing minutes..................................................    59
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey, and chairman, Subcommittee on
Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations:
Letter from Ambassador Ernest Ndabashinze......................    60
Statement of Dr. Cara Jones....................................    63

THE UNFOLDING CRISIS IN BURUNDI

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12 o'clock
p.m., in room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
Christopher H. Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The hearing will come to order. And we will be
joined shortly by our distinguished ranking member, so we
should just wait for her to begin opening comments. Thank you
all for being here, and I especially want to thank our
witnesses for their expertise and for the insights I know they
will provide to the subcommittee.
Our hearing today is extremely timely as events are
unfolding in real time in Burundi, a small nation that is often
overlooked by the international community, including those of
us here in the U.S. House and Senate.
Many are familiar with the horrific genocidal violence that
gripped Rwanda in the 1990s, as Hutu and Tutsi butchered each
other in outgrowths of ethnic hatred. Few knew, however, that
Burundi was also going through a protracted Tutsi versus Hutu
ethnic struggle that also amounted to genocide in the 1990s.
Few knew that Burundi, without much fanfare and without the
largess that the international community showered upon Rwanda,
overcame its divisive civil war and, following a peace brokered
by Nelson Mandela solemnized in the Arusha Accords of 2000, has
sought to heal the wounds of the past and rebuild a nation.
Today, however, this peace is under the threat of
unraveling. The sitting President of Burundi Pierre Nkurunziza,
in apparent defiance of the term limits set forth in the Arusha
Accords and memorialized in the Constitution, is seeking a
third term. While the constitutional issue is complex and
unsettled, the rising political violence and tension--not to
mention the roughly 160,000 people displaced and seeking refuge
in neighboring countries--is easy to understand and serves as
the canary in the coal mine. There are real problems, and again
we need to be ahead of this, not behind, in trying to mitigate
a crisis.
There is a window of opportunity for action, where
immediate and sustained action can prevent the situation from
escalating out of control. As in the case of the Central
African Republic, about which we held two critical hearings in
our subcommittee in the last Congress, timely attention and
targeted interventions can stop an incipient conflict from
metastasizing. Burundi is now approaching a tipping point,
though it has yet to topple over.
There is still time, and we in Congress have a role to play
in sounding the alarm and prodding the administration to take
action followed by oversight. We also need to avoid the
temptation to be penny wise and pound foolish. As several of
our witnesses will explain, by spending a small amount to
further democracy and governance efforts in fragile states such
as Burundi, we can avoid much greater cost down the road, and
of course the mitigation of the loss of life. And I mean not
simply by the dollar and cents expense, but more importantly,
like I said, the blood lost and the lives shattered.
In Burundi, the administration must do more. While often-
lonely voices such as that of Samantha Power have called
attention to the need for atrocity prevention, too often the
administration policy has been one of, if not malign neglect
then certainly non-benign neglect.
We saw this, for example, in the foot-dragging that
accompanied the appointment of a Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. In January of this year, then Special
Envoy Russ Feingold announced that he was stepping down. This
subcommittee called on the administration to find a replacement
as soon as possible, as the circle of violence was beginning to
widen in Burundi.
In May, for example, I stated that a failure to do so
signaled a ``disengagement when lives are at stake.'' I was
afraid that we would see a repeat of the administration's
inaction with respect to the Middle East, where to date it has
yet to appoint a Special Envoy to Promote Religious Freedom of
Religious Minorities in the Near East and South Central Asia
despite Congress having created that position last August,
almost 1 year ago.
I look forward to the comments and the testimony of our
distinguished witnesses. I yield to Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Chairman Smith, for calling this
meeting and to giving us an opportunity to discuss the current
state of affairs in Burundi amid the election violence and the
refugee crisis.
Last year, I had the opportunity to meet with President
Nkurunziza and I voiced concerns around the stability in the
region and feared the current situation. We had a frank
conversation around it, and he told me at that time that he
felt that there was, because of how he took office, that there
was a reason and a rationale for him to run again. And we
expressed our concern that the situation that is occurring
right now is what would happen if he pursued that course.
I want to offer my appreciation to today's witnesses for
agreeing to participate in the hearing. And I can't help
myself, but I have to acknowledge the presence of Steve
McDonald, who we haven't seen in a while, and I am really happy
to know that you are here today and look forward to your
testimony.
I want to close quickly because I know we have a short
period of time before we are going to be called to vote, but I
do want to say that in your testimony I hope you will also give
reference to the surrounding countries, the impact on those
countries, and then just the outright fear that this could
really expand into a region-wide war. With that I yield.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Mr. Donovan?
Mr. Donovan. Mr. Chairman, I will yield my time too. I will
be very interested to hear what the witnesses have, and as Ms.
Bass said we have a short period of time. So thank you, sir.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I will do abbreviated introductions.
Beginning with Mr. Mike Jobbins who is director of global
affairs at Search for Common Ground, a conflict transformation
organization that has worked on supporting media, community
dialogue, and collective actions for peace and reconciliation
in Burundi for more than two decades, he has covered the Great
Lakes Region for 10 years, most recently a senior program
manager for Africa at Search.
Mr. Jobbins previously lived in Burundi and the DRC and
worked on the region as a program associate at the Woodrow
Wilson Center. He previously testified before our committee on
the Central African Republic.
We will then hear from Dr. Elavie Ndura who is a tenured
professor of education and immediate past academic program
coordinator of the multilingual/multicultural education program
in George Mason University's College of Education and Human
Development. She was a 2010-11 fellow at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars and recipient of the Peace
and Justice Association's 2011 Peace Educator of the Year
Award. Dr. Ndura was a Fulbright Scholar, and the recipient of
the British Council Scholarship. She is the founder and
coordinator of the Burundi Schools Project and author of
several books on peacekeeping in Africa.
Then we will hear from Ms. Alissa Wilson who is public
education and advocacy coordinator for Africa for the American
Friends Service Committee where she covers peace and security
issues. Prior to this, she was researcher in Ethics and Human
Development at Tufts, and an affiliate at the Global Equity
Initiative at Harvard University.
Ms. Wilson has served as a long-term election observer with
the National Democratic Institute in Nigeria and as a Jane
Addams-Andrew Carnegie fellow at the Center on Philanthropy at
Indiana University. She has conducted research at the U.N. and
the Carter Center and facilitated peace education trainings in
the U.S. and Nigeria.
We will then hear from Mr. Steve McDonald--again welcome
back--who is currently the global fellow of the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars, freelance writer, and
international consultant. Until recently he was director of the
Africa Program at the Wilson Center. He helped to design,
initiate and manage the Wilson Center's leadership and building
state capacity and post-conflict resolution programs in Burundi
and other countries. A specialist in African affairs, Mr.
McDonald has lived in and worked with Africa for 45 years and
focused primarily on democracy and governance, human resource
development, conflict resolution and transformation,
peacebuilding, and policy formation for Africa.
Mr. Jobbins?

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL JOBBINS, DIRECTOR OF GLOBAL AFFAIRS,
SEARCH FOR COMMON GROUND

Mr. Jobbins. Members of Congress, thank you so much for
having us here and convening this meeting at a timely moment,
and inviting us from the civil society groups who have been
involved in Burundi over the years to join and share what we
see happening in the country at this critical moment. I ask
that my written testimony be entered into the record.
Mr. Smith. Without objection, yours and all the
distinguished witnesses, and any other materials you want to
include.
Mr. Jobbins. Thank you. The Search for Common Ground has
worked in Burundi since 1995 to prevent violence and support
social cohesion in the media, working with communities, and
supporting dialogue processes. Today we support youth,
religious, and community leaders to prevent violence on the
ground, support radio programming with the stations that are
broadcasting at the moment, and we continue to support efforts
focused on land reform, youth and women's empowerment, and
post-conflict education. I will begin by speaking briefly on
recent developments, make three observations about the current
crisis, and conclude with next steps.
Yesterday, Burundi held its Presidential elections. Search
assembled a pool of 150 journalists from the media
organizations able to report on voting throughout the country.
While results are expected tomorrow, early signs are trickling
in and President Nkurunziza is widely expected to win those
elections.
They took place against the backdrop of a political crisis,
which began on April 25, with the ruling nomination, as
expected, of President Nkurunziza to run for a third term. That
triggered protests, as you alluded to, from civil society and
opposition parties who felt it was unconstitutional, violated
the Arusha Agreement and was a betrayal of the process that
ended the civil war.
While the constitutional court upheld Nkurunziza's
candidacy, protests have continued. There was an attempted coup
in mid-May, and serious fighting has unfolded in Bujumbura
periodically over the last few weeks. Despite mediation
attempts, the impasse continues and will continue after the
elections. The crisis has caused an estimated 100 deaths so
far, and more than 100,000 to flee into neighboring countries.
There are three critical things that we need to understand
this situation right now. First, the underlying, most critical
issue is maintaining the social compact that is enshrined in
the Arusha Agreement. Beyond the words that were agreed to,
Arusha laid the bedrock for political order that was based on
dialogue, political inclusivity, and tolerance. The
Constitution may have set out the rules for governing the
country, but Arusha enshrined the social compact in the same
way that the Magna Carta serves in the United Kingdom or the
Declaration of Independence does here in America.
During the peace process, all parties committed to move
beyond a sense of winner-takes-all politics and to build a
Burundi where all Burundians could live in peace. That peace
process forced a culture of dialogue and the question is now,
after this polarization, can that social compact be restored?
The answer will depend on the actions of the next government
over the next few days as well as how bodies like the Land
Commission, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and the
Human Rights Commission handle some of the most contentious
issues that will be put before it.
Second, we need to recognize what the crisis is not.
Despite the political crisis, the Burundian people have put the
ethnic dimension to the crisis behind them. The overwhelming
majority of Burundians across the country reject violence,
support tolerance, and want to see a consensus to end the
crisis right now. The fact that ethnic identity has not played
a role in the crisis is a testament to the Burundian people but
also to the effectiveness of international cooperation.
It has been with USAID and State Department support that
the interethnic reconciliation through people-to-people
approaches has taken place. And it is with concerted effort
from the U.S. and its international partners that the military
integration was able to proceed so successfully. And if we
haven't seen either an ethnic dimension to the crisis or the
security forces splitting into interregional or identity
factions is due in large part to the support that they have
received.
Third, we have to remember that the crisis comes against
one of the most desperate poverty situations in the world.
Burundi is the size of Maryland with a population of 10 million
and nearly everyone is a farmer. In some areas, the average
farm yields enough food for just 3 months out of the year to
feed a family. As a result it is one of the fastest urbanizing
countries in the world, with young people moving to the cities
with little future and little economic hope.
If you look at projections from IFPRI, the research center
down the road, childhood malnutrition scenarios will drop from
45 percent to 40 percent over the next 35 years. You cannot
have a situation with 40 percent malnutrition for the next 35
years without expecting a series of both political and
humanitarian crises to continue to unfold. It is unthinkable
that this situation can persist and that there can be a
solution without international assistance both to the
democratic governance consolidation in the country as well as
to regional economic integration and growth.
The appointment of Tom Perriello as Special Envoy is an
opportunity for the U.S. to play a positive role in the short-
and long-term solutions, and thank you to the subcommittee for
advocating strongly for that. At the same time, there is reason
to hope that the talks will resume following these elections
and that there can be confidence built between the different
political factions operating the country right now.
But we have to remember that American attention to Burundi
has historically lurched from one crisis to another. We talk
about elections, we talk about democratic governance and
justice now, but over the last 5 years the DG and justice
budget was zero. USAID has not made Burundi one of its
resiliency priorities and there hasn't been concerted
accompaniment of economic integration in the region, even
though it is one of the poorest countries, if not the poorest
country in the world.
And so as I conclude my remarks, I just want to focus on
the opportunity that we have for the U.S., with Perriello's
leadership, to make a broad, strategic commitment to preventing
the crises of today as well as the crises of tomorrow, and
using all of the instruments that are available--development,
cooperation, diplomatic engagement--to see through the
Burundian people to a peaceful solution to this crisis. Thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jobbins follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much for your testimony and
your recommendations.
Dr. Ndura?

STATEMENT OF ELAVIE NDURA, PH.D., PROFESSOR OF EDUCATION,
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Ms. Ndura. Thank you. I am very grateful to be here. I am
grateful for this initiative to get more information about
Burundi in order to hopefully shape and frame policies and
actions that will be able to help the Burundian people build a
peaceful country and peaceful communities.
I was asked particularly to focus on ethnic relations in
Burundi's struggle for sustainable peace. Just like my friend
Mike, here, I request that my testimony be included in the
official record.
Mr. Smith. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Ndura. Thank you. Let me begin briefly by stating that
I am quite honored to sit here as a Burundian woman, as a Hutu
Burundian woman who was severely victimized by ethnic conflicts
in Burundi as I was forced to leave a life of single
motherhood, of a political asylee, an immigrant in the United
States, thankfully, after my husband who was Hutu was
assassinated by the Tutsi-dominated government.
So when I talk about ethnicity, it is real. It is real. I
have focused my entire livelihood, my entire professional
career on education in the hopes of contributing to the
education and the supporting and the sustaining of a new
generation that will be able to work together across ethnic
lines to really engineer, co-engineer a sustainable future for
Burundi and for the African Great Lakes Region.
In terms of background, the history of Burundi can be
divided into four main stages, what I call phases. First, the
pre-colonial era, because people always wonder what is this
ethnicity thing? People are all the same in Burundi. They speak
the same language. They have, really, very much the same
culture.
So what is going on in Burundi? It is very difficult to
understand. So many scholars agree that in the pre-colonial era
ethnicity was there as a marker, but not as a major source of
conflict. But during the colonial era, the Belgian colonialists
in many ways divided the communities both in Burundi and in
Rwanda, geographically and politically, and really very much
created what we have come to know in academia and in daily life
as Tutsi hegemony.
Education was made a privilege that mostly Tutsi
aristocrats were able to access and that continued even after
the independence that Burundi acquired in 1962 as the
structures were never changed. Hutus who have always
constituted the majority of the country, about 84 percent,
while Tutsis as Mike mentioned are 14 percent, we also have a
very small minority of Twa as some people call them the
Pygmies. We have Twas in Burundi and DRC, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and in Rwanda. They are very much a forgotten and
an underserved part of the population, and yet which has always
been exploited by both the Tutsis and the Hutus, especially
during the war because they have been given weapons and asked
to fight on whichever behalf.
So this post-colonial era is itself divided in three
phases: The 1962 to 1992, 1993 to 2005, 2005 to the current day
in 2015. The first phase of the post-colonial era really
continued, without interruption, the colonial divisions where
the Tutsis were in charge, had control over the military, the
economy, education. If you really wanted to get through any
door during that time you had to have been connected to a Tutsi
somehow. Some of us barely survived. I have more information in
my most recent book, which opens with my story as a Hutu woman,
for reference later.
Nineteen ninety three saw Burundi turning the corner and
becoming, attempting at least to become a democratic country by
holding Presidential elections, which for the first time had
many parties that were represented, which led to the election
of Melchior Ndadaye, the very first Hutu and civilian ever to
become elected President of Burundi. Unfortunately, hardliners
within the Tutsi military assassinated him after only 100 days
in power, and that set off the killings and the civil war that
lasted 12 years.
Let me back up first and mention that many in the
international community including the United States, when they
talk about genocide they always refer to the Rwandan killings
of 1994. Very few people realize that in 1972, next door
Burundi, also had a genocide, this time of the Hutus by the
predominately Tutsi government and the military. So Rwanda and
Burundi have always fed on each other's history and present all
the time, so it is very, very difficult to tell them apart.
The third phase of the post-colonial era, which is why many
of you are interested today, the 2005 to 2015, it is a period
that has been framed in many ways by the Arusha Accords that
everybody probably will be talking about here, because the
Arusha Accords that got all the parties together, even civil
society, the international community together, to create a
framework that would allow Burundi to move forward not just as
a democratic country, but as a diverse country, as a country
where everybody was going to be able to have a voice, everybody
was going to have opportunities open to them. And I believe
that is what all the Burundian people, both within Burundi and
outside of Burundi, were hoping for, here is the Arusha Accord,
finally.
There is something that has happened in my research. I
travel to Burundi a lot. My entire research agenda is dedicated
to Burundi and the African Great Lakes Region. There is
something good that has come out of the Arusha Accords--voice.
The people of Burundi have reclaimed their voice. They speak
up. The question that I ask then, do we listen when they speak
up?
And I think that is my major contribution today, because in
terms of moving forward for Burundi and in efforts to avoid the
recurrence or renewed violence based on ethnicity or any other
intergroup dynamics, voices, the voices of the people must be
heard. So I propose that we, the Burundian people, the current
government, the opposition, everybody get together in order to
really hold some honest conversations. Conversations where
people express themselves, but also are willing to listen.
I think my major concern ever since April of this year, my
major concern has been the lack of spaces for those kinds of
conversations. People have been saying many things. People have
been talking. But as a researcher and a person who loves
Burundi and has been invested in Burundi for many years, I have
constantly been wondering if anyone is listening.
Is President Nkurunziza listening? Is the current
government listening? What are they hearing when people say
``no'' to the third term bid? Is it just about the third term
bid or is it something else that is complicating the current
situation? But we cannot unearth all those reasons unless we
listen with compassion. Listening with compassion, in my mind,
means listening, knowing that everybody talks in good faith,
and that is what I hope. But then that is a question. As a
researcher, I have more questions than answers. So are all the
people who are talking, talking in good faith? Do they have
some kind of ulterior motives, something that they stand to
gain or that they stand to lose?
Let us go back to ethnicity. Yes, the government is mixed.
Yes, even the Imbonerakure, the renowned youth militia. In some
strategic areas in Burundi even the Imbonerakure is ethnically
mixed. So, when some people go to those mixed areas they don't
talk about ethnicity. However, it has emerged that when they go
to talk in the campaign in promoting agendas in places that do
not have Tutsi members among the Imbonerakure, the conversation
shifts to, ``Hey, remember.'' Remember you have to support us,
otherwise the Tutsi will get you again.
So for me, I am sitting here confused and wondering, so
where is Burundi? Is it really post-ethnic? I argue that
Burundi is no more post-ethnic than the United States is post-
racial. Ethnicity, even on the surface, we think that
ethnicity, people have made peace with ethnicity. Tutsi, Hutu,
Twa are ready to work together and move forward together. I
consider it a neverending undercurrent, almost a convenient
divider that can be brought in at any time to advance some kind
of agendas, wherever the agendas are coming from.
So how do we deal with that then? I focus on the common
good. When you walk into Burundi and travel across the country,
one of the most striking things that you would notice is the
major difference between people who have access to resources
and people who have no access to resources. From big houses and
big hotels and big cars and several employees in the house, to
the villages where people have no food, where people have no
shelter, where children walk around and run around in coats
that have become so oversized and so brown because they can't
even afford soap to wash them.
So where is Burundi going, and how is violence contributing
to worsening the situation of the real Burundian people beyond
the politicians, beyond the policymakers? That is a major
question for us to ponder because that is where the work needs
to be done.
Let us go back to education. I consider education to be a
key path forward toward the reconstruction of the communities
of Burundi, these communities that have been shattered by
endless conflicts and violence. We do have the framework
culturally. You know Ubuntu is not South African only. The
ethic of Ubuntu is actually African. We have an author, Kayoya,
who wrote a book and talked about Ubuntu the same way as
Desmond Tutu framed Ubuntu for the future of South Africa. I
propose that education be grounded again in those traditional
mechanisms and philosophies that rekindle the spirit of
interdependence that really has always defined the Burundian
people and the Burundian communities.
Reflective citizenship. I propose that investments be made
to build the capacity of the Burundian people, especially the
youth, to become reflective citizens. Those citizens who don't
only vote because they stand to gain from the one who wins, but
the people who run for office because they are convinced that
if they win, the livelihoods of the people in those poor
villages will actually be improved. Otherwise, for me, it
doesn't matter who wins and who loses. It really doesn't
matter.
I guess you can tell that I don't stand here to gain
anything. That is the beauty of being an academic. Tenured,
too, so I can say what I want as long as it is constructive. So
education for reflective citizenship. Education that promotes
youth peaceful engagement and reflective citizenship. Burundian
people love children. We sing to them all the time. We have
amazing lullabies that even my grandsons adore. To go to sleep
when they visit with me, they ask me to sing the lullaby which
states how special they are and how loved they are and how we
will always be there to protect them against the enemy.
How can we rekindle the spirit that treasures the youth
through education instead of arming them as child soldiers,
instead of arming them as militias who kill even one another,
sometimes resorting to killing even their own relatives? For
what purpose? To get some money, to get some food, to get some
clothes.
So you are powerful policymakers and that is why I am
trying to tell the truth here, because we cannot focus on
Burundi as yet just another troubled and troublesome country
and a region of the world where we cannot do anything. We can
do something, but we have to be honest with ourselves and our
policies. And, in fact, develop and implement policies that
will actually empower the people of Burundi to change their
livelihood from the roots, not at the surface.
When we go in to do peacebuilding we are already in
trouble. They are fighting, so we need to go in. Yes, it is
good to go in, but what if we were to say we are going in to
start educating the Burundian people from the bottom, from the
roots? From the grassroots, so that when they graduate from
school, or even if they drop out from school they have the
spirit of unity, they have the spirit of interdependence, they
have the spirit of reflective citizenship, instead of thinking,
when I graduate I want to be able to build the biggest hotel
and charge the most money that I can. How can we change this
kind of thinking so that we reconstruct the Burundians to say
this? Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ndura follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Dr. Ndura. Despite your
personal loss, and again let me convey on behalf of our
committee our condolences because I am sure that has to be an
ever-present source of agony for you, but despite all that you
continue to fight hard for a durable peace and reconciliation
with an emphasis on education. So thank you for sharing and the
history as well, which I thought was very fascinating.
Ms. Wilson?

STATEMENT OF MS. ALISSA WILSON, PUBLIC EDUCATION AND ADVOCACY
COORDINATOR FOR AFRICA, AMERICAN FRIENDS SERVICE COMMITTEE

Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you to Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Bass, and the members of this subcommittee for holding
this important hearing. My name is Alissa Wilson, and as you
have heard I serve as the public education and advocacy
coordinator for Africa with the American Friends Service
Committee, or AFSC.
The AFSC is a Quaker organization working in 56 locations
throughout the world. Founded almost 100 years ago, we promote
lasting peace with justice as a practical expression of faith
in action. We were co-awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on behalf
of all Friends in 1947, and have worked in Africa for over 50
years.
AFSC has worked in Burundi for over a decade, and like many
Quakers before us we work with the belief that there is that of
God in everyone. We have brought together people across lines
of identity, ethnicity, religion, gender, and experience during
war to heal and restore bonds of community. Our work with
Burundian partners has yielded strong examples of communities
resolving differences through inclusive dialogue and increasing
self-reliance through livelihood approaches. We have also
engaged actors at the sociopolitical level, on dialogue and
exchange programs and on peacebuilding issues such as the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission design and implementation.
Currently, the AFSC is supporting the Friends Church of
Burundi on an emergency response project that has brought
together leaders from different faith communities. At the local
level, pastors, imams, and priests are encouraging
congregations to take action for peace. These congregations
come from all over the country and represent an array of
political backgrounds. And at the national level, a small
committee of religious body representatives will reach out to
different sociopolitical actors to advocate for dialogue.
Our decade of experience working in Burundi leads us to
three recommendations. First, help to revitalize the mediation
process. Second, create a long-term U.S. strategy for Burundi
that includes sustained funding for peacebuilding, democracy,
rights, and governance programs. And finally, support regional
actors in contributing to peace. Revitalizing the mediation
process needs to be the top priority for the U.S. and other
donors to help Burundi move past this very real crisis.
We welcome the appointment of Special Envoy Tom Perriello,
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa. We hope
he will support increased coherence to the mediation process by
coordinating with the mediation team, East African Community,
African Union, and other key actors. Attention should also be
paid to civil society at this moment. A range of nonpolitical
Burundian organizations has been working on trust building and
good governance issues since the Arusha Peace Agreement. They
should be consulted by the mediation team and be included in
post-mediation planning. Their inclusion makes these processes
more accountable to citizens and strengthens transparency and
credibility. We recognize that civil society participation
should be negotiated with all actors to ensure that their ideas
have a voice balanced appropriately with the role of political
actors.
The Atrocity Prevention Board is to be commended for
ensuring U.S. attention to Burundi over a year ago. However, an
engagement strategy with Burundi should focus on long-term
engagement not flashpoint prevention. Sustainable peacebuilding
and development progress happens in the daily work between
elections. And as Mr. Jobbins mentioned, democracy, rights, and
governance funding for Burundi needs to increase. If we
maintain these funding levels and continue to provide military
assistance at significantly higher levels, what message are we
sending to the people of Burundi?
An investment in long-term accounts shouldn't come at the
expense of those for crisis prevention and response like the
Conflicts Crisis Fund, or CCF. Flexible funds for unexpected
challenges are still important. Unfortunately, for Fiscal Year
2016, for the second year in a row, the House budget did not
allocate money for the CCF. The Senate passed a budget that
included CCF but with only $30 million to cover efforts
worldwide.
Finally, the history of the Great Lakes Region includes
conflicts that have spilled across borders. Countries have also
provided support or safe harbor to armed groups from their
neighbors, and we urge the U.S. to use good offices with
Burundi's neighbors to create a setting where each country
supports peace processes and refrains from involvement in armed
activities within or across borders. We also encourage the U.S.
to remain committed to collaboration with the EAC, AU, U.N. and
others to respond with rapid, high-level diplomatic engagement
in case of heightened violence.
AFSC has worked in contexts of conflict across the globe
for nearly 100 years and we understand that there is rarely an
arrival in peacebuilding processes, there are cycles of
challenges and opportunities for breakthrough. At this moment,
Burundi once again faces a very real choice between reignition
of conflict or a recommitment to building and maintaining
sustainable peace and development. Regional actors, the U.S.,
and the global community at large must do all we can at this
time to support the conditions for the latter to win the day.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you so much, Ms. Wilson.
Mr. McDonald?

STATEMENT OF MR. STEVE MCDONALD, GLOBAL FELLOW, WOODROW WILSON
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SCHOLARS

Mr. McDonald. Thank you very much for inviting me to
testify today, Congressman Smith, and thank you very much for
your warm remarks, welcoming remarks, Congresswoman Bass and
Congressman Donovan. I appreciate the opportunity.
Batting cleanup is sometimes a disadvantage, sometimes an
advantage because it allows me maybe to pick up on some points
that I might have noticed that were not emphasized as much as I
thought they should be. I was very involved in Burundi in 1993-
94 during the election period then, and from 2002 to 2008 with
a former colleague of yours, Howard Wolpe, one of your
predecessors, Mr. Smith, in doing exactly the kind of work we
have been talking about here in terms of reconciliation, trust
building, capacity building amongst the key leaders of the
country including working with the integration of the armed
services there, the newly formed national army coming from the
former armed rebel groups and the existing National Army.
We had quite a measure of success at that time working
through the 2005 elections and the ceasefire in 2004 through
the 2005 elections and beyond in terms of the demobilization,
disarmament, and reintegration process. I mention this not to
burnish my credibility but because it has been done. The kinds
of things that my colleagues, particularly Alissa and Elavie
and Mike, have referred to in terms of getting involved in
long-term ways with democracy and governance and trust
building, capacity building, education work has worked in the
past. It is important to know that the crisis that we are
facing now is a real one, but it is not ethnic in nature at
this point, but it could become.
The basic rivalry here is a political one. The basic
rivalry is a Hutu-Hutu rivalry as a matter of fact. The primary
opposition members who are challenging Nkurunziza and
challenging the third term issue are Hutu. That doesn't mean
the crisis can't grow and take us back to the days of old and
pick up on that underlying ethnicity consciousness that Elavie
was referring to, which is certainly there, and therefore we
have to be very, very conscious of not letting it get to that
point. And I am glad to see that the United Nations, the
African Union, the East African Community, and the United
States have realized this and made statements to this effect.
The elections of course that we have just finished, we will
know something about the results hopefully tomorrow. The
elections commission in Burundi is saying that we had a 74
percent turnout. I personally think that is probably a very
high figure, probably higher in the countryside than it was in
Bujumbura. The feedback I am getting from people I know is that
this is an exaggerated figure. We will see.
But the point is that the election has occurred. The
opposition members who boycotted the election, although three
of their names remained on the ballot, are now speaking out of
a possibility of a unity government. I think that is a
possibility that we should investigate, stay conscious of, that
there may be still strands of dialogue and unity that we can
bring together. You are all aware of course of the effort
initiated by President Museveni to start a dialogue amongst the
parties, again very late in the game. This was commendable but
failed at the time, but there is no reason why that can't be
picked up.
But another thing that is very important to realize is that
the third term issue, the political issue that set this off,
was only a trigger for the violence. As I think Mike was
outlining for us, there are much, much deeper issues here. As
we know, the country is extremely poor. Eighty percent of the
population live in poverty, $420 a year GDP, soaring inflation.
I don't know if you are even aware that there were in July,
early July and earlier in the year, protests around petrol and
food prices and et cetera, and a strike was actually called at
one point in time. The unemployment rate is 40 percent, much
higher amongst the youth. Youth issues are extremely important.
Malnutrition rates are very high. Chronic malnutrition. The
vast majority of the population is rural and there are immense
land pressures due to the high population density to begin
with, but the returning refugees and displaced persons.
So the numbers of issues that have gone unaddressed by the
current government that has been in power for 10 years have led
to a very, very unsatisfied, dissident population. Ironically,
and I point this out in my written testimony but I won't
elaborate here, Nkurunziza has been a popular President with
the rural population, overall, and my own private opinion is
that he could have easily won this election doing it without
any kind of manipulation, and it is a shame that what has
occurred, has occurred. That it really didn't need to. The
third party issue should have been solved by the constitutional
court and been just a legal issue that Burundi solved in and of
itself.
But it is important to know that the tensions in the
country are real. The Imbonerakure youth gangs that Elavie
mentioned are organized and active. They have been around
actually since 2012 or maybe even before. They are often
uniformed. They carry weapons. They operate mostly at night.
They intimidate. They harass. They even kill. People often
sleep outside their homes in rural areas for fear that the
Imbonerakure youth gangs might show up. Even with the flow of
refugees out of the country, Imbonerakure, according to
information I am getting particularly in the north part of the
country in Kayanza, have been intercepting refugees as they are
trying to leave the country to go into Rwanda, taking away
their belongings and even raiding in their houses in the
evening to take furniture and stuff out of it.
So they are continuing to intimidate population. The
government has said of course that it is trying to disarm the
Imbonerakure. That effort is moving very slow. Again, an issue
that we may not all be aware of is the fact that since the
ceasefire in 2003 and 2004, the efforts to get guns out of the
population's hands, out of civilian population have been
basically a failure. Some estimates estimate that as high as
300,000 weapons still exist out there in the civilian
population.
Weapons of choice are grenades. Grenades are plentiful.
They are easy to hide, put them in your pocket, throw them into
a group of people quite easily. We see that all the time. The
most egregious one was in Gatumba in 2011. You remember when 40
people were killed in a bar.
And then we have the refugee flows. I am sure you are aware
that recent reporting by MSF says 1,000 people a day are
crossing into Rwanda right now. Aljazeera was just reporting
yesterday from the camp there, where there is 70,000 refugees
now in Rwanda, up to 170,000 total including Tanzania. So these
are very, very real situations. There was fighting on July 10
in Kayanza which reportedly was with the armed forces and a
group of rebels, who probably are former armed forces or
involved in the coup, and they are well armed and they are
staging in the Kibira forest area.
So those tensions occur, continue to occur, and will be
real for the time being and into the future, so it is a very
tense situation that we are faced with. Undoubtedly, in a few
days' time or by August 26th, we will, the West will be faced
with a Nkurunziza-led government. Not happy with the way he got
there possibly, but he will be there. We will have to deal with
him. And while many countries are withdrawing their security
assistance, other forms of aid including, as you well know,
some of the aid that was coming in for the election process
itself was withdrawn by three donors.
Short of breaking diplomatic relations and cutting off
ties, what is it that we can do to help to bring Burundi to a
peaceful, sustained peaceful future? My colleagues have already
named a number of things with which I agree. I think it is
really important that we remain, first of all, we remain
outspoken, which we have been doing. The new Special Envoy is
good to have in place. We, along with the United Nations and
the African Union, have said the right things recently. We need
to push publicly and strongly for upholding democratic
principles, the rule of law, freedom of press--extremely
important. As we all know the press was shut down. A lot of the
press was shut down during the crisis--but also for independent
judiciary and independent elections commission.
Part of the problem with the third term issue was the doubt
cast upon the constitutional court's validity and so we need to
push hard for that independence of the judiciary. We need to
revive and strengthen the efforts of local NGOs, and NGOs like
the international ones that are working there that are
represented at this table. Community groups and religious
organizations, we need to restart efforts to promote
reconciliation and peace efforts across political, community,
subregional, religious, and ethnic lines.
And again I refer to those efforts that led us up to the
2005 elections and through that which did have success. They
can be done. We need to push and assist, which we can do, in
this disarmament effort. The government says it is working on
the disarmament effort. Let us hold it at its word. Let us push
for that. Let us offer resources for that if we can.
I think it is important that we mobilize and continue to
mobilize greater national attention to the rising political and
ethnic threat that Burundi represents to the country and to the
region. Congresswoman Bass, here, asked about the region. We
know tensions exist in the region. We know the relationships
with Rwanda and Burundi are problematic and have been for some
years going back to 1994 and before. We know that some staging
of rebel groups, Banyamulenge and others, are rumored to be
happening in the DRC. We know the FNL itself, one of the
opposition parties has done some staging there.
So we need to work with the regional group countries and
to, as I said, push strongly to see that they do nothing to
exacerbate the tensions in Burundi. Make it clear to President
Nkurunziza and his closest allies and associates that they have
violated international agreements and norms in their actions
and that they bear the greatest responsibility for the current
political crisis. They will be held responsible to the
international community for any breakdown in the future in law
and order and any mass violence that should occur.
I think in this context that, Alissa mentioned this, that
we should push for the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which is of course an Arusha Accords
mandated body and has not yet come into effect. A little goes a
long way to getting toward questions of justice. There should
be no immunity for violent deeds by youth militias like
Imbonerakure, the police, or any other party that is engaged in
violence and loss of life because this isn't all just one-sided
obviously. It is important to realize that this crisis did not
catch the world unaware.
Since 2008, when preparations for the 2010 elections began
and in subsequent years, international funding for democracy
and governance, as Mike as talked about, and reconciliation and
peacebuilding has fallen away. The work with political party
reconciliation, leadership development and integration and
capacity building of the armed forces that was done through
those years needs to be continued.
The issue of making sure we have long-term commitments has
been mentioned by everybody at this table, and it just seems to
be something that never, ever gets through to policymakers. You
never get a grant for more than 18 months to 2 years anyway no
matter what you are doing, and as soon as you have done it then
you have done that and the donor moves on to something else and
somebody else. And just when you are beginning to establish
yourselves and beginning to be effective and have impact,
whether you are local, whether you are international NGOs, that
gets withdrawn.
Then another thing that I want to mention, just in closing,
which Burundi officials will not like, and that is we often say
to ourselves, and you hear this from the U.S. Government
officials, that, well, we have such limited leverage, what can
we do; how can we push? Well, it is true. We don't want to be
in a position of taking away humanitarian aid and assistance
and et cetera that is so badly needed. We don't want to break
diplomatic relations. We don't want to do those things.
But remember that there is one point of leverage that
should be borne in mind. I am not threatening anybody, but in
terms of Burundi's role in international peacekeeping in Haiti,
Central African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, Sudan, where it has
over 7,200 troops committed, nearly one fifth of the standing
armed National Army is committed to peacekeeping. They have a
wonderful reputation, laudable contribution to international
peace and order. However, Burundi is reimbursed by the U.N.
$1,028 for each soldier deployed, or a return of $45 million
annually, along with salaries of $750 a month received by each
individual soldier, 7,200 soldiers. You can add all that up.
The Burundi Government should be warned that mass violence in
Burundi and any human rights perpetrated by the security forces
domestically could jeopardize their ability to serve in future
peacekeeping operations. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McDonald follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. McDonald. Let me say
for the record, Tom Perriello as well as Secretary Linda Thomas
Greenfield were invited. They had things that they are doing
overseas. We have invited them at a date when they can make
themselves available. I think that will happen. So part two of
this hearing will be to hear from them, and probably more from
the NGO side as well, sometime in September.
We also submit for the record and unanimous consent, a
statement by Assistant Professor Cara Jones and a letter from
the Ambassador of Burundi to the United States. Without
objection, so ordered.
I thought since we have a series of votes coming, I, my
good colleague Ms. Bass, and Mr. Donovan will ask questions and
then we will see if we have time for a second round, if there
are anything you didn't answer or we want to elaborate, we will
do it that way.
Let me begin the questioning, first, with July 2, 2015,
just a few weeks ago, days ago, the State Department announced
that they were going to suspend security assistance programs to
Burundi. What do you think needs to be done to resume that
money? As specific as possible would be appreciated. What role
have neighboring states played in either fomenting or
addressing Burundi's crisis? Is Kagame playing a role here? We
have heard that. I would appreciate your thoughts on that.
Mr. Jobbins, you went into great detail and appropriate
detail about the impact in your part, backdrop of desperation
that USAID funded research in 2010, 45 percent of the children
under 5 are anemic, and NGO's report stunting rates of 57
percent. As you know, Burundi signed up to the scaling up
program in February 2013, which is this herculean effort on the
first thousand days of life from conception to the second
birthday. If you get that right, the next 25,000-30,000 days of
that child's life into adulthood will be exponentially enhanced
in terms of immunity, strength, stunting pretty much goes away,
but that prenatal care, mother and baby of course, maternal
healthcare is absolutely transformational. They signed up in
2013; how well or poorly are they doing, if you can speak to
that.
Let me also ask about, Ms. Wilson, you emphasized the
importance of the faith community. Maybe all of you might want
to elaborate how they are being on all sides, all faith
community leaders into the peace efforts, the mitigation of
ethnic animosities. Is that working? Do they utilize the faith
community as effectively as they could?
Ms. Wilson, you talked about how revitalizing the mediation
process should be the top priority for the United States. Is
it? Are we doing it? If not, are we about to do it? And I do
have other questions. And the 150-plus journalists, did any of
them encounter any threats, pushback? Were they unfettered in
their ability to report on and to ascertain what is truly going
on?
Ms. Bass. Sure, I just have a couple of questions really
focusing on the U.S. and what more we can do, in particular
with the IDPs and the concern about people being in the
surrounding countries and what more that we can do on the human
rights side, on the humanitarian side, but also on the security
side.
And then the AU has taken a position that they will not
recognize the results of the election which, although they
haven't been announced, everybody knows what the results are
going to be, and so I wanted to get a sense as to practically
what that means. Will the President not be allowed to
participate in the AU? Will he be kicked out? How do you see
that in whether or not you see that is going to have any impact
on him? Those are my two questions.
Mr. Donovan. I, as is the chairman, very concerned about
the children. And I met with a group yesterday, we were talking
about preventable diseases that we have medicines and
inoculations for, and also about the malnutrition that you
spoke about, Mike, and wondering if the aid being provided,
first of all, is it being provided for the children?
Doctor, I have a 2-month old and I am so glad to hear you
say about the children, how they are cherished in your country.
So, one, is aid being provided? Is medication being
provided for these preventable diseases, and is food being
provided to help with this malnutrition? And two, if it is
being provided, is it getting to the children or is the
government allowing the aid to be received by those who are in
need? So those are my two issues.
Mr. Jobbins. Thank you so much. To take first perhaps the
cross-cutting question of nutrition and food security. We have
seen some progress with a lot of different assistance programs
to ensure food security, but what we haven't seen is that the
fundamental underlying mathematics is broken of this
agricultural society that doesn't have enough land with the
agricultural techniques to feed its people. And so the question
for the long term is not how do we ensure food security right
now, but how do we set a path for growth? And that is only
through regional integration, it is only through an education
system that prepares people for the modern economy and through
dealing with this urban class. And so I think to us that is the
biggest gap. Certainly emergency feeding is needed, but setting
people up for a path for growth is what we haven't seen a lot
of progress on and what is absolutely critical.
But to come to terms with Mr. Smith's question about the
media, we did feel that with the journalists who we worked
with--we worked with six radio stations as well as our own
journalists--we were able to document what happened on voting
day. However, this is a current against the backdrop of, like
Steve said, a number of radio stations are off-air. We have in
principle the President as well as certainly the media
themselves want to get back on air, but there is a lot of very
deep issues about the pre-conditions for those to get back on
air.
And in terms of where, places where there could be found
common ground, certainly every political actor in Burundi has
been the victim of hate speech at one point or another in their
careers and everyone has benefited from the opportunity to have
a fair shake through the media. And so to the extent that that
can be an opportunity to get those stations back on air to meet
the concerns of the government, get them back on air can help
create the conditions for a dialogue to be successful. It is a
key confidence building measure and one where we feel that
there is a decent chance at least of beginning to set things on
the right course in supporting that dialogue and social
compact.
To touch just rapidly on the two questions of the faith
communities and the displaced. The faith communities have
played a heroic role particularly on the aspect of preventing
violence. We have worked with interfaith groups throughout this
crisis. I was meeting with them the day before protests broke
out about how you talk about violence to your parishioners or
to your congregations. And the number one message that they
focused on was the principle of individual accountability, the
story of Cain and Abel in the Christian tradition.
At the end of the day, you alone are accountable for your
acts before the law and before God. It is not your commander.
It is not your neighbor. It is not your political leader who is
going to be rendering an account for the judgment, but in fact
it is going to be you yourself who have to justify your own
actions. That has been something that has been particularly
empowering and something that needs to be reinforced. That
principle does not group collective blame but rather every
individual has the right and the responsibility to for their
own actions, and the faith community has been very instrumental
in communicating that as a moral message.
And then the last question on the displaced people, we see
that there has been a slow increase in assistance. Right now
the capacity is still overwhelmed particularly in Tanzania and
Rwanda with the reports of the latest, there seems to be signs
it is being overwhelmed. And in Congo, of course refugees are
fleeing into an area that is profoundly unstable and risks
destabilizing further the context of the Ruzizi Plains on the
Congolese side.
But what we hear from our colleagues--we work in each of
those countries. What we hear from our colleagues are two other
needs in addition to the humanitarian needs. One is access to
information, media programming and information that can help
prevent those populations from being manipulated. We have seen
in past crises in the region how refugees have been
instrumentalized, have been manipulated into worsening the
violence back home, and that is something that will absolutely
be critical.
And then the second is the issue of protection. We hear
particularly our colleagues, from talking with the Tanzanian
Government, there are a lot of concerns in how the government
themselves can ensure protection for these vulnerable
populations, for victims, for women, for children who are
fleeing, how you ensure their security, how you ensure their
wellbeing in this crisis. It is something that in those areas
the government hasn't had a lot of experience and capacity and
resources for.
And so to the extent that we can focus on the protection of
women, children, victims of violence in those refugee settings
is a key point that has been underlined to us by the
humanitarian community and by the governments of those
neighboring countries. I think I will let my colleagues speak
to those points, and then also about the regional actors.
Ms. Ndura. Let me focus on children's issues. I can say
that I am a grandma. I always start with the children and I end
with the children. It is almost like when you travel across
Burundi, it is very much as if it's two worlds ``juxtaposed''
to each other. Even within the same provinces, you go to an
area in the city centers or a neighborhood where children are
very well cared for, have everything they need, even more than
they need. They are spoiled to death even, sometimes, and have
a great education. They are multilingual, sometimes in French
and Swahili because they have the best schools. And then you
walk a mile or two to just see children who are in the dirt,
many times with not even the basic clothing on, honestly, naked
in the street in the water puddles after it rains. And then of
course with all the germs or the illnesses that that brings to
them.
So when I travel and work across Burundi I always ask
myself that same question, where is all the assistance that all
these multi-nations are saying they have poured into Burundi? I
personally have not seen it. I am being honest. I really have
not seen it. Because I was able to travel to Burundi for the
first time in 2006, because I was a political refugee I had to
wait for my U.S. passport for which I will forever be grateful.
That is what allowed me to go back to Burundi to do the work
that I currently do.
But you don't see, I have not been seeing. In 2006, I
thought this is normal. The country is barely emerging from
armed conflict so it is normal that everybody is hungry, that
everybody is poor. But how about today, 2015? I was there in
March. The conditions have not changed. So I don't see where
the support is going. So what do we do? Do we stop? Definitely
not. Because if we were to stop the assistance, then many more
children, many more expectant mothers would die.
I would say expect accountability. How do we do that?
Burundi, it is very difficult to operate and to collaborate
with people from different cultures, because if we ask for
reports about how the assistance has been spent and we get the
reports but that is not always how exactly how things were
done, and we proclaim that things were done because we have a
report. The report is not always the reality.
So I suggest that not only we continue the assistance to
the children and to the mothers, but actually increase it. But
also monitor, more effective monitoring practices from people
who have a greater conscience. I don't want us to do like one
country in Europe did. They gave cows to a community, three
cows, and then they sent three consultants, one per cow. And
one consultant per cow and they were paid $15,000 to watch over
the cow. No, that is not what I am proposing.
But we surely need a more effective monitoring process that
would ensure that the assistance gets there, that it is
distributed, so that we can increase it. There are very
responsible people in Burundi, we just need to find them. There
are people who are compassionate in Burundi, we just need to
find them. Because most of the time those that we reach
immediately because they have access to us, they have access to
these important people with whom they have been working for
years, sometimes you may be surprised that they may not be the
best.
Moment of truth here. Seriously, I did research on NGOs,
community based peacebuilding programs and practices a few
years back, and one of the lessons I learned was that oh, how
come all the NGO heads and Presidents, how come they are all
Tutsis? I noticed, but they still talked to me and I
appreciated the work they did. But as a researcher I still have
to ask myself. So who has access to us and whom do we have
access to has to be reconceptualized to make sure our good work
really produces the impact that it is meant to have.
Now beyond children there is youth. Children are not the
same as youth. Let me go back to the youth. Until we invest in
sustained opportunities to provide the youth with the means to
produce their own food, their own money to take care of
themselves, to go to the clinic when they are sick, to take
care of their wives and children when they get married and have
families, until we show them that they do not need to depend on
biased and self-serving political party leaders--there must be
a category for enhancing and developing the capacity of youth
to productively engage in the affairs of Burundi--I am sitting
here to say the troubles of Burundi will continue. Because when
those young men, young women are hungry, they will do whatever
they need to get food. We are just talking about food. We are
not talking about cars and houses and boats. We are talking
about basic needs, food, medicine, shelter. The youth. There
must be a category--yes, the children. We need to help them
grow in a safe neighborhood. But there must be a new emphasized
category for the youth. Until we listen, we are not helping
Burundi and the Burundian people.
Ms. Wilson. Two quick points. First, on the mediation. So
as you mentioned before, we had not had as robust a presence as
we might have in this process because we didn't have a Special
Envoy appointed. And so I would say right now we have a hopeful
moment that someone is there and can really be the U.S. point
person on collaborating with these partners. But I would say
that two mediators were dismissed from this process and now we
are on to a new process.
And I would say that it has been harder to see how and
whether the Burundian NGOs that we mentioned, that Steve has
mentioned, will be consulted and what that consultation will
look like. And if it happens in a black box, to come back to
the Burundian people and explain what has happened will be
harder than if there was a process that did involve these kinds
of organizations.
Also on the role of faith, someone said to me that people
are believers before they are political beings, and I thought
that was just a really salient point. Because there is a reach
that faith communities have that others don't have just because
of the moral authority often that faith leaders play. And it is
not always easy, and it is not always that faith leaders are
apolitical beings, but that there is a higher sense that they
are trying to work toward.
And as Search for Common Ground as done, as we have done, I
think, in supporting the faith leaders who really want to come
together and ensure that both at the local level and at the
national level, these messages for dialogue are really being
heard in the community. And as I mentioned, it is happening
across the country, and I think as long as that continues we
have a hope line for what can happen both within civil society
and at the sociopolitical level.
Ms. Ndura. And may I add that even with the faith community
we cannot go in without thinking and asking critical questions?
One of the things I noticed when I traveled to Burundi is that
many of the guests at hotels, sometimes large numbers, are
always missionaries, mostly from the United States. So there
are financial advantages for many Burundians for connecting
with those missionaries because they bring dollars.
So are we practicing faith because we are called by the
Almighty to improve the wellbeing of the Burundian people or
are we preaching and praising the Almighty because He, or She--
who knows? I haven't seen Him. I believe, but I don't know. Are
we praising the Almighty because He has helped us connect with
somebody who would help us complete the foundation for our new
home?
Do you know that President Nkurunziza is one of the most
practicing faithful people? He prays a lot. He even dances for
the Lord. Is he listening more? Should he listen more? Is he
growing from his faith that tells him to love all people and
care for people, to actually develop and exact policies that
will help him and his associates live by faith? I would just
end with that question.
Mr. McDonald. I want to respond to several of the
questions, but I will start where Elavie and Alissa ended,
first of all, just by saying quite simply that I have not been
to a country in Africa--and I have been to almost every sub-
Saharan African country for an extended period of time in my
life--that is more faith-based, is more religious than Burundi.
It is a deeply, deeply religious people. But I absolutely agree
with what Elavie said. President Nkurunziza has been here for
the Presidential Prayer Breakfast. He has been wined and dined
by all kinds of faith-based people and organizations, and we
have got to be very careful how we approach this issue. That is
all I will say on that.
Mediation process, not a whole lot more to say than what
Alissa said. I think it has not been a top priority, which was
your question, Congressman Smith, but it should be and
hopefully is being underlined even more now. I am aware of a
process that is going on right now in The Hague where the
Burundi Leadership Training Program, an organization that I had
a lot to do with coming into being, and The Netherlands
Institute for Multiparty Democracy are meeting with State
Department officials from the Bureau of Conflict Stabilization
Operations talking about exactly this effort. We need to
encourage, we need to enlarge on that. It is an area in which
we can have an effect.
But also to your question on the regional role, regional
states' role, Uganda of course was doing, I think, a very
honest mediation role in the past few days, so let us not
ignore the neighboring states as potential players in the
mediation process. As far as what we should be saying to
neighboring states, I think it goes back to that old platitude,
first of all do no harm, because that is possible.
I am not an expert in this area, but there are certainly
rumors about that Rwanda has possibly tried to instigate anti-
Tutsi fears, and whether this is happening officially or not we
don't know. But certainly tensions are building, and as I said
in my oral remarks, the tensions in the eastern DRC
organizations and groups that are there, FDLR, Banyamulenge, et
cetera, have got to be very careful that they don't get
involved in this. So we really need to be consulting with all
the neighboring states at all times.
In this security sector assistance, I think the United
States has done exactly the right thing in terms of stopping
that assistance right now. I think we have got a situation in
some ways, and analogous to Nigeria now, we want to be helpful
in Nigeria in the fight against Boko Haram, but how can you
work with a military that is corrupt and ineffective and
inefficient? So you have got to be sure you have some security
sector reform before you can move back in there. It is not very
easy.
The army, as Mike said, has been one of the positive things
in this whole crisis and transition and that is good, but they
are not without their own divisions particularly from the
intelligence unit which is very close to President Nkurunziza.
But they are very well meaning, professional army officers of
both Tutsi and Hutu backgrounds with whom we can work. What we
can do is have a very, very effective well plugged-in defense
attache there who is following these things very, very closely.
And I am not quite sure what the status of that is with our
Embassy. I am a very, very big supporter of Ambassador Liberi.
I think she is doing a wonderful job, but I think she is
limited in her staff and her outreach and her ability to get at
some of these issues. So that maybe needs to be one thing we
build up just to know more about those divisions within the
army, and when the time will come when we can work with them
again in terms of security sector assistance.
In some ways that is the same thing I can say about the
refugee issues. Mike has elaborated on that a bit. One thing is
we need to be better informed. I don't think anybody from our
Embassy in Tanzania has been to the border yet to visit with
those refugee camps. I know they haven't gone yet to the Rwanda
border because those camps have just popped up there, literally
just popped up there overnight. Obviously we have got to work
very closely with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees on
that, but our own efforts to inform ourselves need to be
increased.
The other thing was your question, Congresswoman Bass, on
not recognizing this election and what happens next. I am
reminded, I can pull my gray beard out on this and I am
reminded of what happened after the Idi Amin coup in Uganda,
and I was in Uganda at that time as a political officer in the
American Embassy. And the OAU had a really tough time knowing
who to seat at the 10th anniversary of the OAU up in Addis
Ababa when Idi Amin and Milton Obote both showed up. It can be
a difficult issue.
But the AU is not the OAU. They operate by some pretty
different rules and it is a much better organization. But
still, I think the fact of the matter will be, as I said in my
testimony we will be faced with a government that we will have
to recognize. That it will be a de facto situation that we will
have to deal with. How the AU handles that, how we handle it
diplomatically I will leave to other people to sort out. But it
is going to be a fait accompli. And in time, there may be some
awkward moments over the next few months, but in time they will
be accepted and we will have to work with him and with the
Nkurunziza government one way or another. I think that is all.
Mr. Smith. We still have a few minutes before the votes, so
just a couple of follow-up questions. Mr. McDonald, in your
testimony you talked about a novel idea which would cost
Burundi some $45 million if they were disqualified from
participating in peacekeeping. They have the deployments in
Somalia, Cote d'Ivoire, Sudan, Haiti, Central African Republic,
and the numbers are rather stark, $45 million and $750 per
month for the soldiers as you point out, one-fifth of the
standing army. And I do believe, and correct me if I am wrong,
that that actually helps make them a better, not worse,
military force because of the humanitarian work they do.
But I remember when Mr. Jobbins testified on the Central
African Republic almost 2 years ago, pointed out to our
committee that the Burundi deployments were among the most
professional, if not the most professional that you saw, which
is a paradox. Is it the police that is really the problem, or
the military? If you two might want to elaborate on that.
Because I think I know what you are trying to get at, Mr.
McDonald, and it is a laudable goal to try to have some impact
on the government. But again I think those peacekeeping
operations might be harmed. I am not sure enough could be
raised up in any reasonable amount of time, but again they are
among the most professional, which is a paradox.
Secondly, on the issue of the first thousand days from
conception to the second birthday, the numbers are not really
coming down. And I am not sure with the big sign-up ceremony in
February 2013. In other places we have seen it--I was in
Guatemala the day the Guatemalan Government signed on to the
first thousand days program; with nutrition supplementation for
mother and baby, both unborn and newborn, the stunting does
come down. In Nigeria, \1/2\ million kids died before the age
of 2.
Preventable deaths like few places in the world, and we are
hoping--I raised it with President Buhari yesterday that this
should be a singular issue that he says, for the sake of the
children and the mothers, do you want to mitigate maternal
death and morbidity, make sure that there is enough proper
nutrition and supplementation for both mother and baby. And
again stunting does go away if this were to happen. So if you
could maybe elaborate a little bit on that issue, because I
think that is a cost-effective initiative that has got a lot of
rhetorical support but not a whole lot of implementation on the
ground.
And on faith leaders, my real focus is on the pastors, the
bishops, the archbishops, the people who I have found, and I
have been here 35 years and I remember in Central America it
was the church that played pivotal roles. Cardinal Obando y
Bravo in Nicaragua, I remember meeting with him when he was
under siege, frankly, but they tried to make peace. They tried
for human rights to speak truth to power.
And all over Africa, everywhere I go I meet with the faith
community, whether Muslim, Orthodox Christian, Roman Catholic,
Evangelical and others, Friends, and everywhere I go I find
they have that higher calling, as was mentioned, and they put
their lives on the line like few people that I know. Now there
could be politicians who brandish and wear their faith on their
sleeve, but I find that the clergy, they are in it for the
people and that is the way they serve God.
And I am just wondering if the U.S. Department of State and
USAID, because I have this argument with them all the time,
sufficiently understands the asset that they pose? We have been
pushing this in South Sudan to get the church more involved.
They are ready and willing. I have met with bishops, my staff,
Greg and Piero have, and they get put over to the side a little
bit. Have a prayer service at the beginning, but they are not
really integral parts of this whole process. So if you could
speak to that one as well.
Mr. Jobbins. Thank you so much. I think to the first
question about the role that the Burundian troops have played,
for example, in the Central African Republic, I said, as you
alluded to, several years ago, and it is still is the case that
they are playing a very positive role and are certainly
cooperating and contributing to protection in that country and
in, as far as I understand, a number of the other countries
where they are deployed.
I think what I would take away is that you get what you pay
for, and security sector reform and a focus on the army reform
was an organizing priority and we have seen relatively good
performance from the army. There was less of a focus on police
reform and less of a focus on justice sector and less of a
focus on a number of other elements of the security sector.
They have been the groups that have been the most criticized,
partially because they haven't been supported through this
process.
Second, on the question of nutrition, one of the real
achievements of the Nkurunziza's administration and the
Government of Burundi with its partners has been child
survival. It has been the healthcare extension. It has been
also a schooling extension to the rural population that is a
source of the popularity of the current government, or one of
the reasons that Steve alluded to. There is a lot more that
needs to be done fundamentally. For me the challenge is looking
at the optimistic scenario, if we are facing 40 percent
malnutrition in 2050, it is not how you get from 40 percent to
35 percent, but how do you create the environment for an
overall step change in the economy? Fundamentally we do need to
work on child survival and agricultural livelihoods, but also
how can you set a path for growth so you can get from 40
percent to zero percent? And that is going to be the big
political challenge.
Mr. Smith. On that issue, now I understand immunizations,
oral rehydration nutrition therapy, all the pillars of child
survival, but are they also doing the first thousand days of
life effectively? They signed on, it is just are they doing it?
Do you know?
Mr. Jobbins. For that I am not sure. I don't know the
details of all the programs. There are certainly programs
underway, but the details I don't know.
And I think the last is just on the question of the
religious community. We are supported to an extent for our work
with the religious community from the Department of State via
the CSO Bureau. Certainly there is always a need for more and
more support and particularly in other kinds of domains, but on
this immediate question of how can the religious community work
with their flocks and their followings to reinforce that
message of nonviolence, that component at least is being
supported at least to an extent by the Department of State.
But in terms of the broader engagement and the engagement
of the religious community as thought partners, I think
Museveni's meeting with the religious community as part of his
mediation process was a positive one. And certainly as we look
to see how that broader social compact could be reinforced
beyond the political question of who gets to lead Burundi, but
how can we try out a Burundi that people want, certainly the
Burundi faith community as well as the media as well as youth
groups and community leaders have to play a huge role in that.
And so hopefully we will see their political involvement going
forward as part of the solution.
Ms. Ndura. The Catholic Church has been one of the most
vocal and actively engaged faith groups in Burundi from the
beginning. In fact, Le Conseil des eveques, the Bishop's
Council was instrumental in leading Burundi to the Arusha
Accords in the 2,000 years and before that and they have been
very vocal. The only complication is that they have been very
vocal against President Nkurunziza's bid for the third term.
So now what I wonder is how would collaboration return,
because they do need each other. They need to work together.
Burundi is almost 60 percent or so Roman Catholic
approximately, a legacy of Belgium, so collaboration is a must
between the government and the Roman Catholic Church. I am not
clear yet how they will be able to renegotiate that.
But on a smaller scale, my colleague here keeps saying we
need to invest more, we need to invest more. George Mason
University has had initiatives working to build the youth
capacity for peaceful engagement, and we have been doing the
work and the collaboration with the Archdiocese, Gitega
Archdiocese Office of Education Supervision. And they keep
saying we have more ideas, we need to do more work, we need to
do more work. But we have yet to generate any kind of financial
support that would help us to strengthen and expand the work
that they have been doing.
University of Ngozi, also in Burundi, which is interethnic,
multifaith, and international, a private institution run by a
Catholic priest, is also one of George Mason University's
partners. And through our work and collaboration in March,
particularly this past March, they were able to organize a
youth interfaith festival, therefore enhancing the
consciousness of members of different faiths within the
university community and beyond to work individually and
collectively to promote nonviolence and peace in Burundi. So
the faith communities are engaged, but as Mike keeps saying and
reminding us, we cannot do the work we need to do without
adequate financial support. Our energy can only go so far.
Mr. Smith. Before you answer, Ms. Wilson, because you might
want to incorporate this, on Monday, the Department of State
will announce their TIP ratings for human trafficking. And for
the record, I wrote that law. It is called the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act of 2000. I wrote 2003's and 2005's
expansions and reauthorization.
Burundi has a Tier 2 Watch List ranking. And their
recommendations--I don't know what it will be Monday, but it
might drop to Tier 3, which means a country is an egregious
violator. Finalizing a draft legislation on trafficking is one
of the recommendations that was made. There were a number of
recommendations made by State. What is your sense about the
trafficking situation in Burundi today? Because again, Tier 2
Watch List, child sex trafficking, forced labor on plantations,
it is a huge problem and I am wondering if the government is
doing enough on that, as you go and answer the other questions
as well.
Ms. Wilson. I cannot answer that question, but it is
something that I will ask some of our colleagues about. And
just a small footnote to say that I mentioned time to start
planning now for the long-term engagement, because it is hard
when you are in the middle of a crisis to think about what is
going to happen at the end of a crisis, just as the faith
community, as it is consulted by Museveni and others, should be
consulted as the U.S. plans for that future part with State,
with USAID and others.
Mr. McDonald. On the faith leaders issue let me add just
one little thing. And that is, in the work that Howard Wolpe
and I were involved in and those years that we were involved
with a cross section of leadership, we were sure to include the
Archbishop of Burundi, several of the provincial archbishops,
and Pentecostal and Protestant leaders as well. It is important
not just to support the faith-based community and what they do
with their flocks, but to be sure they are part of the national
dialogue as you begin to build any kind of mediation effort or
whatever.
Mr. Smith. Is State doing that now?
Mr. McDonald. Not that I know of.
Ms. Ndura. And sex trafficking, human trafficking, I have
not presently collected any data on that but I have witnessed,
as I travel a lot in Burundi, it all goes down to poverty.
Poverty. People will do whatever they have to do to find food
and to find shelter. I guess you realize we have the same
problems here in the United States. In the most poor
communities that is where we have the greatest problems,
relevant problems. That is why I keep going back to the need to
intentionally invest in the youth in order to impact any of
these problems positively.
Mr. Jobbins. And I think just to complement on the TIP
issue--and thank you so much for your leadership on that and
putting protection of vulnerable groups at the forefront of
U.S. engagement--we, certainly on the regional sex trafficking,
we have certainly heard reports, the extent, I don't think, is
documented.
And I think one of the biggest questions both in terms of
assistance to the Burundian side, as well as for international
groups is understanding the extent to which these very real
phenomena are there, but what I can say is that it is almost
certain to increase. With one of the highest rates of
urbanization in the world you have young, poor migrants moving
into cities and to vulnerable situations and increases in
street children and other kinds of people living at the margins
of society, and so it is very foreseeable that child
exploitation, the sexual exploitation of these vulnerable
groups is going to increase both in the urban areas as well as
many of the reports that we also hear about the artisanal
mining communities, where it is not a huge trade in the region
but there are artisanal mining activities, and we hear worrying
reports about child protection and vulnerable group protection
there. So it is certainly a very, very real risk and it is
something that needs to be focused on as we focus on these
broader issues, how do we really protect that vulnerable group?
Mr. Smith. Mr. McDonald.
Mr. McDonald. Well, I will leave the trafficking, because I
don't have any statistical evidential thing to put forward on
that except in just all of my years of being involved I have
seen the trends that are being spoken about by Mike and Elavie,
and including in young women and prostitution, Burundians both
in DRC and other neighboring countries, so they get there
somehow.
On the peacekeeping question that you asked, let me add
something there. There is a difference between the police and
the military, the army, in terms of how they have responded and
how they see their national mission, in my mind. In the work
that Wolpe and I did with the military and the integration of
the military armed forces, which lasted over a period of about
2\1/2\ years with repeated workshops and ongoing efforts at
creating a sense of interdependence and trust building, et
cetera, none of that was ever done with the police.
Police certainly got technical training from the Belgians
and the French and others, but the police of course were
transitioning from a gendarmerie to national police situation,
old Belgium style, French style gendarmerie, in which sort of
the role of them in terms of servants of the people and et
cetera just is not quite understood. I think their sense of
mission is very different than what the professional army has
developed over these years, and that is why the army has
performed so very well in its peacekeeping missions abroad.
Now the individual soldiers who have been involved in those
peacekeeping missions have been rotated. We are not talking
about 7,200 troops stationed over there permanently. So this
permeates the army and they are very proud of the
professionalism and the reputation they have gained and et
cetera, so this is really something to build on. Although the
numbers that are abroad at any given time are one-fifth of the
armed forces, the entirety of the armed forces have been
involved in one way or another in this whole peacekeeping
process. And so it really is a point of national pride for them
and we should keep that in mind.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very, very much for your testimonies,
your expert guidance. Anything you think we have missed that
you would like to add to the record and give us guidance on
would be deeply appreciated. But thank you for your time, your
expertise, your commitment. It really does make all the
difference in the world. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:39 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
