- ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS: EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS: EXAMINING THE
PRESIDENT'S FY 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR
AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-183

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-946PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2016

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

----------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

MATT SALMON, Arizona Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Richard Olson, U.S. Special Representative for
Afghanistan and Pakistan, U.S. Department of State.............     9
Mr. Donald L. Sampler, Jr., Assistant to the Administrator,
Office of Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    21

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Richard Olson: Prepared statement..................    11
Mr. Donald L. Sampler, Jr.: Prepared statement...................    23

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    46
Hearing minutes..................................................    47
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Rhode Island: Prepared statement..................    48
Written responses from the Honorable Richard Olson to questions
submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa.................................    49
The Honorable David A. Trott, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Michigan........................................    52

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS: EXAMINING THE
PRESIDENT'S FY 2017 BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 27, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa and

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m.,
in room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the Subcommittee on Middle East and North
Africa) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself, Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member
Deutch, and Ranking Member Sherman for 5 minutes each for our
opening statements, I will then recognize other members seeking
recognition for 1 minute. We will then hear from our witnesses.
Thank you for being here today.
Without objection, the witnesses' prepared statements will
be made a part of the record, and members may have 5 days to
insert statements and questions for the record subject to the
length limitation in the rules.
Before we begin, I would like to express my deepest
condolences to the families and friends of those killed by the
Taliban last week in Kabul, a terrorist attack which claimed
the lives of 64 people and wounded more than 370 others. I know
I speak on behalf of Chairman Salmon and all members here today
when I say we condemn this attack and all terrorist attacks in
the strongest possible manner.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
This hearing represents an important opportunity for both
of our subcommittees, allowing members to provide appropriate
and necessary oversight of the President's budget request for
Afghanistan and Pakistan, each of which fall under our
different subcommittee's jurisdictions.
This year the President is requesting approximately $1.2
billion for Afghanistan and about $742 million for Pakistan in
the foreign aid budget. For comparison's sake, the combined
request for these countries is about 77 percent of the overall
request for the South and Central Asia region, and about 4
percent of the entire foreign affairs request for this year. It
is critical that Congress understands exactly where this money
is going and whether we are getting a good return on our
investment, and assesses how we can ensure that these funds are
helping achieve U.S. interests in the most effective way
possible.
When I led a CODEL to Afghanistan in November 2015, I was
struck by the positive changes that President Ghani and CEO
Abdullah had made since former President Karzai stepped down.
Despite their differences, every official we met with said that
Ghani and Abdullah are a vast improvement over Karzai, and that
they have proven to be partners who are willing and able to
cooperate with the United States, while taking steps to root
out corruption and stabilize their country. But last week's
terrorist attack in Kabul is a sobering reminder of the
challenges that Afghanistan continues to face from the Taliban
and other terrorist groups.
While Afghan security forces have had some success since
taking the lead last year, the Taliban is resurgent in
Afghanistan and is responsible for most of last year's 5,500-
plus military casualties and 10,000-plus killed or wounded
civilians. The Taliban is adapting to the Afghan military's
tactics, moving into new territory as it gets pushed out of
others, and using terrorism to inflict the kind of mass
violence that we saw in Kabul. The Taliban is also adapting to
our restrictive rules of engagement, understanding the
extremely limited situations when the U.S. actually does
provide air support to the Afghan security forces, and
adjusting their tactics accordingly.
When I was in Afghanistan in November, our troops did not
have the authority to target ISIS, allowing it to grow in
strength and numbers before the President finally authorized
ISIS as a target earlier this year. The President needs to
allow U.S. forces to target the Taliban as well, and I urge the
administration to provide the Afghan security forces with the
close air support and surveillance assistance they so
desperately need.
It is extremely difficult to negotiate with an enemy who
sees its position constantly improving. And as President Ghani
said yesterday, the Taliban operates freely because Pakistan
refuses to take action against it inside its borders. Pakistan
is a direct contributor to the Taliban's success, not only
allowing them to use Pakistani territory as a safe haven, but
providing it support inside Afghanistan's borders. It makes
little sense to continue giving Pakistan billions of dollars if
it is going to continue to work against our interests.
We must leverage our aid to Pakistan so that it is a better
regional partner with Afghanistan, and also helps us to root
out terrorists within its borders. That includes stopping the
sale of F-16s that Pakistan does not need and will probably not
use in its supposed fight against terrorism. We should instead
be prioritizing assistance for Afghanistan which, in addition
to its security needs, continues to struggle with an enormous
budget deficit, an economy almost entirely reliant on donor
aid, and rampant and widespread corruption.
With corruption still a significant issue, I continue to be
concerned by our provision of on-budget assistance, and
question whether our aid is getting to the right places.
Afghanistan has said it needs about $10 billion donated each
year until 2025 before it is self-sufficient. And I fear what
will happen to Afghanistan's economy once the donor fatigue
that has already set in gets worse.
In addition, not enough attention is being paid to
counternarcotics efforts in Afghanistan, which already accounts
for 90 percent of the world's heroin. And I am concerned that
the administration's decision to draw down resources in this
area will allow a boom in poppy production, if it hasn't
already.
When I was in Afghanistan, the commanders on the ground
told us that they do not have the authority to carry out
counternarcotics operations. And while DEA's presence has been
substantially reduced, INL's footprint is also restricted due
to the reduced DOD presence. The Afghan military does not have
the resources to focus on counternarcotics while it is
concentrated on fighting the Taliban.
So with all that said, the question is who is going to
cover counternarcotics operations? With the Afghan
counternarcotics chief declaring that no eradication will occur
in the Helmand Province this year due to the Taliban's
presence, the drug trade is poised to expand even more, fueling
both the Taliban's operations and Afghanistan's massive
addiction problem. In all of these areas we need to be giving
the Afghan Government a chance to succeed, supporting it
politically and providing it with the right kinds of security
assistance, while helping bolster its economy and redoubling
our counternarcotics efforts.
Afghanistan is an important ally in an important region of
the world, and its security, its stability, and its success are
critical for U.S. interests. We must remain engaged for the
long term.
I am honored to now recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Deutch, for his opening statement.
Mr. Deutch. Well, I thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen and
Chairman Salmon, for holding today's hearing to examine the
President's budget request for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Thanks to my fellow ranking member Mr. Sherman for his
longstanding and thoughtful leadership in this region of the
world.
And welcome to our esteemed witnesses.
For a decade and a half, U.S. troops, along with our
international coalition partners, have been on the ground in
Afghanistan. After so many years, after so many tragic losses,
the American public is understandably weary of continued
engagement.
When President Obama announced his intention to draw down
troops, many welcomed the end of significant American troop
presence in Afghanistan, while others worry that the withdrawal
would end the significant gains made in development and leave
the fledgling Afghan national defense and security force unable
to defend its country from terrorists.
I am extremely sensitive to the idea of long-term troop
engagement in Afghanistan. And I want our men and women home
safe. But I believe that the President's decision last year to
maintain 9,800 troops through the end of the year was correct.
The administration must evaluate strategic decisions based on
conditions on the ground, not on a preset timetable. And with
the rise of ISIS, which has made clear its intent to attack
Western targets, we cannot allow Afghanistan to revert to a
breeding ground for terrorists.
The United States has committed over $100 billion since
ousting the Taliban from Afghanistan. After years of corruption
under and difficult cooperation from the Karzai government, we
were hopeful that the 2014 transition of power would bring
renewed leadership. Secretary Kerry's brokered National Unity
Government between President Ghani and CEO Abdullah brought a
renewed hope for real reform. And while I believe that both
President Ghani and CEO Abdullah want to see their reform
agenda succeed, they have been hampered by disagreements among
their political backers.
So how can the U.S. best support these reform efforts? For
our aid dollars to be effective, we need a country strategy
that supports the vision of the unity government, both in
development goals and in security. We need to see gains in
long-term sustainable projects. We have made impactful gains in
areas like women's access to education and healthcare, but we
need to see economic gains that will help Afghanistan become
self-sufficient.
This is a country that is dependent on foreign aid for 95
percent of its GDP. How can we continue progress toward
creating jobs, rooting out corruption, creating an independent
fully functioning judiciary, while we enter what could be a
very difficult fighting season?
Since the Taliban's incursion into Kunduz last year, the
attacks have continued. Fighting in Helmand continued, even
throughout the normally quieter winter. The large-scale attack
in Kabul last week was a tragic remainder of the past where
truck bombings in the city were heard all too frequently. And
as we enter the spring fighting season, it is now more
important than ever that Afghan troops are prepared.
The continued U.S. role of training, advising, and
equipping will be critical. Afghan forces have shown that they
can have the capability to defend and hold territory. They are
not the Iraqi military. They have not had an experience of
cutting and running. And while there is still a long way to go
to professionalize the Afghan security force, rooting out
corruption, addressing severe allegations of sexual abuse, and
making sure that soldiers are getting adequate leave and pay, I
don't believe that now is the time to abandon our support for
these forces.
At the same time, we have to continue to encourage
reconciliation talks. President Ghani has used a tremendous
amount of political capital reaching out to Pakistan in hopes
of securing cooperation on the Taliban. Yet Ghani has found
himself burned time and time again. In a surprising change of
tone this week, Ghani stated that if Pakistan does not increase
cooperation on preventing cross-border attacks, he may seek
referral to the United Nations Security Council. And we are a
long way from reconvening reconciliation talks, and there are
many steps that need to be taken before those talks can begin.
If Pakistan wants to be a helpful partner, it must take
real and actionable steps to combat all terrorism. Receiving
$742 million must yield greater cooperation on what should be
mutual regional security concerns. Pakistansecurity forces must
treat all terrorist groups equally, not choose to turn a blind
eye to some.
The conditions set forth in Kerry-Lugar-Berman in 2010 have
only been met once. They have been continually waived on the
basis of national security, but we have an opportunity here to
seriously consider how to incentivize better cooperation. And I
must say that I share the concerns of leadership of this
committee about Pakistan's bid to buy F-16s with American
financing.
As we go forward in both Afghanistan and Pakistan and our
aid dollars decrease, we need to be sure that what we are doing
is sustainable. We need to be funding the priorities of the
host country, but also ensure that the host country has a
vested interest in seeing projects succeed. And USAID must take
the lead in prioritizing those projects.
As the number of U.S. personnel in Afghanistan decreases,
we must have a clear plan how to remotely monitor existing and
continuing projects. And I hope today we can hear more as to
whether those efforts have been working and how we can improve
on them.
We have spent a tremendous amount of blood and treasure in
Afghanistan, and as we continue to pour billions of dollars
into the region, we have to have a clear strategy that can
adapt to the kinetic security situation on the ground. We owe
it to the men and women who have given their lives to protect
the security of this country and to the future of the Afghan
people.
And I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Amen. Thank you so much, Mr. Deutch.
I now would like to yield to the other subcommittee
chairman, Mr. Salmon, for his opening remarks.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you, Chairwoman Ros-Lehtinen, for working
with me to convene this important joint subcommittee hearing on
U.S. foreign assistance to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
As we all know, Afghanistan and Pakistan make up one of the
most complex foreign policy and security challenges we have.
Subsequently, they are one of the largest recipients of U.S.
foreign assistance. But even after the billions of dollars we
have spent following the 9/11 attacks, I still have serious
concerns about the administration's strategy for the region,
about the effectiveness and efficiency of our aid programs, and
about our partner governments' alignment with our interests and
values.
As chairman on the subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, I
will focus my attention and my remarks on Pakistan, which
presents a number of difficulties for our foreign assistance
partnership.
Conduct by the Pakistani Government raises serious doubts
about the country's trustworthiness as a partner for peace and
change in the region. And too often they seem to do the bare
minimum to keep the money flowing without committing to any
real change. Today, I look forward to hearing from our
administration witnesses about the value of our programs in the
region, and their strategies for meaningful and lasting
improvements.
One area of concern in Pakistan is foreign military
financing, FMF. It has been a contentious topic in Congress
recently, especially with the administration's recent attempt
to subsidize, with taxpayer dollars, the sale of F-16s to
Pakistan. Fortunately, an effort paused by the Senate. Many
Members of Congress, including me, seriously question the
judgment and timing of such a sale.
Additionally, India/Pakistan tensions remain elevated, and
some question whether the F-16s could ultimately be used
against India or other regional powers, rather than the
terrorists, as Pakistan has asserted. I would ask the panel to
clarify the underlying purpose and timing of the intended sale,
and how is it in the best interests of the United States?
Despite giving Pakistan enormous amounts of counterterror
assistance over the years, over $25 billion since 9/11,
terrorist organizations continue to operate with impunity in
Pakistan. Pakistan has used terror as a tool of statecraft and
terrorist proxy groups where the Pakistani military have
carried out fatal attacks inside India. The Pakistani Taliban
is showing signs of unification. Pakistan argues that this may
work to its advantage, but the United States maintains that
this is detrimental to regional security efforts.
This is just one example of how Pakistan's priorities and
values regarding terrorist groups are seriously misaligned with
our own.
In another instance of our priorities not aligning, the
Pakistanis are holding Dr. Afridi, who aided the United States
in finding and eliminating bin Laden, on dubious charges. Like
many of my colleagues, I am deeply disappointed we have not
been able to find a solution to his imprisonment. I look
forward to hearing the panel's comments on these issues.
USAID has prioritized health and education programs in
Pakistan. An example of the challenges that exist was
demonstrated just last week when the police escorts of
healthcare workers distributing vaccines were killed.
Afghanistan and Pakistan are the only places in the world with
an ongoing polio endemic. And according to Pakistan's own
press, upwards of 45 percent of Pakistanis are intellectually
stunted due to malnutrition. While that number is distressing
in and of itself, it also has the potential to add to the
region's instability and should remain a top priority for our
aid efforts.
After spending billions in U.S aid in Afghanistan and
Pakistan, it is important to ask, exactly how much leverage has
our investment really bought us? Are we undermining our own
security interests by supporting a military that props up
terrorists? Have we bolstered the wrong leaders, complicating
meaningful reform efforts?
We have not always focused on this carrot approach to aid
in Pakistan. In the 1990s, we tried the stick approach with
sanctions which were largely ineffective at curbing Pakistan's
nuclear programs. But the stick approach after 9/11 did work,
at least for a time, resulting in the capture of some notorious
terrorists.
I am concerned that our current strategy lacks resolve and
clarity, and as a result, taxpayer dollars are not being used
in a way that furthers our national security interests and
protects our citizens.
I look to our panel's testimony in justification for both
the nearly $2 billion in funding this year and the strategy for
these relationships going forward.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to recognize the gentleman in the audience
who is the Afghan Ambassador to the United States. And we
welcome you here today, sir. Thank you.
I now would like to turn to our other ranking member, Mr.
Sherman, for his opening statement.
Mr. Sherman. I thank the chairwoman and the chairman for
holding these hearings.
With the tragedy of September 11th, we understood that
Afghanistan can have a profound effect on the United States. We
have lost 2,300 service members killed, over 20,000 wounded. We
spent $100 million in foreign assistance, and our total costs
have exceeded $1 trillion, including our military costs.
Pakistan is a nation of 180 million people with a history of
terrorist activities, roughly 100 nuclear weapons, and a very
confused body politic.
The administration's requested $740 million in assistance
for Pakistan, more than $265 million of this is for military
assistance. As noted by the chairman of the Asia subcommittee,
we have got to be concerned what military assistance and
whether the F-16s constitute the least expensive, most
efficient way for the Pakistani Air Force to go after the
terrorists, and the least disruptive weapon system to the
balance of power between India and Pakistan. We need to offer
to Pakistan those weapon systems well crafted to go after
terrorists and not crafted for a war with India.
I join also the chairman of our subcommittee on the
importance of Dr. Afridi, and would not be surprised if
Congress made a big portion of this aid contingent upon the
release of Dr. Afridi and his family.
One question I hope the gentlemen answer for us
historically, and that is, why we did not install in Kabul a
government acceptable to Islamabad back 15 years ago, or
whether there are elements in the Pakistani military who look
at the pushed-on population of both countries and have reached
the conclusion that they want a weak and divided Afghanistan,
under any circumstances, as a matter of Pakistani national
unity and national security.
Many Americans wonder why we are still involved in
Afghanistan. Many say why don't we just turn our back on the
greater Middle East? I should point out that we were under-
involved and under-responded when our Embassy was bombed in
East Africa, both Embassies. We under-responded when the U.S.
Cole was hit in Yemen, and then we faced 9/11. We can and did
and may again ignore the Middle East, but the Middle East will
not ignore us.
The way for a terrorist organization to hit the--to be in
the vanguard of some mythical world conflagration is to attack
the United States. We have to win over the people of the Muslim
world, and in order to do that, we need to speak their
language. That is why many on this committee have heard me talk
of the importance of broadcasting in the Sindh language of
southern Pakistan, and in the other languages where for $1
million, $2 million a year we can reach out to huge segments of
the Pakistani population.
But not only the linguistic language, but the language of
Islam must be understood by our State Department. I worry that
for every--that there is a lot more understanding of Metternich
and the European power moves and diplomacy of the 1800s in the
State Department than there is of the Koran.
We will never pronounce the words of the Sindhi language
without an accent. We will never be the last word in Islamic
interpretation. But the fact that we don't have a half a
dozen--we don't have anyone in the State Department whois paid,
not to issue a fatwa, but to read one and to understand the
subtle allusions to particular events in the life of the
prophet indicates that we don't speak their language, aren't
learning their language, and are not in a good position to win
what will be a continuing effort against certain elements in
Islam.
Finally, on human rights, the brother of a dear friend of
mine, Anwar Leghari was assassinated in Sindh. Other Sindhi
activists, including Kausar Ansari, have been detained. And it
is important that we speak out for human rights, the rights of
religious minorities in Pakistan. The VOA is asking us for
another $16 million, yet they have not detailed how they are
going to reach out to the Muslim world in the various different
languages that they should be communicating in.
And my time has expired. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Ranking Member
Sherman.
And now we would like to turn to Mr. Rohrabacher for his
opening statement.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman. I am
very upset today, more than normally. There it is. The fact
is----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Drinking a lot of Red Bull?
Mr. Rohrabacher. And I am sorry if I--and I will try to
contain myself.
The State Department and this administration has again
decided to slap the face of a person who we rely upon to defeat
radical Islamic terrorism. The administration has again
targeted a prominent enemy of radical Islamic terrorism in
order to humiliate to his own people. I am talking about this
administration's denial of a right to the Vice President, the
Senior Vice President of Afghanistan, to come here and talk to
the Congress. This is a slap in the face to the Congress as
well.
Who is going to trust us to be on our side in the fight
against radical Islamic terrorism if we treat those people who
are allies in this way? Yes, he is an imperfect person. The
fact is that he is fighting--that Vice President Dostum of
Afghanistan happens to have been essential in the defeat of
Taliban and al-Qaeda forces after 9/11.
Shame on this administration for that. Shame on them for
slapping the face of other people trying to help us defeat the
radicals who would kill our own people.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, again, I thank the chairman and the ranking members
for this hearing. I look forward to the testimony of the
witnesses as well.
When you think about South Asia, the interconnected nature
obviously is very complicated, you know, between Afghanistan,
Pakistan, India, and increasingly China's presence in South
Asia as well. You know, I look forward to listening to the
witnesses.
As our mission changes in Afghanistan, you know, and as the
missionhas changed over the last decade, the reduction in
foreign troops and their presence really has left an economic
hole in Afghanistan. And as our mission changes, you know, I do
have real worries about Afghanistan's economy and the impact
there.
India has had a major presence in Afghanistan in terms of,
you know, pumping over $2 billion into major projects in
Afghanistan. The complexity of India's role in Afghanistan
posts our change in mission, you know, is going to be important
to weigh vis-a-vis Pakistan as well. So I look forward to
hearing that.
Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Dr. Bera.
Seeing no other requests for time, I will now introduce our
panelists.
First, we would like to welcome back the Honorable Richard
Olson, thank you, sir, who is the special representative for
Afghanistan and Pakistan at the U.S. Department of State.
Ambassador Olson previously served as the U.S. Ambassador to
Pakistan and the coordinating director for development and
economic affairs at the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan. Thank you,
sir.
And thank you also as we welcome back the Honorable Donald
L. Sampler, who is assistant to the administrator in the Office
of Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs, OAPA, at USAID. Mr.
Sampler previously served as senior deputy assistant to the
administrator in that agency, and he has traveled to
Afghanistan and Pakistan over 60 times since 2001 and lived in
Kabul for several years.
As I had said, your prepared statements will be made a part
of the record. Please feel free to summarize.
And we will begin with you, Mr. Olson.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD OLSON, U.S. SPECIAL
REPRESENTATIVE FOR AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Ros-Lehtinen, Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member
Deutch, Ranking Member Sherman, and members of both
subcommittees, thank you for inviting me to appear before you
today to discuss Fiscal Year 2017 foreign assistance priorities
for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
First and foremost, I want to commend the men and women of
the armed services, the foreign service, the development
agencies, and intelligence community stationed in Afghanistan
and Pakistan. I am honored and humbled to have served with them
in Kabul and Islamabad over the past 4 years.
My written testimony, which has been submitted for the
record, touches on many of the topics that I expect we will
discuss today, including updates on Afghanistan and Pakistan,
prospects for peace and reconciliation, and our budget
priorities.
With regard to Afghanistan, a great deal has been achieved
over the past 14 years. However, Afghanistan faces very real
and daunting challenges, challenges that affect our own
national security. Afghanistan will need our support as it
continues to strengthen its institutions and become
increasingly self-reliant. It is essential that we help prevent
it from ever again serving as a safe haven for international
terrorists that would threaten the United States.
This year, two vital international donor conferences aimed
at shoring up Afghanistan's security and development will take
place in Brussels and Warsaw. Robust U.S. and international
financial support and sustained diplomatic engagement are
critical to ensuring that the Afghan Government is able to
enact needed reforms, spur a stagnant economy, and consolidate
the gains made over the past 14 years.
Our relationship with Pakistan, a growing country with more
than 190 million people, a nuclear arsenal, terrorism
challenges, and a key role to play in the region will remain a
critical one. In Pakistan, we see the government in a concerted
and difficult fight against terror groups that threaten
Pakistanis. But, unfortunately, Pakistan does not take
equivalent steps against groups that threaten its neighbors.
Our core initiatives in Pakistan include promoting economic
growth, countering terrorism, fostering regional stability, and
promoting the consolidation of democratic institutions.
Let me emphasize. We have repeatedly and, frankly,
underscored with the most senior leaders of Pakistan that the
Haqqani Network must be part of their wider counterterrorism
operations in order to keep their commitment not to
discriminate between terrorist organizations. Effective
engagement with Pakistan is grounded in our national interest.
We have carefully calibrated our Fiscal Year 2017 budget
request, balancing global funding constraints and our interest
in stability in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Our overall combined
request is just under $2 billion, with $1.25 billion requested
for Afghanistan and $742 million for Pakistan. While this is a
14-percent reduction from the President's Fiscal Year 2016
request, and an approximate straight line from Fiscal Year 2015
enacted levels, these levels will enable us to stay engaged in
a critically important region, while also responsibly
rightsizing our commitments.
We believe we are on the right track to achieve our goals
in the region, but we fully recognize serious challenges
remain.
Thank you for the opportunity to address your
subcommittees. I look forward to our discussion today and
welcome any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Sampler.

STATEMENT OF MR. DONALD L. SAMPLER, JR., ASSISTANT TO THE
ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN AFFAIRS, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Sampler. You are very kind.
Chairwoman Ros-Lehtinen, Chairman Salmon, Ranking Members
Deutch and Sherman, and members of the subcommittees, thank you
for inviting me to discuss the administration's Fiscal Year
2017 budget request for the U.S. Agency for International
Development's assistance to Afghanistan and Pakistan. It is
again an honor to appear before you with Rick Olson, the
special representative.
I too will begin my testimony by recognizing the sacrifices
made by our sons and daughters and their families in the
military and in the civilian agencies who have served and
sometimes died in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Their tireless
efforts alongside those of our allies, as well as of our
Pakistan and Afghan brothers and sisters, make our work today
possible. I have also submitted written testimony for the
record that gives considerable detail about the work that USAID
has done and expects to continue. But in the interest of time,
I will summarize.
USAID's mission is to partner to end extreme poverty and
promote resilient Democratic societies, while advancing
America's own security and prosperity. I can think of no other
region in the world today where this mission is more relevant.
The President's Fiscal Year 2017 budget request for
Afghanistan and Pakistan reflects our Nation's efforts to
advance political stability and economic prosperity, which will
further strengthen and advance our peaceful partnerships with
both countries.
Over the past several years, with vital support from
Congress, we have taken firm steps to ensure that our
assistance in the region is more efficient, more effective, and
impactful. No one, least of all me, will say that our work in
these two complex countries is easy or without challenges.
Wracked with conflict and instability for much of the last
three decades, the region remains one of the least economically
integrated in the world, with the majority of its human capital
and economic potential still untapped.
Despite the challenges, on behalf of the American people,
we have accomplished a great deal. There is a growing
understanding and appreciation of our support in the
communities where USAID's programs have had an impact. USAID
has worked to increase awareness of our assistance, for
example, in Pakistan. Our most recent polling data showed that
an awareness of U.S. assistance among Pakistani citizens has
increased over the 3 years from 34 percent to 47 percent.
Whether it is a shop owner in Lahore, whose sales have
increased because of more reliable electricity, a result to
USAID's efforts to add over 2,300 megawatts of electricity to
the grid; or whether it is an Afghan seed provider who now,
because of USAID programs, is linked to specialty baking
industries around the world, millions of people in the region
have longer life spans, increased access to health and
education, improved economic opportunities and brighter futures
because of America's assistance in their countries.
Sustainable development will require the regions leaders to
make some hard and fundamental choices. Our assistance programs
act as catalysts and incentive to promote that change and are
delivering measurable results that contribute to this potential
transformation. The Fiscal Year 2017 request reflects our
continued push toward expanding progress that will build local
capacity in facilitating private sector growth, access to
essential social services, and transparent governance that, in
the long term, can undermine the support for insurgent groups
and help stabilize the region.
There are inherent risks in doing business in many parts of
the world where USAID operates. But USAID around the world
prioritizes the effective and accountable use of taxpayer
dollars. There is no acceptable level of fraud, waste, or abuse
in any of our programs. All of our projects receive proper
monitoring and oversight, and we adjust our efforts as
necessary to respond to dynamic security and operational
environments where we work.
In addition to standard oversight procedures and measures
implemented worldwide, specifically in Afghanistan and
Pakistan, our project managers rely on multiple data sources to
provide information on the progress and the effectiveness of
USAID activities. We triangulate this information to determine
whether adjustments to programming are required. We have also
taken specific measures to prevent funds from being diverted
from their development purpose to malign actors. Since 2011,
our vetting efforts in Afghanistan have kept over $660 million
from being awarded to organizations who did not meet our
vetting standards.
As USAID looks to 2017 and beyond, the agency is committed
to making every effort to ensure that our programs in
Afghanistan and Pakistan are sensible, sustainable, and
developmentally sound. And we will continue to support our
national security objectives in this complex but important part
of the world. It is an honor to be able to share with you today
a small glimpse of what USAID is doing in that regard.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sampler follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much to both of you.
Ambassador Olson, last week's terrorist attack in Kabul
highlighted the limits of our policy in Afghanistan, especially
our restricted rules of engagement. The Taliban is increasingly
using terrorism as a tool as it targets and adapts to the
Afghan military and coalition forces. But as General Campbell
testified in February, U.S. forces are not allowed to target
the Taliban in an offensive manner to get ahead of the attacks
like the ones we saw last week.
Can you explain why U.S. forces are not allowed to target
the Taliban? And is the administration discussing whether the
Taliban should be authorized for targeting in the future?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First of all, let me join you in robustly condemning the
attack of 19 April. These clearly undermine the efforts to make
peace in the region. And I would just add that we have pressed
the Government of Pakistan on its commitment not to
discriminate amongst terrorist groups. We believe there across
the region must be zero tolerance for safe havens.
With regard specifically to the question of combat
authorities, I think I would have to refer you to my colleagues
in the Department of Defense for a more detailed discussion of
what they are seeking and the state of deliberation on those
questions. But I would emphasize that the administration's
position, the President's position, is that our combat
operations in Afghanistan ended in December 2014. And so we
will continue to work on a policy on that basis.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
President Ghani made a good-faith effort to engage Pakistan
and enlist its assistance in eliminating the Taliban from
within Pakistan's borders. And yesterday, he called again on
the Pakistani military to eliminate this threat.
What are we doing to press Pakistan to take action against
the Taliban? And besides giving it safe haven, what kind of
support is Pakistan providing to the Taliban?
Mr. Olson. Madam Chair, I think that Pakistan is at a
strategic crossroads. We have made very clear at the highest
levels that we believe, first of all, that Pakistan has made
great progress over the past couple of years in addressing its
domestic counterterrorism priorities. That is to say, it has
taken robust action against those groups, principally the TTP,
the Pakistani Taliban, that threaten Pakistanis.
Their stated policy, which we agree with, is not to
discriminate amongst terrorist groups. We believe there is
considerable room for improvement in the application of that
policy on the ground. And we believe, in particular, that
Pakistan has not taken as vigorous action against groups that
threaten its neighbors as it has against those that threaten it
domestically. So Pakistan has also been very helpful in the
reconciliation process, but I do believe that there is a
strategic choice right now. With the Taliban having refused to
come to the table, it seems to us that it is time to address
more robustly the question of groups that threaten Afghanistan.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir. And I have two remaining
questions. One is about the F-16s sale to Pakistan. I think
that we need to leverage our military sales to Pakistan in
order to get some more cooperation within the region.
Can you please update us on the status of the F-16s sale,
and how would you describe our ability to leverage our aid to
Pakistan?
Mr. Olson. Madam Chair, the administration is supportive of
the F-16 sale to Pakistan. This has been developed between our
military coordinating groups over the course of time. It is
consistent with our overall program of support for the Pakistan
military, which is based on counterinsurgency and
counterterrorism.
The Pakistanis have developed a precision strike capability
that they use in the F-16s they have right now to take out
targets. As I mentioned before, these are principally the
Pakistani Taliban. But we think that that is a good thing.
The Pakistani Taliban has been involved in attacks against
Americans at FOB Chapman in Afghanistan in 2009, and indeed in
supporting the Times Square bomber. So we applaud the actions
that the Pakistanis have been taking against their domestic
terrorism threat, even as we call upon them to take more robust
action against those groups that threaten their neighbors.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And lastly, when I was in
Afghanistan last year, officials described the SIGAR report of
a $47-million gas station as inconsistent with their
understanding of the situation. What can you tell us about that
gas station, how much did it cost, what is the status of it? Do
they give free towels and detergent or anything good? Car wash?
Mr. Olson. Well, my understanding, Madam Chair, is that the
total number referred to several different projects, including
the rehabilitation of the Sheberghan gas fields, some of which
were funded through, I believe, through USAID, but much of
which was funded actually through the Department of Defense and
the TFBSO operations.
I was involved in this when I was in Afghanistan, and I
think we would have to get you a more detailed breakdown for a
response.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Deutch is recognized.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Madam Chairman.
It has been reported that refugees of Afghan origin
represent the second largest group of refugees trying to enter
Europe. Just a couple of questions there.
First, what are the numbers of refugees? And secondly,
howis the U.S. responding both politically and, Mr. Sampler,
programmatically as well?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Ranking Member Deutch. With regard to
numbers, I think I will have to get back to you on that. Our
understanding is that it accords with yours, that Afghans have
represented a significant number of refugees that have shown up
in Europe.
I think it is worth noting that our impression, and we
don't have hard numbers, but certainly our impression is that
many of them are actually coming from other countries than
Afghanistan. In other words, they are coming from countries
where they have been resident for some period of time. But that
is not to suggest that there aren't ultimately some Afghan
causes for this.
I think the downturn in the economy, the transition, the
economic transition that accompanied the security transition in
2014 is still being felt. We have been at a diplomatic level
very supportive of our European allies' approaches to the
Afghan Government to see if there are ways that we can assist.
The Europeans are seeking arrangements for the return of those
who don't qualify for refugee status, and we are supportive of
that.
And, of course, ultimately I think this highlights the
importance of continuing engagement on the development side
with Afghanistan to strengthen the Afghan economy so that it
can absorb the population coming on the market.
Mr. Deutch. But, Mr. Sampler, and then I have a followup,
please.
Mr. Sampler. Yeah, please. The--very specifically, $50
million in Fiscal Year 2015 in previous year money is allocated
specifically to helping the Afghans address this issue. I would
define the issue as having two components that they have to
address. The most fundamental, of course, is growing their
economy. If there is a silver lining in this issue, it is that
the pressure on the economy is being driven by 200,000 young
Afghans graduating from high school and entering the job force
every year. That is a positive thing, but only if there can be
jobs made available for them.
So this $50 million is intended to help grow the economy
through internship programs, which will allow some of these
students to move straight from high school into employment, as
well as the National Solidarity Programme that the Afghans
themselves have designed to generate employment and economic
growth across the country.
Second point I will make that they also have to address is
strategic communications. If young Afghans graduating from high
school now with critical thinking skills, access to the
Internet, and understanding that there is a bigger world out
there, which they didn't have in the past, that understanding,
that access, and that critical thinking is going to lead them
to make very hard decisions about do they stay or do they go.
So the Afghans must do a better job at messaging to their own
young age bulging population that there are prospects for you
to stay in Afghanistan.
Mr. Deutch. Well, if we don't--if we think that, Ambassador
Olson, that the significant number of those, the majority of
those are coming from other countries where they have lived,
are we--I guess again for both of you, if we have seen an
uptick, is it because they are looking at what is happening on
the ground in Afghanistan realizing that they are not going
back? And shouldn't there be a coordinated effort to address
this refugee issue, given the numbers and regardless of where
they are coming from, since they are ultimately all--they all
originated in the same place?
Mr. Olson. Well, if I may, Congressman, I think these are
excellent questions. And I think we are still in the process of
working with our European allies to identify what exactly the
nature of these movements are. I mean, obviously the immediate
response, and this is outside of our purview here, but has been
to be supportive of our European friends and allies. I know my
boss, Secretary Kerry, is extraordinarily focused on this
topic. But I think these questions probably do require a
greater degree of analysis and beyond the immediate sort of
crisis management we need to be thinking about how we can
respond.
Mr. Deutch. I couldn't agree more. And I would urge that
that analysis, to the extent that it is being done, be done as
quickly as possible and that you share it with the members of
this committee.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. You are welcome very much, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Salmon.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Pakistani Dr. Shakil Afridi assisted U.S. efforts in
tracking down Osama bin Laden, and later was jailed for 23
years for alleged links to terrorist groups. Congress has, in
the past, withheld aid to Pakistan to encourage the release of
Afridi. What progress has been made on the effort, and what
more can we do to aid this friend of the United States in his
freedom? Should we look for any other possible restrictions on
aid?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me say that we
share your sense of outrage with regard to the plight of Dr.
Afridi. I can assure you that we have raised this issue at the
very highest levels of our Government. It has been the subject
of very direct conversations. We have requested the release of
Dr. Afridi, and we continually request updates on his health
and his status.
So far, I have to say we have not--those result--those
approaches have not yielded any results, but we will continue
to raise them. There are already conditions, as you know, on
assistance. And we make the point to our Pakistani colleagues
that the very strong sentiment on Capitol Hill in particular,
which is completely shared by the administration.
Mr. Salmon. If they are listening today, I just want to
tell them for the record that as I talk to different members
about financial support, financial aid for Pakistan, it is the
single biggest impediment to members wanting to be supportive.
And if they are truly interested in furthering relations,
strong relations with us, I would really hope that they take a
second and a third and a fourth look at the incarceration of
this man and look to his expedited release.
One of the biggest drags on Pakistan's economy has long
been corruption. In Transparency International's 2015
Corruption Perception Index, Pakistan ranked 117 out of 168
countries. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was one of the world
leaders identified in the recently leaked Panama Papers. How is
the United States assisting Pakistan in reducing corruption,
and how do we ensure our own programs and activities do not
suffer because of corruption within Pakistan?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to the
question of the Panama Papers, we actually would not, the
administration would not have any comment on these allegations
that have surfaced. Globally, of course, we are in favor of
greater financial transparency. With regard to corruption
efforts in Pakistan, there have been, I think, an uptick in
anticorruption efforts, particularly in conjunction with some
of the military operations that have been taking place in the
settled areas of Pakistan. There was a strong anticorruption
drive in Karachi at the same time that there were operations to
round up miscreants.
These are primarily conducted by the National
Accountability Bureau, and, of course, as long as these
investigations are done in accordance with due process, the
U.S. Government is supportive, and we do have some links with
the National Accountability Bureau. I think I would probably
defer to my colleague, Larry, if he had anything to say on the
assistance piece.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, just to your specific question
about how do we ensure this doesn't affect our programming, our
programs are very aggressively monitored and overseen. We asked
our own inspector general, in fact, to create a hotline, and
there is now the equivalent of a 1-800 number in Pakistan that
implementing partners, suppliers, and even Pakistani citizens,
are encouraged to use. It was intended to use that hotline to
report on our own programming, but it has become much broader,
and this anticorruption hotline is actually quite popular in
Pakistan.
I am reasonably confident the programming we are doing is
not just safeguarding our own programs, but it is serving as an
example to the government and the governments within Pakistan
as well.
Mr. Salmon. Thanks. I am out of time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Salmon. Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I want to join with the ranking
member of the Asia Subcommittee and everyone else in Congress
in talking about Dr. Afridi. I think the Pakistanis understand
that you will give them the money whether they turn Afridi over
or not, but I hope you convey that Congress probably won't, and
next year, I would suggest Congress is much less likely to.
So what would happen if we simply didn't provide the aid
until Dr. Afridi and his family were released? We could
reprogram that money to other parts of the war on Islamic
extremist terrorism, and defend ourselves perhaps much more
effectively than aid through Pakistan. What would be the
Pakistani response if we cut all aid until Dr. Afridi was
released?
Mr. Olson. Well, Congressman, first of all, let me say that
your message has been received loud and clear, and we will
indeed convey it as we have conveyed it, to the Pakistanis on
Dr. Afridi. I would just respectfully suggest to you that our
assistance program is crafted to advance our national
interests.
Mr. Sherman. There are many things we could do with that
money that don't involve giving it to the people who are
holding Dr. Afridi. Your focus is Afghanistan and Pakistan.
There are things we could do in the war on terrorism outside
your jurisdiction that could perhaps do more to safeguard
America and its interests. And the Pakistanis shouldn't think
that we have unlimited resources so we might as well spend them
on anything that seems useful.
I want to shift to Sindh. Vice Chairman Kehar Ansari has
been kidnapped, arrested. He is the vice chairman of the
leading Sindh party. We have got assassinations that have not
been investigated, including Anwar Laghari, but also a host of
others, Mr. Raja Dahir, Mr. Samiullah Kalhoro, Mr. Sirai
Khuhawar, and Mr. Maqsood Qureshi. Is this something you are
bringing up in Islamabad or just leaving to the Karachi
Consulate?
Mr. Olson. Well, first of all, our Consulate in Karachi is
tracking this closely but with the full support of our Embassy
in Islamabad----
Mr. Sherman. Have you personally raised either Mr.
Laghari's case or Mr. Ansari's case? Well to how high a level
have you personally conveyed it to Pakistanis?
Mr. Olson. Yeah. The Laghari case we have raised at the
provincial level, and----
Mr. Sherman. So you personally haven't engaged with the top
officials in Islamabad on these issues?
Mr. Olson. No, sir, I have not engaged on them.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I want to go on to another question. The
administration routinely declined to certify that Pakistan is
cooperating with the United States in counterterrorism against
the Haqqani Network and others, and that it is not supporting
terrorist activities against the United States or coalition
forces in Afghanistan.
Why is the administration unwilling to make that
certification? And does it make sense to just waive that and
send them the money even if you can't make the certification?
Mr. Olson. Congressman, we believe that all of the
programs, again that we are talking about, are in our national
interests, and we have to balance the national security
interests of the United States and----
Mr. Sherman. But can you say that they are not cooperating
with the United States on counterterrorism and they are not
supporting terrorist activity? What are the facts that make it
impossible to make these certifications?
Mr. Olson. We have long had concerns about the fact that
despite Pakistan having a stated policy of not discriminating
between terrorist groups in the application of that policy,
they have, in fact, not moved against actors that threaten
their neighbors. And we have raised this with them very
directly, and we share the concerns that have been expressed
about the Haqqani Network and also about Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
Jaish-e-Mohammed, and other groups.
Mr. Sherman. My time is expired. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I don't want to cut you off if you have
another question.
Mr. Sherman. Madam Chairman, that would be a dangerous
precedent----
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay. You are right. All right. What was
I thinking? Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
Obviously from my opening 1 minute, I am very disturbed about a
major slap in the face to someone who is Vice President, Senior
Vice President of Afghanistan, who was instrumental in
defeating the Taliban and al-Qaeda forces shortly after 9/11,
and I just don't understand that. But it seems to be a pattern
in this administration where they go after the people who are
the most friendly to the United States and use a very soft
approach and conciliatory approach toward those who would
slaughter Americans by the thousands if they had a chance.
Let's go to Dr. Afridi and why we have to provide F-16s and
military equipment to a country, that Dr. Afridi's imprisonment
continues to be basically an act by the Pakistani Government to
basically thumb their nose at the United States and the people
of the United States.
Here is the man who permitted us with his activity to bring
to justice the criminal who slaughtered, the criminal terrorist
who helped slaughter, not helped but planned the slaughter of
3,000 Americans on 9/11, and here we can't grant a passport to
the man who helped defeat the radical Islamists in Afghanistan,
but we are going to give aid, continue to give aid to the
country that holds Dr. Afridi, the person who helped us defeat,
or bring to justice the man who murdered our people, that we
can't even demand that he be freed from the dungeons he is
being held in.
That makes no sense. Can you make some sense out of that
for me?
Mr. Olson. Thank you very much, Congressman. First of all,
with regard to the question of visas, privacy laws prohibit us
from commenting on the details of any particular consular
application, but I can tell you that First Vice President
Dostum is reported to have decided not to travel to the United
States in order to remain in Afghanistan to deal with the
security situation, especially in the----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You don't believe that he really decided
that on his own? I am happy to see that you are towing the
line. It is your job to be here and say that to us, but nobody
buys that.
I mean, the bottom line is we have slapped him in the face.
Let me just put it for the record, General Dostum, now Vice
President Dostum, was pivotal after 9/11 in organizing the
Northern Alliance. He put together a force that defeated the
Taliban. When his forces, by the way, removed the Taliban from
Kabul, there were only 200 American troops on the ground at
that time. That was a very hard-fought battle. He was in front
of the troops most of the time leading the way. This is a very
brave man and a very yes, flawed man, no doubt. We are all
flawed.
And what they are saying that he committed, the horrible
crime he committed was in Afghan tradition when someone
surrenders, they surrender and pledge not to try to overpower
their captors. The captors pledge not to kill the people they
have captured. That is so ingrained in the Afghans that
otherwise their whole history would be killing all the
prisoners.
After the Taliban forces were defeated in one of the first
major battles, General Dostum had hundreds of prisoners who had
surrendered. They were a holed up in a French fort. I happened
to have visited that fort. We had one CIA agent there trying to
figure out what was going on. And the prisoners broke their
pledge, broke the word, committed the atrocity of rising up
against their captors and murdered a number of General Dostum's
men, as well our own CIA agent. And yes after that, Dostum took
more lives to defeat, more lives to defeat, those forces who
were now in charge of that fort. And once they captured those
men again, he didn't know what to do with them. He put them
into container trucks and drove them off somewhere, and, yes,
they probably died a horrible death.
They made the decision to rise up against their captors.
They made the decision to kill an unarmed American CIA agent
who was there trying to get a figure about what was going on.
And for this administration to withhold a visa from him and
slap him in the face because of that, knowing that he helped
defeat the people who slaughtered 3,000 Americans, is insane.
And then we go to Pakistan, and they have Dr. Afridi in
jail. And the Pakistanis, we know, what do they use their own
weapons for? To kill the Baloch by the thousands and to attack
their neighbors by supporting terrorist incursions into India.
One last question. Okay. What more can Pakistan do that
would have us cut off the military aid? What other evil deeds
could they possibly do that would put us to the point where we
won't any longer give them the weapons they need to kill
innocent people and undercut the security of the region?
Mr. Olson. Congressman, with regard to Vice President
Dostum, we are certainly well aware of the historic role that
he has played, and let me assure you that we do treat the Vice
President, as the First Vice President of Afghanistan with all
the respect that his office carries. And we are in touch with
him at the appropriate level. As I say, I cannot comment on the
particulars of the status of the visa because of Privacy Act
considerations.
With regard to Pakistan, as I have said, I think Pakistan
is at a strategic crossroads, and I think it needs to make a
choice. It has been helpful to the United States and the
international community in trying to bring the Taliban to the
table for reconciliation talks, but the Taliban have rejected
that. And our view is that the Taliban need to face the
consequences of their decision. So it does seem to me that
Pakistan right now has some very serious challenges and
difficult decisions to make.
Mr. Rohrabacher. What about the Pakistanis suffering the
consequences of their decisions? No. We are just going to keep
the money flowing no matter what they do. It is debatable
whether or not they have encouraged the Taliban leaders that
you are talking about to actually go and try to do something or
whether they are financing the Taliban leaders with our money.
This is insanity. This administration has a--it is not just
this administration. This started when we forced Karzai down
the throats of the Afghan people, a man with no popular support
whatsoever, a man who has family deeply involved with various
criminal activities. We laid the groundwork before this
administration, and this administration continues this type of
insanity that is leading to many deaths by Americans throughout
this country.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you.
Dr. Bera is recognized.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am going to shift
toward my concerns about Afghanistan's economic development and
the need to maintain some sort of economic growth for
stability. We have invested billions of dollars obviously and
lost hundreds of lives in the last decade. I do support the
administration's current position in terms of maintaining a
troop presence to help complement the Afghan security forces
because obviously as we talk to multinational investors, Indian
companies, and others, one of their chief concerns is the
security risks in terms of making major investments in
Afghanistan.
I applaud the Indian company's investments in major
infrastructure projects, like the Salma Dam, and the concern I
have is how do we continue this economic growth? India, as the
major economy in South Asia, clearly has a role in helping
increase trade between India and Afghanistan. And I am
interested in, you know, kind of the perspective there.
Also, as the Afghanistan-Pakistan Trade Transit Agreement
kind of moves forward, I know India is very interested in also
participating in there for the movement of goods and services.
In Afghanistan's interests, I think Afghanistan is certainly
interested in making the flow of goods and services easier with
India. Obviously Pakistan has taken a very different position
in terms of the over-land transit of goods and services. And I
do think it is in our interests as the United States to push
Pakistan to be more open to a trilateral trade agreement that
makes India's participation available.
Mr. Sampler, maybe you want to start, or Mr. Olson?
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman Bera. Let me
first say, as you mentioned in your opening remarks, we greatly
appreciate the approximately $2 billion that India has invested
in Afghanistan in development assistance. I wanted to let you
know that I traveled to Delhi about a month ago myself and
briefed, along with General Nicholson joined me, and we briefed
on the situation in Afghanistan with regard to the security
situation, and also development, and reconciliation, Afghan
reconciliation.
I think that it would be particularly helpful, and we made
this point, to Indian Government officials if India were able
to participate in some of the development conferences that are
taking place later this year, especially the Brussels. The EU-
hosted Brussels Development Conference focused on the
development of Afghanistan, focusing on the years 2018 to 2020,
and I think the Indian Government is considering that right
now. In our view, it would be a useful way for them to get some
credit for what they are, in fact, already doing.
In terms of regional connectivity, absolutely the U.S.
Government favors, and the administration favors, everything we
can do to promote regional connectivity. As you note, APTTA has
so far been a bilateral agreement between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. We have been very focused on the implementation of
that agreement. There has been some discussion of extending
that to Tajikistan. I think that Pakistan has signalled that it
is not prepared to extend that to India at this point. But, of
course, we as a matter of policy favor regional connectivity
all across the region.
Mr. Bera. I would continue to encourage the administration
and the State Department to push for that regional
connectivity. Certainly through trade, through transit of goods
and services, you do have the opportunity to try to start
creating some interconnected economies, create some stability.
The big worry there is tensions between Pakistan and India, and
you have two nuclear-armed countries, two countries that have a
history of tension, but through economic development, through
trade, through transit of goods and services, you can create
some stability and connectivity. And, again, I would encourage
State to continue to push that agenda.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Dr. Bera. Mr. Weber of Texas.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, ma'am. This is going to be for Mr.
Olson. I guess we will start with you. And I had to step out,
so forgive me if this has been answered.
What is the funding gap between what the Afghan Government
raises on its own versus what it needs to operate? What other
countries are contributing to that Afghan Government in order
to close this gap? And what percentage does the U.S. have?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Congressman. I would say a rough
order of magnitude would be the Afghans raise about $2 billion
a year in terms of government revenues. This has actually been
improving of late. The Finance Minister has made it an
essential effort of his administration to improve revenue
collection, and he has won high marks from the IMF and the
international financial institutions generally for undertaking
that.
But as you correctly point out, there is a shortfall in
terms of what we are planning for for the Warsaw and Brussels
Conferences, the Warsaw NATO Conference and the EU Brussels
Development Conference. We think that funding the Afghan
National Security Forces will require about $4 billion a year
for----
Mr. Weber. The $2 billion they raise, is that for just
funding the Afghan forces?
Mr. Olson. The $2 billion they raise is revenues.
Mr. Weber. Total revenues?
Mr. Olson. Total revenues of all government operations, of
which they devote, I believe, about $500 million to the Afghan
National Security Forces. They devote another $200 million to
the National Directorate of Security, which also plays a
critical role in the defense of Afghanistan, and in their
accounting they would count that as a defense cost, so that is
about $700 million.
And then the remaining $1.3 billion, roughly somewhat less
than that, is what they use to fund the civilian, the
government. The shortfall, if we want to call it that, would be
on the military side, about $4 billion a year, and on the
civilian side, about $3 billion a year. So going into Warsaw
and Brussels, our position is that we would like the donors to
contribute at or near their current levels of funding to
accommodate the need to fund----
Mr. Weber. Who are those donors?
Mr. Olson. Principally for Warsaw, it is primarily NATO,
NATO allies, and some partners, including Japan, contributes
significantly to certain security measures, in addition to NATO
allies.
On the civilian development side, it is a combination of
obviously the international financial institutions, World Bank,
the IMF, but also the European Union is a very significant
donor. The EU and all the EU member states together probably at
or perhaps slightly exceed our contribution.
Mr. Weber. Which is what percentage?
Mr. Olson. It would be roughly, you know, in terms of the
targets, it would be about 1 billion each for the years going
forward, but I would have to get back to you with specific
percentages.
Mr. Weber. Get those for me if you would. There is some
discussion, an Afghan official said they need at least $10
billion in donated funds until 2025, at which time according to
this, Afghans expect to be self-sufficient. Is this predicated
on U.S. troops being there that whole time? And then
furthermore, there is discussion that Afghanistan's
counternarcotics chief said there would be no eradication
efforts in the Hellman Province, which is because of the
Taliban's presence, this is their major drug trafficking area,
and is that going to impact their ability to be self-sufficient
in 2025? Are U.S. troops going to have to be there until 2025?
Mr. Olson. Congressman, the President has been very clear
that we will have 9,800 troops through this fighting season and
a residual force of 5,500 by the beginning of next year. It
will, of course, be up to the incoming administration to make
decisions about future troop levels.
Mr. Weber. Fair enough. Just get that percentage to me if
you would, and I would also like the answer on if they are not
going to try to eradicate, I guess that would be the heroin
production, in that one province, why not, and what is that
going to do to us?
And Madam Chair, I will yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Weber. Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I would ask
unanimous consent to have my opening statement submitted.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you to our witnesses.
Ambassador Olson, with President Obama's October 2015 decision
to keep a larger U.S. military presence in Afghanistan for a
longer period of time, would you tell us what results, if any,
you have seen from this change in administration policy and
what your expectations are going forward?
Mr. Olson. Well, I think that the President's decision to
extend 9,800 troops through the fighting season, and maintain a
residual force of 5,500 has had a very stabilizing effect on
the region. I think there is a great concern on the part of
Afghans and in the region more broadly that the United States
would disengage from the region.
I think Mr. Sherman talked earlier in his opening remarks
about the legacy of the 1990s when the United States did
disengage, and that is I think one of the contributing factors
to the rise of the Taliban and ultimately to our own great
losses on September 11 of 2001. I think there is a great deal
of anxiety in the region about the potential of U.S. and NATO
departure, and so the President's decision to keep forces in
place I think has done a lot to assuage those concerns.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Would you also, I think this could be
principally Mr. Sampler, how is our assistance improving the
human rights situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan? We still
hear horrible stories of abuses, ranging from bacha bazi to
sexual abuse of young boys by some Afghan Security Forces, the
recruitment of child soldiers by the Taliban and physical
attacks on the women and religious minorities. Are any of our
programs really addressing the root causes of this kind of
violence and abuse? Are there things we should be doing
differently to more effectively reduce these horrific
situations?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, thank you for the question. At
the macro level, I would say that virtually all of our programs
are working to address the root causes of these issues because
all of our problems are working to advance Pakistan and
Afghanistan civil society to a level of self awareness and self
respect where this kind of behavior isn't tolerated. The United
States doesn't have the ability or the authority to go into
either of these countries and police this sort of inappropriate
and illegal behavior. What we have to do is build communities
and then institutions within the state that can on their own
and in an appropriate way police this sort of inappropriate
behavior.
There are two things I will talk about that actually I
think are having a direct impact. One is the connectivity,
particularly in Afghanistan, but also in Pakistan, where rural
women in particular now have access to cell phone technology
that they didn't have 10 years ago. This is partly just because
of the advances made and the decrease in price of cell
technology. But USAID is helping civil society learn to use
this technology in ways to integrate at-risk populations,
whether it be women or children.
The second point is our support of rule of law and making
sure that women and at-risk populations have both access to
rule of law and then an understanding and advocates who can
help them make use of those systems of rule of law.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Ambassador Olson, I want to turn
for a moment to Pakistan's blasphemy laws. As you well know,
these laws are widely used and have long been a source of deep
concerns to international rights organizations and others as
they sometimes are used to settle feuds, grab land, or
persecute religious minorities by making false allegations. It
seems impossible to change or repeal these laws, and, in fact,
the Governor of Punjab Province sought to make it more
difficult for false cases to be registered, and he was
assassinated by a bodyguard, a murder that was celebrated by
the public who was opposed to changing these laws.
Is there anything we can do? Are there any incremental
changes that can be made to these laws that would improve the
situation as this continues to be the source of some very
serious both human rights violations and rule of law
violations?
Mr. Olson. Thank you very much, Congressman. First of all,
just I would provide a little bit of an update. As you may have
read, the man who killed Governor Taseer was recently executed
by the Pakistani authorities. The Supreme Court upheld the
death penalty in the case of Qadri, and I think this was seen
as a, widely interpreted in Pakistan, as a signal of resolute
opposition obviously to vigilantism and to those who would take
the law into their own hands. There were protests, but the
protests at the execution of Qadri, but they have not been
successful.
I think it illustrates the divide in Pakistan. There are a
lot of people in Pakistan who see things the way we do and
share your concern. I think that they are feeling a bit more
emboldened now by some of the actions by the Pakistani Supreme
Court to limit the abuse of blasphemy laws and to also extend
fuller protection of law to religious minorities. So this is
very much a work in progress, but I think there are a lot of
people who think of these things the way we do, and I think we
need to do everything possible to encourage them as we do.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Perry of
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Madam Chair. Ambassador Olson, to
what extent is Iran a player in Afghanistan affairs? If you can
inform us on the policy tools that Tehran employs to further
its goals in Afghanistan and elucidate those goals in
particular, what their presence is in Iran, and whether they
supply assistance or support for the insurgent groups in
Afghanistan and to what extent?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Congressman Perry. Iran has by and
large played a constructive goal with regard to Afghanistan,
and we would encourage them to continue to play a constructive
role. There have been some press indications that because of
their concern about the emergence of Daesh in Afghanistan, they
may be tempted to support the Taliban against Daesh. We think
that would be a mistake, and we would encourage the Iranians to
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan, which, of
course, is taking action against both Daesh, ISIS, and the
Taliban.
Mr. Perry. So then is it kind of your feeling or your
testimony that they don't supply assistance to insurgent
groups, or do they? Maybe you need to define or I need to
define what we would consider an insurgent group in the context
of that discussion, that question.
Mr. Olson. Congressman, there have been some press reports
suggesting that they are thinking about supporting the Taliban
against Daesh. We think that that would be counterproductive
and mistaken.
Mr. Perry. Do you consider the Taliban an insurgent group?
Mr. Olson. Yes, I would consider it an insurgent group,
yes.
Mr. Perry. Are you saying right now that they are not
supporting the Taliban but just considering it?
Mr. Olson. I think this is a subject that would probably
require us to be in a different setting to really have a
thorough discussion of this topic, but I would just say as a
matter of policy, we would encourage the Iranians to focus
their energies on supporting the Government of Afghanistan.
More broadly, I think what we would want to see from the
neighbors of Afghanistan in general is three things: Its
support for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Afghanistan and the idea that there will be no restoration of
the Islamic emirate of Afghanistan, that is the Taliban, but a
recognition, of course, of the Islamic nature of Afghanistan;
and, thirdly, the idea that the only way and the best way to
resolve conflicts in Afghanistan is through negotiation and the
peace process.
Mr. Perry. So how actively are you monitoring their
conversations with the Taliban or would-be conversations? Are
they having conversations, and are they materially supplying
currently, or is that stuff that you cannot discuss in this
forum?
Mr. Olson. I really cannot discuss it in this forum, sir.
Mr. Perry. All right. I got it. Moving on quickly. The
President, Ashraf Ghani, recently threatened to file a
complaint with the U.N. Security Council if Pakistan failed to
take military action against Taliban leaders operating within
Pakistan. The question is, what is Pakistan doing to pressure
the Afghan Taliban to come to the negotiating table, and how
has Pakistan used its influenced with the Afghan Taliban to
bring a reduction in violence to Afghanistan? And have we
specifically asked Pakistan to do this with regard to exerting
its influence on the Afghan Taliban?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Congressman. Pakistan has actually
been a good partner to Afghanistan and to us in the search for
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process. We have
been partners in the so-called quadrilateral process, which
involves the United States, China, Afghanistan, and Pakistan,
which has called for several times direct, face-to-face
negotiations between the Taliban and the Afghan Government in a
publicly acknowledged process.
Unfortunately, the Taliban have refused to come to the
table, so it is our view that they should face the consequences
of that decision. We have long expressed our concerns to the
Pakistanis about their reluctance to go after terrorists that
threaten their neighbors with the same degree of assiduousness
that they go after their own terrorists, and we think that they
are at a moment of needing to make a very strategic and
fundamental choice.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. We thank you for an
excellent record of public service on behalf of our country.
Thank you so much. We look forward to getting your answers to
some of the members' questions in writing.
Thank you, gentlemen. And with that, the subcommittees are
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:37 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
