- JORDAN: A KEY U.S. PARTNER

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JORDAN: A KEY U.S. PARTNER

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-157

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-604PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     7
Ms. Paige Alexander, Assistant Administrator, Bureau for the
Middle East, U.S. Agency for International Development.........    15
Ms. Fatema Z. Sumar, Regional Deputy Vice President, Europe,
Asia, the Pacific and Latin America, Department of Compact
Operations, Millennium Challenge Corporation...................    23

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein: Prepared statement...........    10
Ms. Paige Alexander: Prepared statement..........................    17
Ms. Fatema Z. Sumar: Prepared statement..........................    25

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    38
Hearing minutes..................................................    39
Questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the Middle East and
North Africa, and written responses from:
The Honorable Gerald M. Feierstein.............................    40
Ms. Paige Alexander to.........................................    44

JORDAN: A KEY U.S. PARTNER

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock p.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. The subcommittee will
come to order. I know that our panelists are going to be
stepping out here in a second.
We will have votes starting at possibly 3 o'clock or 3:15
so we will try to wrap up before then. After recognizing myself
and Ranking Member Deutch for 5 minutes each for our opening
statements, I will then recognize other members seeking
recognition for 1 minute.
We will then hear from our witnesses, and without objection
the prepared statements of our witnesses will be made a part of
the record and members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes. In recent
years, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has turned into one of
America's most important allies.
The King of Jordan had proven to be a reliable partner and
someone who is committed to protecting our shared security
interest.
With all of the violence, all of the turmoil in the region
and the accompanying instability and insecurity, the U.S. has
made a substantial commitment to strengthening our bilateral
relations with the Kingdom.
That commitment was reflected in a renewal of our
memorandum of understanding, MOU, with Jordan, which was signed
a year ago last week.
This new MOU recognizes the importance of Jordan in the
fight on the front lines against ISIS and radical
fundamentalism as well as the Kingdom's leadership in taking in
over 1 million refugees from Syria and Iraq.
Jordan's resources are already scarce and with the addition
of over 1 million Syrian and Iraqi refugees, these resources
are being strained to the limit--stretched to the limit.
That is why it is vital that we help Jordan shore up some
of these resources, especially when it comes to the Kingdom's
water needs and energy needs.
Through our MCC-Jordan Compact, a $275 million compact that
nears its completion, we have invested in public-private
partnership wastewater projects that are now operational and
serving over 1 million people, many of whom are refugees.
I had the pleasure of visiting the As-Samra Wastewater
Plant in 2014 with Mr. Deutch and its importance cannot be
overstated.
I am also pleased that a local south Florida firm, Hazen
and Sawyer, was the engineering firm that managed the project,
proof that these MCC compacts and projects can benefit both the
U.S. economy and also the host nations.
There are other projects and it is important that we begin
to bring them to fruition. One of these will not only be
important to alleviate the water shortage in Jordan but it has
the potential to also improve the cooperation and bilateral
relations between Israel and Jordan--the Red to Dead Project.
Continued U.S. investment in this sort of infrastructure
project has enormous upside and can really be a game changer
and it is critical that Congress remains supportive of these
efforts.
There is also the benefit--the potential for collaborative
work between Israel and Jordan in other areas that can be
mutually beneficial, especially when it comes to Jordan's
energy needs.
Jordan signed an agreement with Israel to import natural
gas and, again, as with the wastewater project, this agreement
has economic benefits for the U.S. as well with U.S.-based
Noble Energy discovering the natural gas field off the coast of
Israel and now ready, willing and able to begin production to
help meet the growing natural gas demand in Jordan and
elsewhere.
And it will be important that we continue to support these
efforts and others just like them because Israel and Jordan
have shared concerns, shared interests and it would be mutually
beneficial for the two to work closely together.
We must also continue to support the good work of USAID--
the good work that they are doing to help Jordan in its economy
but also the work it does to strengthen the country's democracy
and governance as well as female empowerment programs.
The Jordanian Government's commitment to political reform
over these past few years has been commendable and it is clear
that our programs have had a good amount of success based on
the interest and the support from the government and the
Jordanian people, a testament to how this is--how this
International Republican Institute--IRI--has been able to
expand from working in just a handful of districts when its
programs first started in Jordan to now over 30 and seeking to
expand further in the coming years.
These programs have had successes. We need to build upon
the support these programs have received and work with the
Kingdom to help strengthen democracy and governance in Jordan
and to strengthen civil society.
On security, Jordan's needs are also substantial because of
the Kingdom--the Kingdom has been such a staunch ally in the
coalition against ISIS, and the stability and security of
Jordan are vital if we are ever going to see a secure and
stable region.
That is why I am pleased that the bill I introduced with
Congressman Deutch and as well as Congresswomen Granger and
Lowey, the U.S.-Jordan Defense Cooperation Act, has passed
Congress just last night and will now make its way to the
President's desk.
The bill recognizes Jordan's precarious situation and the
need for the U.S. to support the King's effort against ISIS.
That is why it will allow for expedited sales of certain
weapons and ammunition and excess defense articles that the
Kingdom needs to secure its borders, to protect its citizens
and to assist the coalition in the fight against ISIS.
But as the King reminded us when he visited us last month,
we cannot keep a myopic focus on the fight against ISIS and
think that it is just in Iraq and in Syria.
ISIS is spreading, it is gaining support elsewhere and it
has shown that it has the capability to strike the West as
well.
The King warned us not to lose sight of the threat that
ISIS poses in Africa where it can gain a lot of support and use
a lot of territory for safe havens, and we, obviously, can't
lose sight of the threat ISIS poses to us here in the homeland.
This is an obvious difficult task. But it would be much
more difficult were it not for the leadership and the
willingness of our ally Jordan to take on this challenge
together.
I look forward to expanding and strengthening our
relationship with the Kingdom of Jordan in the coming months
and years and I thank the King for his steadfast commitment to
the security and stability of the region, and we welcome
Ambassador Bouran with us today.
Thank you so much. Mr. Deutch is recognized.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chairman, you have been a true champion of the U.S.-
Jordan relationship and I thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the challenges facing our two countries in depth today.
Thanks to our witnesses for being here today and for the
work that your agencies do to promote a stable and prosperous
Jordan and to advance the U.S.-Jordan cooperation. I would
especially like to thank Ambassador Feierstein for his many
years of service and wish him well in his retirement.
And I would like to take a moment to recognize the
Jordanian Ambassador, Ambassador Bouran, who does a fantastic
job here in Washington and is a valued resource to many on this
subcommittee.
I am also pleased that legislation introduced by the
chairman and me, the U.S.-Jordan Defense Cooperation Act, has
now passed the House and Senate and is on its way to the
President's desk.
I thank our colleagues for supporting this bipartisan
legislation that will ensure that Jordan has the tools that it
needs to confront regional challenges.
Just over a year ago, the United States and Jordan cemented
our partnership in a new memorandum of understanding that
increased U.S. assistance to Jordan from $600 million to $1
billion annually.
This increase reflects our commitment to Jordan's stability
and recognition of the tremendous strain placed upon Jordan
since the start of this hearing crisis as well as Jordan's
willingness to partner in the fight against ISIS.
The conflict in Syria has fundamentally altered Jordan and
its effects will be felt for years to come. Jordan, already a
home to hundreds of thousands of Iraqi refugees from previous
conflicts, has taken in over 635,000 Syrian refugees and that
number only reflects those refugees who are officially
registered with the UNHCR.
Jordanian officials estimate this number is probably much
higher than that. In fact, most Syrian refugees aren't
currently living in the two U.N.-run camps and have instead
assimilated into Jordanian towns.
While Jordanian host communities have welcomed Syrian
refugees into their communities, the influx has, of course,
placed a strain on Jordan's already scarce resources,
particularly water and energy.
Many of our USAID programs have focused on increasing
access to water while reducing waste. In fact, USAID programs
have brought fresh water and sanitation services to more than
one-third of Jordan's population. We look forward to hearing
more about these efforts from Assistant Administrator
Alexander.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen and I had the opportunity to visit
the As-Samra Wastewater Treatment Plant, the product of the MCC
compact awarded to Jordan in 2010.
The expansion of this plant will increase access to water
for 3 million Jordanians and, as the chairman mentioned, we are
pleased to see a south Florida company involved in such an
important project.
U.S. assistance has also focused on expanding access to
education as well as infrastructure building and teacher
training.
We often talk about the potential for an entire lost
generation of Syrian children and our continued focus on
building and rehabilitating schools is a critical component to
ensure that refugee children are able to access education in
host communities.
I applaud Secretary Kerry's recent announcement of $267
million in assistance for education in Jordan. We all
appreciate the Government of Jordan's willingness to keep its
borders open to refugees and I acknowledge the security
challenges that this poses.
But as fighting in Syria's southern front increases, more
and more refugees will be seeking safe passage to Jordan. I am
extremely sensitive to Jordan's ability to adequately screen
those trying to enter the country and it is my hope that those
waiting at its borders, those who do not pose a threat to
Jordan's stability, will be admitted as swiftly as possible.
As the U.S. seeks to expand the contribution to the members
of the international coalition to counter ISIS, Jordan has
continually met our call to action.
King Abdullah has often the need for Arab states to lead
this fight against extremism and Jordanian planes have been
flying missions since the formation of the coalition.
Let me again offer condolences--our condolences--to the
people of Jordan for the horrific loss of a Jordanian pilot at
the hands of ISIS just 1 year ago.
But if we want our partners to step up, we must ensure that
they have what they need to both be active participants in the
coalition and to defend their own borders.
That is why the legislation I referenced earlier passed by
the chairman and me along with our Appropriations Committee
colleagues Chairman Granger and Ranking Member Lowey is so
critical.
Our bill will ensure the timely transfer of certain defense
articles to the Kingdom. The King understands the importance of
regional stability and recognizes the need to confront ISIS
while working to find a political solution to the conflict in
Syria and we appreciate the ability to consult regularly with
him.
As we wait to see if talks can restart, I would just again
note that as long as Assad is in power we will not be able to
stem the flow of refugees from Syria or to defeat ISIS.
While the refugee crisis has no doubt strained Jordan's
economy and resources, there are steps that can be taken now to
reduce some of these pressures.
The lifting of various barriers to work for Syrian refugees
will help refugees contribute to their communities. Economic
investment will shore up jobs for Jordanians.
Cooperation with Israel on the Red to Dead project will
help increase Jordan's access to water, and I thank the Kingdom
for its commitment to peace with Israel and its recent efforts
to reduce tensions at the Temple Mount.
The King can play a vital role in preserving the status quo
as Israel has committed to do and I hope that any roadblocks in
implementing the agreement brokered by Secretary Kerry to
install cameras at the Temple Mount can soon be worked through.
In addition, I am alarmed by reports just this morning that
certain members of Parliament are threatening to topple the
government if Jordan moves ahead with the deal to import gas
from Israel's Leviathan Field.
This deal has the potential to bring much needed energy
sustainability to Jordan.
Madam Chairman, there is certainly a lot more to discuss
when it comes to the depth of U.S. cooperation with Jordan and
the increasingly important role that a stable Jordan plays in
the region.
And I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses, and
I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Cicilline is recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen and Ranking Member Deutch
for calling this hearing on Jordan and our relationship and
thank you to the witnesses.
I look forward to hearing from you about how our strong
partnership with the Kingdom of Jordan can continue,
particularly at this critical time in our shared fight against
violent extremism as well as a pivotal moment in the resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
I want to welcome Ambassador Bouran and again acknowledge
her extraordinary leadership here in Washington and I would
also like to express my appreciation to the Kingdom of Jordan
for its leadership and its commitment to the coalition to
defeat ISIL.
Jordan's actions s part of this coalition have been
significant and difficult, notably, air strikes that have been
conducted, Jordan's allowing foreign forces to use its bases,
Jordan's sharing of intelligence with coalition partners, and
we have a very long and close relationship with the Kingdom and
look forward to continued and deepening cooperation.
The people and the Government of Jordan know all too well
how ISIL's actions create instability and fear, which is why
Jordan is hosting more than 630,000 refugees from Syria, and we
appreciate this incredible sacrifice and remain committed to
support Jordan's crisis management effort through increased
economic support.
I had the opportunity to visit Jordan last March. As part
of that visit I traveled to the Zaatari refugee camp and saw
first hand the extraordinary challenges facing the Kingdom of
Jordan and the extraordinary work being done.
And I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses today
and working with the administration and my colleagues to
further strengthen our important relationship with the Kingdom
of Jordan.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Ms. Frankel is recognized.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I thank you for this opportunity because I have to
leave for a markup in a few minutes--I mean, a vote at
Transportation.
But I wanted to start. I thank you for the witnesses being
here and I visited Jordan this year on a personal trip, and I
just want to say for anyone who has never been there what a
beautiful country it is, just magnificent--beautiful sites and
beautiful people.
And I want to also thank--I see our Ambassador here--just
thank you to the people of Jordan for opening their arms to the
refugees.
I had an opportunity when I was there to meet with some
women and children who had fled Syria and the issue that just
kept coming up over and over that Mr. Deutch referenced to was
their inability to do any work and to supplement the very
pittance, really, of aid that they are getting.
So I would just be curious whether--I know there has been
some discussions to maybe have some relief in that area. So I
would be curious as to that.
I also would be interested to know what kind of work we are
doing to enable Jordan to boost its economy. I was told that
there is some work going on there.
And I would also be interested to know whether any of it
involves trying to advertise or boost up its tourism because I
will tell you, I have been all over the world and going--we
went to the desert where ``Lawrence of Arabia'' was filmed. It
was amazing. Well, there is a lot of historic sites there.
So I will be curious about the tourism industry. But on a
more somber note, what is going on in Syria is so horrific and
I am very interested in knowing what you--because the witnesses
that are here--what you believe is the impact of Russia now
intervening in Syria because I have heard that the rebel forces
are being decimated and I know we have aid programs to the
rebels and I am just wondering whether it is even worthwhile
programs now.
And so I would like to get your insight on that. So when I
leave I am not going to be rude. I have to go vote. But I am
going to catch up and whatever you say somebody will take notes
and tell me and I will try to come back.
Thank you very much for being here.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
We know that you are a professional all the time so there
is no doubt when she says that she means it, and she has
pointed out the benefits of private travel.
She got to visit where ``Lawrence of Arabia'' was. Mr.
Deutch and I on congressional travel went to a wastewater
plant. So that is quite a difference.
But now we are pleased to introduce our panelists. We
welcome back Ambassador Gerald Feierstein, who is the principal
deputy assistant secretary of the Bureau of Near Eastern
Affairs.
Previously, the Ambassador served as our Ambassador to
Yemen from 2010 to 2013 and has served in different postings
throughout the Middle East, including as deputy chief of
mission in Islamabad and deputy consul-general in Jerusalem.
Thank you for your service and we look forward to your
testimony, Mr. Ambassador.
Next, we welcome back Assistant Administrator Paige
Alexander of the Bureau of the Middle East of USAID.
Previously, Ms. Alexander has served as assistant administrator
of the Bureau for Europe and Eurasia as well as associate
director of Project Liberty at Harvard University's John F.
Kennedy School of Government.
She has also served on the board of the Basic Education
Coalition and the Project on the Middle East Democracy. Welcome
back.
And last but certainly not least, we would like to welcome
Fatema Sumar, who is the regional deputy vice president for--
listen to these areas of the world--Europe, Asia, the Pacific
and Latin America, wow--for the Millennium Challenge
Cooperation's Department of Compact Operations.
Previously, Ms. Sumar was the deputy assistant secretary of
state for South and Central Asian affairs and before that she
was a congressional aide in the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, and I hear that Mr. Connolly used to be an aide in
that--I have heard that before.
Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. We will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GERALD M. FEIERSTEIN, PRINCIPAL
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you so much, Chairman Ros-
Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch, distinguished members of the
committee. Thank you for inviting me to discuss our
relationship with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan today.
Let me also thank you for your continued support to Jordan
over the years and in particular to express our thanks for your
championing the United States-Jordan Defense Cooperation Act.
Now that this legislation has passed we look forward to
expediting consideration of letters of offer to sell defense
articles and services to the Kingdom of Jordan, thereby
shrinking the delivery time for these articles even more.
As you note in the title to this hearing, Jordan is a key
partner for the United States and has played a vital role in
addressing virtually all of the highest priority challenges
that the United States is facing in the Middle East.
From countering the threat of Daesh and supporting a
peaceful political transition in Syria to expanding prosperity
across the region, Jordan has been an essential ally.
The King is returning to Washington later this month and I
know that President Obama looks forward to discussing many of
these issues directly with him when they meet.
Nowhere is the strength of our relationship more apparent
than our shared efforts against the threat of Daesh and other
extremists.
Jordan is a committed leader in the global coalition to
counter ISIL and the regional campaign against Daesh. Jordanian
air force pilots regularly fly missions as part of Operation
Inherent Resolve and have shown no sign of decreasing their
tempo.
As part of our broader coalition efforts against Daesh,
King Abdullah has called upon the international community to
challenge Daesh's recruiting.
We are working hand in hand with our Jordanian counterparts
to expose the false narrative of Daesh and other extremist
groups and to deprive Daesh of financial resources.
Jordan has been a critical partner in international
security efforts around the world for many years. In 1996, the
United States designated Jordan as a major non-NATO ally. They
are also a member of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism.
Just last month during the King's visit, Secretary Kerry
signed a joint action plan with Jordan to combat the smuggling
of nuclear and radioactive materials, expressing our intent to
work together to prevent, detect and respond to nuclear
smuggling incidents.
Jordan has also been an integral part of the political
process, spearheading efforts to reach a political transition
in Syria through the International Syria Support Group.
Today, Foreign Minister Judeh joined Secretary Kerry in
Munich during a meeting of this group as they deliberate on
next steps to resolve the crisis in Syria.
We are also deeply appreciative of Jordan's crucial role in
efforts to achieve a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians.
Jordan continues to demonstrate determination and resolve
in support of our shared goals of reaching a two-state solution
to the conflict and bringing an end to the vicious cycles of
violence.
Since the signing of its peace treaty with Israel in 1994,
Jordan's engagement on Israeli-Palestinian issues has been
critical to our ongoing efforts to advance peace and stability
in the region including this past fall when Jordan worked
closely with us to help defuse tensions in Jerusalem on the
Haram al-Sharif Temple Mount compound.
However, our partnership with Jordan goes beyond our two
Governments. Trade between our two countries remain strong. Our
free trade agreement with Jordan signed in 2000 was our first
in the Arab world.
Total bilateral trade reached $2.8 billion in 2015 and you
can now find a number of Jordanian goods in U.S. markets from
cosmetics and jewelry to air conditioners and pharmaceuticals.
Jordanians, meanwhile, have access to Florida orange juice,
Boeing airplanes and countless other U.S. products and services
recognized for their quality.
As part of our commitment to Jordan's security and
stability during this critical time, we are providing Jordan
with robust security and economic assistance.
Last year, we signed a memorandum of understanding with
Jordan signalling our intent to provide the Kingdom with $1
billion annually in security and economic assistance from
Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2017 with Congress' generous
support.
I know my colleague will further discuss our economic
support but I wanted to note that Jordan received $385 million
in Foreign Military Financing in Fiscal Year 2015, making it
the third largest FMF recipient in the world. We will continue
our robust support this year.
Before I conclude, I would like to address one issue that I
know you are aware was an urgent topic of discussion during the
King's recent visit.
Jordan currently hosts more than 635,000 registered Syrian
refugees. We are working closely with the Jordanian Government
on solutions to alleviate the strain on the country including
how to handle ongoing humanitarian challenges for the 22,000
refugees on the Syrian-Jordanian border.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch, our
partnership with Jordan remains strong and our military
coordination and assistance has never been closer.
From their counter-Daesh activities to Jordan's active
participation in a number of peacekeeping operations around the
world, Jordan is a strong friend and an essential partner in
our pursuit of regional peace and prosperity.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Feierstein follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Ambassador.
Ms. Alexander.

STATEMENT OF MS. PAIGE ALEXANDER, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR THE MIDDLE EAST, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Alexander. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking
Member Deutch, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the United States Agency for
International Development's assistance to Jordan.
Jordan has one of the largest USAID missions in the world.
Our longstanding partnership with the Kingdom dates back nearly
six decades.
Over the years this cooperation has improved water systems,
trained teachers and enhanced the quality of education. We have
also upgraded medical facilities and have increased job
opportunities by developing key sectors of the Jordanian
economy.
With Congress' generous support in Fiscal Year 2015, $615
million went into the Economic Support Fund programs that
directly help the Jordanian people.
Our economic assistance to Jordan is multifaceted,
including direct assistance, sovereign loan guarantees and
project-based programs.
We are working to help the Government of Jordan deal with
the significant development challenges, low economic growth,
crowded classrooms and scarce water resources, as you all have
discussed.
USAID has reoriented its development assistance to better
support the government and the people of Jordan and has
addressed the increased needs in the areas and sectors where
Syrian refugees have the greatest impact on the Jordanian
communities.
We recognize the enormous strain on resources that
Jordanians face due to the large population increases from the
Syria crisis.
Our programming is designed not only to help host
communities meet current needs but also to identify and
catalyse innovations that meet Jordan's longer-term development
challenges.
My statement for the record includes more details of the
USAID priorities and challenges in Jordan. I would like to
briefly give you some examples here.
USAID supports the Government of Jordan's reform agenda,
focusing on strengthening civil society, rule of law and good
governance with partners such as the chairman's mention of IRI.
During my trip to Jordan last year, I met with local
officials in communities hosting these large refugee
populations. They told me the assistance they received from the
American people has been invaluable.
For example, USAID partners with local communities and
officials to identify the real stressors and the priorities in
community life, and then USAID--with our partners--helps the
municipalities implement very practical solutions, things such
as paving streets, replacing broken street lights or picking up
the trash, which make a major difference in these communities.
USAID's economic development and energy programs in Jordan
have evolved over the years from building roads to building a
more diverse and globally competitive economy.
One program has awarded nearly 100 grants totalling more
than $5 million to small- and medium-sized enterprises.
One of these grants went to the Andalus Dairy Factory run
by a local cattle farmer association in northern Jordan. With
the help of the project, the factory entered a partnership with
Safeway and achieved $140,000 annual increase in revenue and
now they are on track to double that increase in the coming
year.
We are also the lead donor for education in Jordan where
the Syria crisis is having a profound effect on the public
schools. To help the Jordanians meet this challenge, USAID has
expanded 120 schools, renovated 146 schools and built 25 new
schools in areas where there are large population increases
from the refugee flows.
We are also fast tracking the expansion of 20 schools in
the most needed areas. Just last week, I attended the London
conference where Secretary Kerry announced the additional $267
million commitment for education in Jordan.
This will help Jordanian public schools provide quality
education for an estimated 230,000 Syrian refugee children and
another 500,000 Jordanian students.
I want to share one particularly inspiring story, that of
Maha Al Ashqar. She is the principal of the Khawla bint
Tha'laba Primary Girls' School.
When a Syrian refugee mother approached the school and
wanted to get her child in, she was told that the classes were
full. She approached the principal and Ms. Al Ashqar's response
was simple--yes, your daughter can come to school, I ask that
you bring a chair because we have run out of chairs.
It is by supporting educators and families determined to
get ahead that we can make sure more children are not lost to
this conflict.
We are also working to ensure that the humanitarian
assistance we provide to Syrian refugees has benefits for the
local Jordanian economy.
For example, we fund a food voucher debit card for Syrian
refugees. I believe the two of you saw this when you were in
the camp. I actually brought one because it is nicely branded
as well.
And, for example, with these vouchers these cards are used
to shop in the local Jordanian supermarkets and stores. They
give the users a dignified way to buy food for their families,
giving them more choice and nutritional diversity than food
handouts would permit.
It has also provided an important economic boost for the
host country. It is estimated that the program has injected at
least $428 million into the Jordanian economy, providing new
jobs and new revenues to food retailers, traders and producers.
Going forward, we need to think about how to preserve the
important development gains made through the years of bilateral
assistance to Jordan while developing creative solutions that
help to meet the complex challenges posed by refugees living in
these host communities.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alexander follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Ms. Alexander.
Ms. Sumar.

STATEMENT OF MS. FATEMA Z. SUMAR, REGIONAL DEPUTY VICE
PRESIDENT, EUROPE, ASIA, THE PACIFIC AND LATIN AMERICA,
DEPARTMENT OF COMPACT OPERATIONS, MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE
CORPORATION

Ms. Sumar. Well, thank you so much and good afternoon.
Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch and
members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss the
Millennium Challenge Corporation's work with our partners in
Jordan to fight poverty.
I request that my full written testimony be submitted for
the record.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Ms. Sumar. MCC forms partnerships with some of the world's
poorest countries, but only those committed to good governance,
economic freedom and investment in their citizens.
MCC provides these select countries, like Jordan, with
grants to fund country-led projects and reforms designed to
reduce poverty by promoting sustainable economic growth.
MCC's Board of Directors selected Jordan as eligible for a
threshold program in 2005. The threshold program supported
Jordan's efforts to strengthen local government by increasing
transparency and accountability.
The program also sought to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of their customs administration as a way to
encourage trade. Our $275 million compact with Jordan began
implementation in December 2011 and will end in December of
this year.
Because Jordan is one of the most water-scarce countries in
the world, our compact focuses on increasing the supply of
water available to households and businesses and improving the
efficiency of water delivery, wastewater collection and
wastewater treatment.
Affordable access to clean water is critical not just for
businesses and agricultural producers but for all Jordanians.
The scarcity and expense of water constrains the country's
economic potential.
Though our partnership began before the crisis in Syria
erupted, Jordan's generous response to that crisis has only
compounded the strain on the country's water supply, making
MCC's work there even more critical.
The compact includes three closely-related projects to
address the needs of the goverment's entire water system.
First, as you saw during your visit there, the biggest
investment of the compact is the expansion of the As-Samra
Wastewater Treatment Plant, originally built with support from
USAID.
It is the primary facility for treating wastewater from
Jordan's Amman and Zarqa governorates where much of the
country's population lives.
The expansion increased the plant's capacity by more than
one-third, while more than doubling its capacity to handle
certain chemicals and other materials.
It now treats 70 percent of the country's wastewater. One
of the most interesting aspects of this project is its
innovative financing.
MCC's grant is paying for the expansion in partnership with
a private sector operator. This public-private partnership
allowed MCC's investment of $93 million to mobilize an
additional $110 million from the private sector.
Through this financing method, the private sector not only
provides over 50 percent of the cost of construction, it also
ensures that the facility is operated and maintained at world
class standards for 25 years.
Second, the wastewater network project will modernize and
upgrade the outdated sewer system in Zarqa. This project has
already replaced or rehabilitated trunk sewer lines and
expanded the system by laying over a 139 miles of sewer pipe.
And third, our water network restructuring project--before
this project, if you can imagine, as much as 50 percent of
water that entered the system was lost both through leaks in
the network and weak management--an unsustainably high loss
rate, given Jordan's scarce water resources.
This third project has repaired reservoirs and pumping
stations, and already replaced more than 70 percent of the
targeted 495 miles of urban drinking water pipelines.
What is perhaps most notable about this program and about
all of MCC's compacts with our partner countries is that it is
the Jordanians who determined which problem we should address
and how we should tackle it.
Following the end of our engagement with our partner
countries, we perform impact evaluations where possible to see
how successful our projects were in reducing poverty.
In Jordan, we are implementing an innovative impact
evaluation of the benefits of our projects to Jordanian
households and farmers.
This impact evaluation will be one of the first of its kind
to measure the economic benefits of improved water
infrastructure. The success of this evaluation and of our
overall compact is a product of the close relationship between
MCC and the Government of Jordan.
The Government of Jordan has been an excellent partner in
the development and implementation of the compact.
Thank you again for the invitation to testify, and I look
forward to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sumar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much for excellent
presentations. I will begin the question and answer period.
One of Jordan's critical needs is energy, although not as
burdensome now since, thankfully, oil prices have taken dive.
But Jordan has almost no domestic production to talk about,
importing around 97 percent of its energy needs.
The agreement to import natural gas from Israel could be a
game changer, not just for Jordan and Israel but for the entire
region.
Ambassador Feierstein, would you talk about the significant
foreign policy benefits for all parties involved with this
agreement? What has the U.S. been doing to promote these
exports, given that there have been some challenges faced on
both sides?
Ambassador Feierstein. Absolutely, Congresswoman Ros-
Lehtinen.
The United States has been strongly supporting the efforts
of the two parties with Noble Energy, an American energy
provider, to reach agreement to draw natural gas from the
Leviathan Field as well as the Tamar Field in Israel and those
talks are going forward with a great deal of encouragement from
the United States.
Our acting assistant secretary for energy, Amos Hochstein,
has been very much involved in promoting the efforts and
discussing this and we are optimistic that these--that these
contracts will be completed and that the gas will be provided
to Jordan.
As you said quite correctly, it's going to be a significant
bonus for Jordan, a reliable sustainable source of energy for
them to fuel their economic growth and development going
forward.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And, Ambassador, water is also
a critical need. In the Fiscal Year 2016 omnibus bill, Congress
appropriated $100 million in Economic Support Funds to be set
aside to Jordan for supporting its Red to Dead Canal Project
pending completion of the relevant studies and assessment.
How are--where are we on those assessments? What obstacles
are needed to be overcome in over to get this project up and
running?
Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you, and absolutely we
appreciated the congressional decision to provide $100 million
for the Red to Dead effort.
We are engaged very closely with the Government of Jordan
as well as with the Israelis and the Palestinians, pushing that
forward.
As you noted, and Ms. Alexander may be able to comment as
well, we are engaged in the effort to complete the
environmental impact studies and the other work that is
necessary.
But we also believe that we are moving closer, perhaps in
another month or two, to having a meeting that will bring all
of the parties together to continue the design work and to
further the implementation of that project.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir.
And, Ms. Alexander, you noted that Jordan hosts one of the
largest USAID missions of the world and we also noted not just
the willingness of the government to work with our mission but
that the Jordanian people very much welcome a lot of the work
that we do there.
The Kingdom represents a relatively open space and a
difficult region for civil society and the sort of work that
USAID is looking to expand on in areas that it is hoping to
strengthen.
Does Jordan's willingness to work on these issues suggest
an opportunity for increased support for democratic
institutions?
What would that look like and are we focusing too much of
our assistance on meeting the needs of the Syrian refugees and
not enough on Jordan's actual development needs?
And I encourage USAID to explore new entities, a new
partnership with groups who have a proven track record of local
democratic governance in Jordan.
What type of local government assistance gives us the
ability to strengthen the stability of a country like Jordan,
given the immense pressure that it is under?
Ms. Alexander. Thank you.
I agree that the global economic crisis has really
undermined all the previous gains that the Jordanian Government
had had--reduced exports, remittances, reduced tourism revenue,
as referenced before, and foreign direct investments.
So the loss of this and then the trading partners of Egypt,
Syria and Iraq that had been such a valued part of the economy
and the economic development for Jordan has really set them
back.
However, having such an excellent partnership with the
Jordanian Government, we have continued to work very closely on
the Jordan response plan and reoriented our assistance to make
sure that we are addressing their needs as well as the
stressors on the sectors, whether it is education, health, or
water.
So I think the partnership is valuable. I would not say
that there is a lack of understanding between the need between
the Syrian refugees and the host communities.
I think that we are working very hard to make sure that we
are addressing the Jordanian Government's concern about that.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And finally, as I mentioned earlier,
Congressman Deutch and I visited that wastewater project during
our last visit to Jordan together and it was remarkable how
much progress had been made on such an important issue for
Jordan--water--and I think that--I know that Jordan's MCC
contract is completed at the end of this year--the compact
focused on three major water projects.
But Ms. Sumar, with Jordan being such an important player
for the region and its stability vital to ensuring that the
entire region doesn't descend into something much worse, do you
think that Jordan would be a good contender for a second MCC
contract--compact and, if so, what areas would be best to focus
on for future projects?
Ms. Sumar. Well, thank you, Madam Chairman, for the
question and thank you for taking the time to visit the plant
during your visit to Jordan.
As you noted, we have had terrific success in this compact
because of the strong partnership we have with the Government
of Jordan and our implementing partner, the Millennium
Challenge Account in Jordan.
According to our statute from Congress--our legislation, we
are both time-bound in the way we operate but we are also bound
by income levels. MCC only works in countries with both low
income and lower middle income status as defined by the World
Bank.
Currently, starting in Fiscal Year 2012, Jordan graduated
from lower middle income status and is currently an upper
middle income country.
There are ongoing negotiations and conversations, I
understand, between the Government of Jordan and the World Bank
on its population numbers, given the flows from the refugee
crisis, which could change some of those calculations, given
its GNI per capita.
We look forward to hearing the decision from the World
Bank, which is where we get our data from. But currently Jordan
would not be a contender for a second compact because it has
graduated to upper middle income status and that is a
consideration that we have to take seriously in our
legislation.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
And I would like to yield now to my great colleague,
Congressman Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Alexander, outside of the refugee-specific initiatives,
what other successes can you point to in supporting job
creation initiatives in Jordan?
Ms. Alexander. Thank you.
Our economic development assistance has worked on
everything from fiscal reforms at the ministries to make sure
we have long-term sustainability and better procedures in
place.
We have also worked in the health care sector and I would
say that building maternal and child health care--child
facilities and pediatric facilities--we have modernized the
health workforce and we have established a health quality
assurance mechanism.
The financial sustainability of almost all of the issues
including water is a major one, as referenced earlier, with 90
percent of the water imported--gas and energy, sorry, imported.
That has become a major issue for us.
In the water sector we are looking at nonrevenue water loss
and working directly with the ministries to make sure that they
are tightening up their systems.
So I would say it is on a fiscal side with the ministries
as well on the local government side with making sure that
civil society is listened to in a lot of these communities that
are suffering from stress.
Mr. Deutch. Great. Thanks.
Ambassador Feierstein, King Abdullah makes very strong
pronouncements in the international community that Arab states
must lead the fight against ISIS.
Can you just share your insight as to whether the Jordanian
public is still supportive of the country's involvement and
leadership role in the campaign against ISIS?
Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you, Congressman Deutch.
I believe that our assessment is that there is still a high
level of support within the Jordanian community for the effort
to combat violent extremism.
The King and the Government of Jordan have done a good job
of trying to explain to the Jordanian people what the
challenges are, what the threat is to Jordanian security and
stability.
He has engaged broadly with not only the political leaders
but also with religious leaders, motivating and energizing
imams to speak out in the mosques against the threat of violent
extremism.
And in this context, I think that the Jordanians have
really been leaders not only in terms of how they have
approached the challenge and the issues within Jordan but also
in trying to assist and to build a broader Sunni Arab coalition
that speaks out very strongly against this threat.
Mr. Deutch. How helpful do you think the King can be with
respect to halting Russian aggression against the moderate
opposition in Syria? Is there a role for the King there?
Ambassador Feierstein. Well, this is an important issue
and, of course, as you know, the King did try to engage the
Russians in an effort to prevent the expansion of the conflict
toward the Jordanian borders in southern Syria.
Our understanding, based on our discussions with him, is
that he has been disappointed, of course, in the lack of
Russian responsiveness, although when he discussed this
directly with President Putin he was under the impression that
the Russians would be cooperative with this effort.
To be entirely honest, we were skeptical of the effort and
we remain skeptical. But the King believes that this is an
important element and that he needs to be able to speak to the
Russians and try to get the Syrian Government to go along with
this.
So he is going to continue to try. But I think that at this
point he is a little bit more skeptical and wary about how the
Russians might respond.
Mr. Deutch. Great.
And then, finally, just turning away from Jordan just for a
second since you are here, I understand there is legislation in
the Senate, the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, that
passed out of the Senate Judiciary Committee recently, and as a
member of both Foreign Affairs and Judiciary Committees here in
the House, I have an interest in that.
Since you are here, I thought I would ask whether the
department has a position on this bill.
Ambassador Feierstein. Thank you very much for that
question, Congressman Deutch, and we do.
We understand and sympathize with the motivation behind the
JASTA legislation. The proposed remedy, however, would enact
broad changes in longstanding international law regarding
sovereign immunity that, if applied globally, could have
serious implications for U.S. interests.
Before proceeding with the legislation, we believe there
needs to be more careful consideration of the potential
unintended consequences of its enactment and we would welcome
opportunities to engage with the Congress in that discussion.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.
Thanks to all of our witnesses for being here today.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. First and foremost, I would like to thank
you, Madam Chairman, for your leadership over the years.
I have been serving in Congress with you for 28 years and
you have been a dynamo on those issues that are vital to our
national security and to human rights as well. So thank you for
bring this up today.
Because today you have focused our attention on a country
that is indispensable to the cause of peace in the Middle East.
Without Jordan, we all lose.
Everybody loses if Jordan succumbs to radicalization, and I
would say that we need to pay this kind of attention all the
time toward this.
Let me ask a little bit about the--I learned a long time
ago. My parents came from dirt-poor farms in North Dakota and
that was long before they had any of the oil or anything up
there. And I was taught that people can't be prosperous--
ordinary people can't live a prosperous and decent life without
enough energy but also enough water.
And you were just going through in the testimony the water
projects and how much money has been put into that. Is there
still a water shortage in Jordan after the investment that we
have made?
Ms. Alexander. I will say yes. It has been the third most
water-scarce country in the world and so this is why a lot of
our assistance at USAID has focused on issues such as
nonrevenue water loss and, specifically, reforming and
restructuring how to make this system more efficient.
I will turn it to my colleague to talk about the MCC work.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Ms. Sumar. Certainly, Congressman, it is--not only is it
one of the most water scarce countries in the world, it is a
country that is strained under burgeoning population flows.
And so the investments that MCC has been making over the
past 5 years are intended to not only take a look at the
current needs of the Jordanian people in the cities but also
take a long-term view of the kind of economic growth that is--
--
Mr. Rohrabacher. Is it based on reclamation? Is that your--
the system that you have been providing support for in Jordan?
Ms. Sumar. It is based on three different principals. One
is that we need to add different parts of wastewater treatment
so that you don't have sewage flowing over into your major
cities and streets.
In order to do that, we built this signature project, which
is the As-Samra Wastewater Treatment Plant. Connected to that
are wastewater pipes that would be needed to actually pipe out
the sewage from the cities into the treatment plants. So we
have built hundreds of kilometers of those pipes.
But the third part of that and particularly most important
for people's everyday lives is to make sure they also have the
drinking water that they need and the drinking supplies.
So the third component is building the water pipes for
drinking water. As a result of that entire holistic
intervention, what we are seeing is not just piping the
wastewater out, treating and cleaning it but pumping that water
in a clean way back into the irrigation system of Jordan.
So one of the biggest results we have seen is we have freed
up to 10 percent of water to use for irrigation in the Jordan
River Valley. That is fresh water that we are now putting back
into the system and it is increasing its availability for
farmers and beneficiaries alike.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, just to let you know, I come from
Orange County, California, and in Orange County we are on a
desert and we have a water system now--reclamation system in
which we reuse our water nine times before it is let out into
the ocean.
And I would hope that that type of gray--with the use of
technology we can help solve that problem and we should
certainly be sharing that technology with the people of Jordan.
And second of all, about the Red Sea to Dead Sea project,
is that going to be a reality? This is something that is going
on that provides both energy and water, does it not?
Ms. Alexander. As my colleague had previously mentioned, we
are working to understand a long-term economic viability of the
project and to ensure that we have plans in place to mitigate
any environmental impacts of the project.
We have worked very closely with our colleagues at State
and consulting with the Jordanians and the Israeli Government
and we do think there is a meeting coming up where the next
phase of this will be discussed.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I am concerned, frankly, and Madam
Chairman, we see this here in the United States as well. There
are, you know, people who believe the environment and keeping
it a clean environment is their number-one priority and
sometimes they are a little bit too, how do you say,
unrealistic about the cost of having a 95-percent situation
rather than a 100-percent situation.
And the Red Sea to Dead Sea project has been going on for a
long time and offers such a great potential for benefit for
economic, and economic benefit means how good--how well people
are living--ordinary people--and I would hope that people who
are taking the extreme positions on the environment are not
undermining the well being of women and children who are trying
to live their lives today, which I think would be greatly
benefited by that project.
With that said, we ought to do everything we can and thank
you for leading the effort to do something good for a good
friend of the United States.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Rohrabacher.
And thank you to our panelists for excellent testimony.
Thank you to the Ambassador for joining us, and with that the
subcommittee is adjourned because we will have votes in about 5
minutes.
Thank you so much.
[Whereupon, at 3:04 p.m., the committee was adjourned.

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
