- THE FY 2016 BUDGET REQUEST: ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE EFFECTIVENESS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FY 2016 BUDGET REQUEST: ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
EFFECTIVENESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-817PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2015
________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt, Acting Administrator, U.S.
Agency for International Development...........................     5
The Honorable Dana J. Hyde, chief executive officer, Millennium
Challenge Corporation..........................................    19

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt: Prepared statement............     7
The Honorable Dana J. Hyde: Prepared statement...................    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    60
Hearing minutes..................................................    61
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    63
Written responses to questions submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida....................................    64
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York........................................    68
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................    74
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly...............................    78

THE FY 2016 BUDGET REQUEST: ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
EFFECTIVENESS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 17, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock a.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order and I will
ask the members if they will take their seats.
Today, we review the budget requests of the U.S. Agency for
International Development and the Millennium Challenge
Corporation, and when thinking about your effectiveness the
ultimate objective must be to see countries graduate from
foreign assistance.
Countries that respect individual rights and respect
property rights, clearly, are more likely to enjoy stability.
They are more likely to have economic growth. Both are
essential to overcoming poverty than those countries that do
not.
So when it comes to development, the right policies matter,
far more than the dollars and cents and that is why the
Millennium Challenge Corporation is so important and that is
why the right focus on what USAID does is so important.
So these are the principles that this committee has
promoted in the past. For example, if you look at the African
Growth and Opportunity Act, which I helped write 15 years ago,
that was a plan to help these countries develop and we are
going to have to reauthorize that this year.
AGOA, as we call it, is up for reauthorization. These are
the principles that guided the founding also, as I say, of the
MCC and by working with poor but relatively well-governed
countries; by recognizing sound policies; by committing to the
principles of transparency and accountability, MCC is putting
countries on the path toward graduation.
So today MCC is requesting the ability to enter into
compacts that would advance regional economic integration and
regional trade, and I am pleased to be working with Karen
Bass--Congresswoman Bass--on this issue.
And MCC, at the end of the day, must stay true to its roots
and not dilute its rigorous selection criteria and that is a
constant concern because that is what gives the leverage to
keep moving these countries toward the proper governance.
Meanwhile, USAID has established itself as a global leader.
In humanitarian assistance, in disaster relief; from the
devastating earthquake in Gujarat to the deadly Ebola epidemic
in West Africa, USAID typically is the first to respond.
In the Philippines, I saw firsthand Typhoon Haiyan's
devastation there and USAID knew that it would take 3 weeks for
U.S. food aid stored in Sri Lanka to arrive, 12 weeks if they
had to ship that food from the United States. So what they did
was they bought the food locally. They saved lives as a result.
I was pleased to see the administration renew its request
to exempt a quarter of the Food for Peace budget from costly,
outdated and inefficient U.S. purchase and shipping
requirements. But the President should have asked for more.
This is timid reform.
Still, I will work with the administration and my
colleagues so that our food aid reaches more people in less
time for less money, and that is the nature of the reforms that
we have pushed in this committee in the past.
Despite strong performance in the area of disaster relief,
USAID has historically struggled to perform in other areas. Its
poor performance in Haiti led this committee to pass successful
legislation last Congress to step up oversight of the lagging
aid effort in Haiti, and reports of waste continue to come out
of Afghanistan.
To its credit, USAID has been working to redefine itself
over the past 5 years. In many areas it is putting MCC
principles into practice. The agency is focusing on results and
innovation while tapping the expertise and capital of the
private sector.
USAID also is becoming more transparent. The agency has
begun implementing a number of the transparency reforms that
this committee has demanded and that Mr. Poe on the committee
has advanced.
What isn't commendable is the administration's failure to
nominate an inspector general, which has left USAID and MCC
without a top cop for over 1,200 days.
Ranking Member Engel and I have encouraged the President to
get the second longest IG vacancy filled now, and I am
demanding that USAID sort out its policy with the Government
Accountability Office so it can once again gain complete,
timely access to the information that the Government
Accountability Office requires to execute its congressionally
mandated oversight role.
This is in keeping with the USAID new commitment to
transparency as well as in keeping with the former
administrator's personal pledge to me. As you know, Director
Shaw changed this policy and now we look forward to its
implementation.
So there is no shortage of challenges on your plate and at
under 2 percent of the total annual budget, the International
Affairs Budget has had to punch above its weight and that won't
be changing anytime soon, meaning a focus on efficient and
effective programs has to be a continuum here.
So I look forward to working with you, Ambassador Lenhardt
and Ms. Hyde, to address these challenges and these
opportunities over the coming year, and I will turn to Mr.
Eliot Engel of New York, our ranking member, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for holding
this important hearing. I have always been very fond of USAID
and the wonderful work that USAID does.
Ambassador Lenhardt, Ms. Hyde, thank you for testifying
this morning. Thank you both for all your hard work and service
to our country. As the chairman mentioned, compared to the
entire Federal budget what we are discussing today represents a
drop in the ocean. I have long felt that U.S. foreign aid
should be increased.
But a lot of people don't realize that it is barely 1
percent of our budget. But it is a critical part of America's
foreign policy. Our investments in foreign assistance pay huge
dividends in terms of our country's security, prosperity and
values.
Our efforts abroad save millions of lives, improve
governance and promote economic opportunity around the world.
The benefits of foreign assistance are clear. But, of course,
every tax dollar must be spent wisely.
That is why this committee's oversight of USAID, the State
Department, MCC and other foreign affairs agencies is so
critical.
Ms. Hyde, your leadership of MCC has been outstanding, as
far as I am concerned. For more than a decade, MCC has
maintained an emphasis on data-driven, accountable and
transparent development efforts. I look forward to continued
progress to ensure that MCC maximizes the benefits of this
approach.
I also want to thank you for MCC's work with my staff to
help Kosovo compete fairly within the MCC framework. Thanks to
this collaboration, we found a way to generate data on Kosovo
that can be submitted to MCC and included on MCC's scorecard.
Ambassador Lenhardt, thank you for stepping into the role
of acting administrator. Roger Shaw has big shoes to fill, as I
am sure you know, but your distinguished record tells me that
USAID is in good hands, remains in good hands. Your leadership
comes in an especially challenging time.
As we face expanding needs due to conflict and instability
around the world, our foreign assistance budget remains
constrained.
I want to thank USAID for its incredible work in responding
to the Ebola crisis in West Africa. After a very challenging
year, our strategy is working but the situation remains
critical in Sierra Leone and Guinea.
We need smart investments in sustainable health care
systems. We need to help countries identify and contain
infectious diseases and we need to help people live healthy
productive lives.
We must also not forget that treatable diseases continue to
kill millions of people every year. Last year alone, hundreds
of thousands died from malaria and 1.5 million succumbed to
tuberculosis.
I hope Congress will provide robust funding for our global
health programs this year. Likewise, I am concerned that we
will need more funding for humanitarian relief in the coming
fiscal year to deal with crises in Syria, Ukraine, South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and many other places.
Four years after the start of the horrendous conflict in
Syria, the country continues to be a magnet for extremists.
ISIL has spread across Syria and deep into Iraq. The Assad
regime commits atrocities. I just heard of more gas atrocities
this morning.
They commit atrocities with impunity and the humanitarian
crisis has reached critical proportions. We must do more to
help bring this conflict to an end and respond to the immense
suffering it has caused.
On Ukraine, the President recently signed bipartisan
legislation expanding assistance across a variety of sectors.
Chairman Royce and I have worked in the collaborative process
to help Ukraine as have the members of this committee.
Since USAID is the lead agency implementing much of this
effort, I look forward to hearing your views on these new
programs concerning Ukraine.
I am very pleased by the President's $1.1 billion proposal
to address the root causes of child migration from Central
America.
I also want to call to your attention to a bipartisan
letter I sent you last week along with Ms. Ros-Lehtinen, Mr.
Sires, Mr. Cicilline and others urging USAID to provide direct
funding to LGBT human rights groups in Central America.
The level of violence against LGBT individuals in Honduras,
Guatemala, and El Salvador is unacceptable. In Africa,
increased trade and access to electricity are critical to
economic growth and development.
USAID is leading with the Power Africa and Trade Africa
initiatives. I hope Congress will complement those efforts by
passing Electric by Africa and reauthorizing the African Growth
and Opportunity Act.
And, again, the chairman has been a champion on this for
many, many years. Both of these laws would bolster USAID's
efforts and support innovative and enterprising Africans.
And finally, in Afghanistan and Pakistan the United States
has spent billions of dollars on roads, agriculture, rule of
law and capacity building.
I hope you will focus on how USAID plans to monitor
projects in Afghanistan after the withdrawal of all American
combat troops and assess the continuing value of our aid to
Pakistan.
Ambassador Lenhardt and Ms. Hyde, thank you again for
appearing here today and I look forward to your testimony.
Chairman Royce. And let me second, Mr. Engel, your remarks
about former Director Shaw's work and on wishing you well,
Ambassador, in your new position as acting Ambassador for the
U.S. Agency for International Development.
Ambassador Lenhardt has continued in his service to this
country. He served as the U.S. Ambassador of Tanzania from 2009
to 2013. He also served this nation as the 36th sergeant of
arms of the United States Senate and in that service was the
first African American to serve as an officer of the Congress.
Dana Hyde, prior to becoming chief executive officer of the
Millennium Challenge Corporation, was the associate director at
the Office of Management and Budget and previously worked at
the State Department.
So we welcome them, and without objection the witnesses'
full prepared statements will be made part of the record and
members here will have 5 calendar days to submit any statements
or questions to you or any extraneous material for the record.
So we will ask you both to please summarize your remarks
and, Ambassador, we will start with you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ALFONSO E. LENHARDT, ACTING
ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Engel and members of this committee for allowing me to
discuss the Fiscal Year 2016 budget request for the United
States Agency for International Development.
Thanks to strong interagency partners like Dana Hyde and
bipartisan support in Congress, we are fortunate to have
leaders throughout government who understand the importance of
development to our nation's security and prosperity.
At USAID, we believe that by partnering to end extreme
poverty and promote resilient democratic societies, we are
helping developing countries transform into peaceful, open and
flourishing partners for our own nation.
As I testify today, my colleagues at USAID are supporting
that mission and representing our country in dynamic and
challenging environments around the world.
We are rooting out threats before they reach our shores,
unlocking flourishing markets for American businesses and
connecting our young people and universities with global
opportunities, all for less than 1 percent of the Federal
budget.
This year's budget request advances our country's interest
while responding to pressing national security priorities all
over the world, from Nigeria to Honduras.
By leveraging public-private partnerships and harnessing
innovation we are maximizing the value of each and every dollar
that is entrusted to us.
At the same time, we are making difficult choices about
where our work will have the greatest impact, shifting
resources and personnel to better advance our mission of ending
extreme poverty around the world.
These investments have delivered real measurable results on
behalf of the American people. Our Feed the Future program has
helped 7 million farmers boost their harvest with new
technologies and improve nutrition for more than 12 million
children.
Our Africa has mobilized $20 billion in private sector
commitments and encourage countries to make critical reforms,
and thanks to groundbreaking investment in child and maternal
survival, we are on track to save the lives of up to 15 million
children and nearly 600,000 women by the year 2020.
These efforts are at the core of a new way of doing
business. After 5 years of reform, I am confident our agency is
now a more accountable and effective enterprise.
Yet, I am equally humbled by the challenges before us and
recognize that we have much more work to do. That is why my
focus will be on one core discipline--management. I will focus
our energy in all of our activities at the agency to be more
innovative and strategic in our effort to get better every day.
Because while we may not have all the right answers, we are
asking the right questions. Above all, I will ensure that we
are good stewards of the precious resources that are entrusted
to us.
Spending over 30 years in the Army and becoming a two-star
general and later as an Ambassador to Tanzania may not be the
typical path to a job in development. But even though my
journey was different from the development professionals with
whom I had the privilege to serve, my conclusion is the same.
America's investment in development is money well spent.
Saving children from hunger and disease elevates our own moral
strength.
Empowering entrepreneurs to innovate and create new markets
advances our own prosperity. Strengthening civil society not
only gives a voice to the oppressed but also makes our own
citizens more secure.
Through our work, we are opening up new paths to
opportunity, energizing the global economy and reducing the
root causes of insecurity throughout the world. In doing so, we
are advancing the values that unite the American people and the
people throughout the world.
As we work to tackle these global challenges, we will value
your counsel on how we can become even more effective and,
certainly, accountable.
I thank you for your kind attention. I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Lenhardt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ambassador.
Ms. Hyde.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANA J. HYDE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION

Ms. Hyde. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Royce, Ranking
Member Engel, members of the committee. I am delighted to be
here today with Ambassador Lenhardt to discuss the Millennium
Challenge Corporation's Fiscal Year 2016 budget request.
Just over 10 years ago, Congress created MCC as a
competitive and incentive-based model----
Chairman Royce. Ms. Hyde, let us make sure that that button
is pushed. There we go. Thank you. Keep going. That mic may not
be working. Let us try that one more time.
Ms. Hyde. Are we good?
Chairman Royce. Now we are good.
Ms. Hyde. Now we are good. There we go.
MCC was given a singular mission--reducing poverty through
economic growth--and it was grounded in three core principles--
good governance, country ownership, and accountability for
results.
Over the past decade, we have seen the power of these
principles in action. MCC creates incentives for countries to
do the right thing. Our investments support democracy, help
fight corruption and promote American values of economic
freedom and good governance.
Our work across the globe has created measurable
improvements in the lives of the poor. And our partnerships
have proven that poor countries will deliver on the promise of
prosperity--when given the right incentives and the right
support.
As we look to Fiscal Year 2016 and beyond, MCC will build
on this model of success. The President's budget request of
$1.25 billion will help unlock MCC's own potential to advance
America's interests in three important ways.
First, by enabling new and deeper partnerships in
critically important regions; second, by supporting efforts to
drive transparency and improve data across the development
community; and third, by leveraging private sector investments
to widen impact and create trade and investment opportunities
for American businesses.
Let me expand just briefly on each of these points.
Partnerships--over the past decade the majority of MCC's
partnerships have been in Africa. Roughly 65 percent of the
agency's portfolio has been invested on the continent, mostly
in large scale infrastructure--roads, ports, power lines, water
systems--projects that are designed to unlock impediments to
economic growth.
MCC is playing a key role in advancing the administration's
Power Africa initiative. We have made a $1 billion commitment
to Power Africa and we intend to commit roughly another $1
billion to energy-focused compacts in sub-Saharan Africa.
The MCC brand in Africa is strong and the continent holds
tremendous promise for MCC to deepen its impact. In Fiscal Year
2016, MCC will continue its bedrock commitment to Africa with
investments in two of the countries hardest hit by Ebola--
Liberia and Sierra Leone.
We will also focus on Niger, one of the poorest democracies
in the world and a critical ally in the fight against violent
extremism. And MCC will fund a new threshold program in Cote
d'Ivoire, a country that reformed its entire family code to
provide women equal rights as part of its effort to gain our
assistance.
While Africa will remain a core focus, MCC is also
developing its first ever compact in South Asia with Nepal, one
of the poorest countries in the region and now a committed
democracy. And the board recently approved new compacts with
the Philippines and Mongolia.
Those countries present important opportunities to leverage
our impact on poverty reduction and support U.S. interests in
the region. In each of these partnerships, MCC will commit
itself to evidence-based decision making and accountability for
results.
But what we have learned and what we know is that economies
do not act in isolation. Markets are regional and if we seek to
truly turn the dial on economic growth, we must think and act
regionally.
That is why we are requesting the operational flexibility
to explore regional investments in appropriate circumstances
and on a targeted basis. Examples could include linking
transportation infrastructure within Central America or
enhancing access to power in West Africa or in South Asia.
Such investments offer the potential of fighting poverty on
a wider scale, with higher economic returns and greater
economies of scale. And they are squarely aligned with MCC's
mission and its decade of experience in infrastructure
development and incentive-based reforms.
I am grateful to Chairman Royce for his support of regional
investments and to Representative Bass for her sponsorship of
such legislation.
Second, data and transparency are built into everything we
do at MCC. Indeed, in 2013 MCC was named the most transparent
aid agency in the world. That leadership will continue as we
release detailed geospatial and gender data on our investments
and as we work with the consortium of organizations to collect
even better data on governance.
Finally, catalyzing private investment is at the core of
our work. At the heart of the MCC model is investments that
overcome barriers to growth, reform key sectors and create
opportunities. The recent Ghana Power Compact serves as a model
in this regard.
MCC's $498 million investment in Ghana is expected to
attract over $4 billion in U.S. private sector funding by
transforming the country's power sector. In all of these areas,
MCC punches above its weight.
Our impact reaches beyond the specific projects that we
fund. By helping to reform policies and revamp institutions, we
help put our partner countries on the road to self-sufficiency
and a future without aid.
I know your constituents expect their money to be well
spent, with clear metrics for success and a solid rate of
return. That is why MCC treats foreign assistance like a
business, making decisions based on hard data and rigorous
analysis.
That is why we closely monitor results on the ground and
hold country partners accountable, and that is why I can assure
you that in MCC, American taxpayers are getting a good return
on their investment.
On behalf of the agency, I would like to thank the
committee for its support and guidance over the past decade. I
look forward to our continued collaboration and to helping to
build a more secure and prosperous future here at home and
abroad. Thank you. I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hyde follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ms. Hyde. Thank you very much.
I have got three questions that I want to ask and,
Ambassador, I will just start with you.
Over the past year, the committee has become increasingly
concerned as we have seen USAID inhibiting the congressional
watchdog here, the GAO, from doing its job, and as you know I
spoke with former Administrator Shaw about this after being
contacted a number of times by the GAO. And he gave me a
written assurance that this policy would be repealed and that
the GAO would be provided with the information including
unredacted documents that it needs.
And I was just going to ask you is this your commitment as
well?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you
also for the many opportunities where you support our programs.
Certainly, I give you that commitment.
Chairman Royce. That is fine. That is fine with me. That is
good enough.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Okay.
Chairman Royce. We will see the policy is repealed and I
will work with you on that and I appreciate it.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. On food aid reform is another area where I
worked with Director Shaw closely and I have been working with
the ranking member and other members of this committee for 2
years now to try to make food aid--the program there--more
efficient and more effective.
And we want to get more food sent to more people in need in
real time here when these disasters hit and we can do this at a
lesser cost if we--and we have made some progress in doing it.
But, Ambassador, how much does USAID spend annually on
shipping food aid as a result of the U.S. cargo preference
requirements and how would USAID's food aid program be affected
if cargo preference was bumped back up to 75 percent as been--
as was proposed by some last year?
And I follow that up with another question--how many U.S.
shipping companies benefit from agricultural cargo preferences?
Are they all wholly U.S.-owned and how many more people could
be reached with 45 percent flexibility, assuming a budget of
$1.4 billion? If I can kind of give you that outlay and get
your feedback.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In answer to the question how many--how much did we spend,
about $175 million to ship food aid was spent in Fiscal Year
2013 with about $125 million spent on U.S. flag vessels to
comply with cargo preference requirements.
There are, as you indicated or requested, there are three
carriers--principal carriers--that account for about 85 percent
of the food aid shipped in the past two fiscal years and we
spend, as I said, $175 million.
The request for Fiscal Year 2016 is to give us a 25-percent
leeway in that. That amount--that kind of flexibility would
allow us to feed about 2 million more people around the world.
It would probably get us to a point where we would be able
to cut maybe 11 to 14 weeks off of delivery and it would get
food in a timely fashion to those in need using a number of
ways--voucher systems, cash vouchers, credit cards--to purchase
local food items.
In general, it would create an environment where,
certainly, we would be faster in our effort to get food around
to those in need.
So I hope that was a--those responses addressed each of
your questions.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ambassador.
The other issue I was going to raise is land tenure in the
Philippines. As I noted in my opening statement, individual
property and title transfer rights are really critical and we
see this playing out all over the world.
It helped spark a revolution across North Africa and the
Middle East, and in Haiti the inability to secure land title
has really impeded our recovery efforts there.
In Cambodia and the Philippines, land grabbing routinely
undermines U.S.-supported development efforts. So given the
significance of U.S. investments in the Philippines, I have
been pressing USAID and MCC to tackle the land grabbing issue
there for years.
I have made several trips there and seen this first hand,
been out to some of the areas where this has occurred. I very
much appreciate your efforts but it is unclear to me how high
this is on the Embassy's priority list and that is why I raise
it.
Ambassador, what specifically is USAID doing to urge the
Government of the Philippines to address the issue of land
grabbing and have any of the corrupt local officials who are
complicit in land grabbing been held accountable?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Land tenure remains a key priority for USAID. The lack of
formal access to land and natural resources is, in many ways, a
major cause of poverty, certainly, conflict or, for that
matter, prevention of a country from reaching its full
development.
Since 2008, USAID has worked to improve regulatory
requirements for the Philippines--the Government of the
Philippines--and streamline land registration processes of one
description or another.
I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that in response to Typhoon
Haiyan, many Philippine citizens lost their title as a result
of that catastrophe and one of the things that we are doing
specifically as your request is working with the Government of
the Philippines as well as the city of Leyte to restore those
deeds and titles to the people, farmers and other landholders.
Again, as I think about this issue, the Philippines is
certainly our focus but we are also looking at this across the
globe.
My own experience in Tanzania was one where land tenure
became such a critical issue that in some cases people did not
seek out an opportunity to improve themselves simply because
they were denied the opportunity for land.
And when we made it possible through encouraging the
government's reform for people to use the land--farmers--they
produced sufficient food items for themselves but also they
produced items sufficient enough to sell on the market--the
local markets.
And so they improved themselves. They sent their children
to school as a result of the cash they were able to secure as
result of selling additional food items, and so this issue is a
major consideration in development.
And so you have pressed on a very key issue that we
certainly have taken to heart and we will continue to work with
your--you and your committee as something that certainly we
have to get resolved as quickly as we possibly can.
Chairman Royce. And one of the things that is happening is
that very well-connected developers at the local level where
there is local government corruption are basically blocking
access to public roads.
I saw this myself driving out to one of these areas where
this had happened, and roaring up on a motorcycle is, you know,
one of the private guards employed. He produces a semi-
automatic weapon and tells us we won't be able to access that
public road. He has blocked that road.
What he is in the process of doing is taking the land of
people on the other side of that road, or his employer is in
the process of doing that, because they can no longer access
that land.
And this is a process that, despite our effort to get it
reversed, has not been reversed. At the Presidential level, the
President--President Aquino--has tried to impact this.
But at the local level in the Philippines, USAID and MCC,
despite all of their engagement there--and we have a $433
million compact with the Philippines that is going to be
completed in May 2016. In December the board made the
Philippines eligible to develop a second compact.
So I think the MCC agrees that the lack of enforceable
property and land tenure rights in the Philippines constrains
economic growth. I know what I have heard from the U.S.--
Philippine-American investment community about their
experiences there, their problems there.
Will you condition the second compact upon progress in this
area to make sure that on these public roads the Federal
Government in the Philippines keeps them open, keeps them
public and you remove those well-placed--those, you know, well-
connected developers who are out there blocking access so that
people can get to their property?
And the other question I would ask is what--both of you--
what else can we be doing to press the government to take this
seriously?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In reference to the compact, well, first, let me say that
MCC's experience has absolutely been the case that one of the
key impediments to economic growth is insecure land tenure and
the need for land reform.
So we have worked in those areas in many countries. We are
working now in Cabo Verde. We are building a compact in Morocco
that has land reform at the center of it.
We are, as you mentioned, looking at a second investment in
the Philippines. We are in the very early stages of that. We
will be guided, of course, by the economic analysis. But I
commit to you that if land is an issue in the Philippines we
will take a very careful look at it.
Chairman Royce. But wait a minute. We have been working on
this for 3 years now. We have taken two trips down there. We
have had this happen in the middle of the typhoon.
We have had this happen on an ongoing basis with respect to
people's inability to access their property. Having already had
this compact in place, my point is these are discussions--as I
said, I don't know how high this is on the Embassy's list of
things to do but the principal impediment to investment there
is getting this process fixed so that people--and the other
point I would make is it is a major issue in terms of people in
the Philippines now who don't have the means of preventing
well-connected people from routinely doing this.
As I say, nobody to my knowledge has been charged in this
process and, frankly, to be on a public road and to hear about
this and go out there and have a gun waved in your face is just
an affirmation or an indication of what people are talking
about is a huge problem that is not being confronted, not being
reversed.
Anyway, I will leave you with that. I am out of time. I
will go to Mr. Engel, and thank you very much.
Ms. Hyde. Thank you.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Lenhardt, I want to ask you a question about
Ukraine. The chairman and I have gone to Ukraine together. A
few weeks ago, Secretary Kerry was here before this committee
and we talked to him about Ukraine. I, and many others, believe
that we should be aiding Ukraine with--allowing them to have
weapons to defend themselves.
But I want to talk about Ukraine's financial stability. The
United States, along with the European Union, the IMF and the
World Bank are helping Ukraine remain financially stable with
rounds of loan guarantees.
What will the administration and USAID do to help Ukraine,
including another round of loan guarantees or loans? Do we have
anything in the--in the pipe now for them?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Congressman.
Ukraine is, certainly, a country that we have spent a lot
of time and, certainly, some of our resources because it is an
important entity.
We are doing a lot of work now assisting Ukraine become
stronger in terms of its government but also from the
standpoint of supporting civil society and doing as many other
things to bolster the country so that it is strengthened at a
time when it is being threatened.
The loan guarantee specifically--we have secured one or at
least supported one loan guarantee of $1 billion. Based upon
the performance of Ukraine to date, it looks very favorable
that a second billion-dollar loan might be in the offing.
But from all indications in terms of what Ukraine is doing,
we feel encouraged by their efforts and, quite frankly, looking
forward how we can help them become even stronger.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Let me ask you a similar question. We all know--I was
driving in this morning and heard again the reports that Assad,
who we seem to be somewhat cozying up to--I don't know why--has
apparently dropped some more poison gas on the civilian
population.
So we know the crisis in Syria is just horrendous. It has
displaced more than one half of Syria's population, created
more than 3 million refugees, and while the United States is
the single largest global donor of humanitarian assistance to
help the victims of both Assad and ISIS, much work obviously
still remains to be done.
So how will you assure that U.S. assistance gets to the
Syrian refugees and the internally displaced people in Syria
and is not intercepted by Assad or terrorist group?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
We are doing a lot of work in Syria. Currently, Syria
citizens are internally displaced to the tune of about 8
million--nearly 8 million people, those who refugees in other
countries--Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey--another nearly 4 million
people.
And so the crisis is real. It is the most, at this point in
time, probably the most significant humanitarian crisis that we
have in the world. We are reaching out in major ways to help
the Syrian people with food aid, health and in some cases we
are providing, you know, learning opportunities for children.
Mr. Engel. Are they aware--are they aware that this aid
comes from the United States? When there is food aid does the
local population understand that we are the ones providing it
for them?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Mr. Congressman, yes, they are, and I
say that because although we don't mark it in a major way with
our logos and, as many other, perhaps our flag because of the
situation and the potential to put people in harm's way both
from the standpoint of those recipient of the aid as well as
those who are administering the aid, the beneficiaries
certainly are aware of the fact that America has risen to the
challenge of helping them.
The impression that we get from implementing partners is
that people know where this aid comes from. They are told as
the aid is being administered, as opposed to putting out big
flashy sign, because in some cases with ISIL and their
activities would certainly--there would be retaliation.
So from that standpoint, I think that the Syrian people who
are receiving the aid know that America is there helping them.
Mr. Engel. Let me--let me ask you a quick question about
health. Most of the world has been rightfully focused on Ebola
in West Africa.
But I think it is also important to state and remember that
millions of people around the world die each year from other
terrible contagious but treatable diseases like tuberculosis
and HIV/AIDS.
So I was disappointed when I looked through the
administration's proposed budget. There's a proposal to cutting
bilateral tuberculosis funding by $45 million, which is a 19-
percent cut from Fiscal Year 2015.
Can you comment on that, and if this proposal moves forward
can you elaborate on how this substantial cut in funding would
be implemented?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The request for 2016 is actually overall a plus-up of $66
million and so it becomes a matter of working within a
constrained environment, setting priorities as to how much we
can do, and we have set as the principal focus for our global
health preventing child and maternal deaths.
The second is to respond to infectious diseases and,
certainly, a third priority would be figuring out how we can
extend as much as possible our efforts around the globe. The
point of TB it is--it is a disease, certainly, that is
problematic but it is not something that we have forgotten.
The $66 million plus-up for global health is determined or
at least aimed at helping as many opportunities as we can.
Child and mother--maternal mortality can be reduced by as much
as 13--saving 13 million children and saving 600,000 mothers.
And so my point is that we don't necessarily are neglecting
the treatment of tuberculosis as much as we are putting the
resources where they can do the most good, if that makes sense.
And I know I am a bit rambling on that but I am trying to
get across the fact that constrained resources create an
opportunity for us to prioritize.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. We can talk after the hearing or----
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sir, I would like to do that--come
back to you.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. So I understand that. Thank you.
I just want to, before I go off, again, thank Ms. Hyde for
her help with Kosovo. It is very important. And let me just
say, the MCC was created to be a different type of foreign
assistance model and complement other foreign assistance tools
in the USG tool.
Could you tell us what--where you feel the future is for
the MCC and what you feel you have done?
Ms. Hyde. Sure. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
I appreciate the question and I appreciate your remarks on
Kosovo. We are committed to working with your team to get us to
a place where Kosovo can be evaluated in tandem with other
nations.
MCC was created as a different model of foreign assistance
and it is unique in many ways. It is highly focused on select
countries that are relatively well performing in governance.
It has, over the years, created what is known as an
incentive effect--the MCC effect. What we see is that countries
are changing their laws just in an effort to receive MCC
assistance before any taxpayer money is spent. That sort of
incentive structure is certainly true and we have seen many
examples of that in Africa.
I mentioned one country in my testimony, Cote d'Ivoire,
that changed its entire family code in an effort to pass the
scorecard.
So the scorecard has been a powerful tool for incentivizing
good governance and I think moving forward is something, as we
look to go into regional work as the chairman mentioned, we
absolutely have to be true to those eligibility requirements
and to the model on which this is based.
It has also been a leader in data and transparency and
taking the information and the decisions that we make,
evaluating them strenuously and putting them out for all of us
to learn, and we have learned lessons over the decade as to
what investments were working and not working.
It is catalytic in the way that I think we mentioned around
private investment. So MCC is looking, by definition, at what
is the barrier to growth, with an economic team, and looking to
invest to overcome those barriers.
We are also looking at the regulatory environment, the
policy environment in particular sectors. Here, Ghana is an
example. As part of our investment we are asking the Government
of Ghana to undertake really hard reforms in the energy sector
that will help make that sector more sustainable.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We are going to go to Ms. Ros-
Lehtinen of Florida, chairman of the Subcommittee on Middle
East and North Africa.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome
to you both.
Ambassador, the United States has contributed over $3.5
billion in humanitarian assistance since the start of the
Syrian conflict and the President is now seeking an additional
$1.6 billion for these efforts for Fiscal Year 2016 alone.
But we must ensure that we are being as efficient and as
effective as possible with that aid. Seventy-two percent of
that aid that we have provided thus far has been routed through
U.N. agencies and U.N. initiatives.
My concern is that once this money goes to the U.N. we lose
our oversight into what is actually being done with that
assistance, which is why I was joined by Congressman Deutch,
Mr. Connolly and Mr. DeSantis last month in requesting a GAO
report on our Syria humanitarian assistance.
What mechanisms do we have in place to ensure that the aid
that we send through the U.N. gets to the intended recipients
and does the administration have a humanitarian response
strategy that is distinct from the ISIL strategy, and if so
what is it and if not, why not?
Moving to Afghanistan, sir, we learn from SIGAR's
Supplemental Report released on February 27th that State and
USAID only responded to three of SIGAR's 24 questions by the
deadline that was December 29th, and as of the report's release
14 questions still have not been answered.
This isn't the first time that we have had an issue with
State and USAID stalling or not getting answers to SIGAR as
well as GAO. Where is State and USAID in answering these 14
questions and what would SIGAR and GAO say if we called them up
right now for an assessment?
On the Palestinian issue--on April 1st, the Palestinians
will officially be members of the International Criminal Court,
the ICC, and in my view that has already triggered U.S. law to
cut off funding.
While the administration has indicated that it does not
believe that the PA's actions triggered the suspension of U.S.
aid, it has said that a review of aid to the Palestinian
Authority is underway.
What is the current status of the third tranche of
outstanding aid to the PA and what is new with the review? And
lastly, though, the President's budget request includes $20
million for democracy assistance to Cuba.
I worry that the administration's normalization effort
might signal the end of our efforts to promote democracy and
governance on the island and, indeed, throughout the Western
Hemisphere.
I am concerned about the track USAID is taking with regard
to closed societies, especially those impacting our region. In
Venezuela, for example, many of us have been advocating for
years that the people of Venezuela need more democracy and
governance funds.
Yet, the administration still does not give Venezuela the
attention it desperately needs. Can USAID provide the committee
with a breakdown on how much aid in the Western Hemisphere is
specifically going toward democracy and governance programs?
And then, lastly, for Ms. Hyde, MCC is in the middle of
implementing a $277 million compact with El Salvador awarded
because of that country's supposed commitment to political
rights, to the rule of law, to control of corruption.
This is despite widespread concerns over El Salvador's
March 1st election, the results of which have still not been
announced. Will MCC suspend El Salvador's compact if elections
there are determined not to have been free and fair?
Ambassador?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congresswoman. You have
given me quite an interesting plate here and see if I can take
them in order.
To begin with, our support to various communities and
refugees and other humanitarian programs around the world we
continually assess those programs. We evaluate the
effectiveness of those programs.
We have mechanisms in place to determine how well those
programs are being carried out. We use a tiered effect and
tiered operation opportunity to determine how effective the
programs are on the ground. Personnel are implementing,
partners provide feedback as to how the program is being
executed.
We do so by third party independent contractors who go out
and assess or, if we have the opportunity ourselves, using our
Foreign Service officers, the civil servants, to see what is
happening on the ground. And so there is a process by which we
check on the effectiveness of various programs.
Chairman Royce. General, I am going to--I am going to make
a suggestion here. It will make it easier on you, too.
Why don't we--why don't we respond in writing to those
questions, and I think that would be the most efficient and I
will remind members just to allow our panelists time to respond
to their questions.
We will go to Mr. Gregory Meeks of New York, ranking member
of the Subcommittee on Europe.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ambassador, Ms. Hyde, thank you for your testimony. You
know, I just came back from Asia and I am one who believes in
the President's agenda with reference to TPP and the importance
of international trade.
But one of my pet peeves has always been in any trade
agreement is what are we doing with reference to trade capacity
in development, particularly how does trade promotion and how
can that assist the most vulnerable especially in developing
countries and where there is minority populations and Afro-
Colombian communities.
So in this year's budget for the MCC and the USAID, is
there any plan--what is planned for trade promotion and for the
inclusion of these communities in trade benefits so that
everyone can benefit from the bottom up and not just from the
top down?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you, Congressman. I appreciate the question
very much.
At MCC we do think trade capacity is a core component of
economic growth and we have worked over the portfolio, over $10
billion, in a number of investments that are trade capacity--
infrastructure investments, obviously, building roads,
facilitating ports and the like, and depending upon the
estimate one thinks roughly half are depending upon the
definition of trade capacity, roughly half of our portfolio has
been committed in that area. That said, we are looking forward
to see what we can do more on trade capacity building and
certainly see what we could do more to reach out to American
businesses.
So later this year, we will be leading the MCC's first ever
trade mission with business leaders to Africa. This came out of
the AGOA Summit last summer.
We will be doing more of those to purposefully present the
opportunities that our investments make themselves but in and
around our investments if we are bolstering capacity.
We are also doing a second thing which is we start with a
constraints to growth analysis--economic analysis. We are
integrating into that analytical tool trade capacity
specifically so that more of our investments will be oriented
in that way.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman.
One of the efforts we have is a major program, Trade--in
addition to Power Africa but it is also Trade Africa--focused
on trade and how do we extend, how do we cause a proliferation
of trade opportunities for American businesses.
This program is specifically in Africa but I would share
with you that it is happening in other places around the world
in terms of our focus on trade.
Trade becomes the one tool that anything we have the
opportunity to connect with countries both for their own
prosperity and security as well as our own and an opportunity
for American businesses to certainly become available and use
the technology that they offer to many of these countries.
I will give you an example in Tanzania. As the Ambassador
to Tanzania, I was very active in encouraging American
businesses to come to Tanzania and in fact we were able to
bring about the necessary reforms in Tanzania where the
government itself began to use the phraseology ``Tanzania is
open for business.''
And in those countries--companies, rather, that came to
Tanzania, they flourished. They did very well. Some of the
companies--IBM, John Deere and as many others who came and, by
the way, small businesses as well.
Mr. Meeks. Well, on that let me--let me ask because of the
small business. What has also played a significant role is
micro finance----
Ambassador Lenhardt. Yes.
Mr. Meeks [continuing]. In those areas and reducing poverty
in these emerging economies, these micro--and often these small
investments, you know, they leverage other opportunities in
these communities.
So can you just tell me what USAID and then also in the
time I have left I have another question that I guess I could
ask and just have it--you respond to me.
The MCC proposal do you provide funding and support for
these efforts and any new initiatives to reach vulnerable
groups and attract other funds including American investment.
And here I am specifically interested in efforts in Africa and
USAID and MCC projects.
So if you could answer that, and then probably to answer I
am also concerned about the lack of dollars and spending in
regards to democracy promotion.
It has fallen by 38 percent since 2009, hit a low $1.4
billion in 2014 and furthermore the number of countries where
USAID operates dedicated to a democracy program has fallen from
91 to 63.
So maybe in writing you can respond to me on that. But can
you answer my second question in the 14 seconds I have left?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Congressman.
I will conclude by saying that USAID has been pivotal in
shaping the micro finance industry, particularly by
transforming it into a market-driven model that attracts
private investors, companies who bring to the table their own
capital and so from that standpoint we are looking to see how
we can explore, how we can do more.
Interestingly enough, in those cases where we are putting
out micro financing, women do very well and, by the way, as my
experience in Tanzania, not only did they bring about the
activity that they were embarked on, farming generally, but
they also paid back the loan.
Mr. Meeks. Ambassador, I am out of time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Meeks. So I would love to get your response in writing
and also let me talk to you about Haiti.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Gregory W. Meeks
USAID has been a leader in the Democracy, Human Rights and
Governance (DRG) sector for many years, defending human rights and
civil society and strengthening sound democratic institutions around
the world.
It is true that USAID's spending for democracy, human rights and
governance has dropped by over a third since FY 2009. At the same time,
over half of this decline has resulted from the evolution of programs
in just three countries: Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan. It is the
other half of the budget decline that has impacted our democracy, human
rights and governance programs in the rest of the world, particularly
in Africa. This is our greatest present challenge.
USAID has already begun to act: it has made modest but important
increases in its FY 15 budget, and the President's FY 16 budget
includes substantial increases in requests for democracy, human rights
and governance for USAID. For FY 2016, the Administration has requested
$2.9 billion for global DRG assistance, an increase of nearly $1.0
billion over the FY 2014 enacted level.
While we are working to address the budget challenges of recent
years, we are also pursuing a more integrated approach to development,
making DRG a critical element to all development programs. Only through
respect for human rights, civic engagement, and accountability of
public officials will development gains in health and education, for
example, be sustainable over the long-term.
Despite the challenges to its budget, USAID has been and will
continue to be a leader in supporting the President's national security
policy on human rights and democratic governance. USAID has been an
active member of the Atrocity Prevention Board and has pioneered the
training of USG field officers in this area. We have provided important
support to the Open Government Partnership, through which almost 70
countries have committed to implementing concrete actions in the area
of transparency and anti-corruption. USAID is also a key player in
President Obama's Stand with Civil Society initiative, which is
addressing authoritarian encroachments on political space around the
world. In addition, the Agency has developed new guidance for our
programs in closed spaces. And USAID is an inter-agency leader in
shaping a more comprehensive USG approach to addressing conflict,
fragility and violent extremism. In carrying out these initiatives,
USAID has leveraged significant funding from other public and private
donors. For example, we have raised $50 million of external funding for
its Civil Society Innovation Initiative and $40 million for its Grand
Challenge on Making All Voices Count.
In addition, during this Administration USAID has issued a new
strategy on democracy, human rights and governance. The new strategy
codifies a more holistic approach to our programming in this sector by
focusing on participation, inclusion, and accountability, while
elevating human rights and integration of programming across economic
and social sectors. All of these efforts come on top of our continuing
work in areas such as electoral support. For example the support that
USAID provided to Nigeria's recent election--assistance to the
electoral commission, political parties, and NGO monitors--was a key
factor in Nigeria's historic transition of power. All of these examples
speak to the important work that has been carried out despite the
budgetary challenges.

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Meeks.
And now we turn to Mr. Rohrabacher, the chairman on the
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
I would like to identify myself with what Mr. Meeks just
brought up on in terms of the importance of micro finance as
compared to--even comparing that to the bigger loans and the
more substantial financial dealings that we seem to be involved
with.
Also, I would like to identify myself with the remarks of
Chairman Royce in terms of the concern about title and actual
ownership--the legal basis of this. Establishing micro loans
and looking for title and ownership rights is actually a low
cost way of achieving great things, and just a thought there.
Let me just note that with that and with the concern Mr.
Royce has expressed today we also need to make sure that those
governments that are engaged with stealing property, especially
from American citizens, do not benefit by the benevolence of
our Government.
Specifically, the Government of Ethiopia, which there is a
family in Orange County in which Chairman Royce and myself are
familiar--with an immigrant family from Ethiopia whose property
has been stolen and the Ethiopian Government refuses to not
only return--not return it but not offer any type of just
compensation whatsoever.
So I would hope in the millennium the MCC does not provide
Ethiopia or other governments like it that steal property from
Americans that we offer them sort of some loan guarantees, et
cetera.
The--in terms of the overall program in terms of America's
assistance, I would prefer to see a program--an assistance
program aimed more at emergencies and disasters rather than
economic development.
When people are in tragic and horrible situations, we as
human beings need--there is a moral obligation for us to reach
out and help them and as we see that in the Middle East today.
So I would hope that those millions of people, especially,
for example, in the Middle East where--and the Kurds are taking
in 1 million or more--1\1/2\ million people, which they have
very little budget.
Let me ask Mr. Ambassador, is--are we providing direct aid
to the Kurds now or does all of this have to go through Baghdad
which, of course, is ruled by Baghdad government which is ruled
by people who think of the Kurds as an adversary?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Mr. Congressman, for the
question.
We are providing assistance to people who need it without
regard to whether or not it is in a direction fashion to the
Kurds or, for that matter, that it is funneled through----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Maybe I will go directly--does our aid
that goes to--that eventually ends up with the Kurds do we have
to ship that through Baghdad first? Does that have to be
approved by Baghdad before we are permitted to give that direct
assistance? That could be a yes or no question.
Ambassador Lenhardt. I will come back to you on that
question. I don't have all the details, Congressman.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you, General.
Ambassador Lenhardt. So I will come back to you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would appreciate that.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Dana Rohrabacher
U.S. humanitarian assistance is not channeled through government
(central or regional) authorities in Iraq. U.S. government humanitarian
assistance in Iraq is delivered on an impartial basis by trusted
partners, including United Nations (U.N.) agencies, public
international organizations such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the International Organization for Migration, and NGOs.
The U.N. coordinates the international humanitarian effort in Iraq,
under the leadership of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Lise Grande. To ensure the most effective response and to avoid
duplication of efforts, the U.N. coordinates with relevant government
bodies such as the Joint Monitoring and Coordination Center in Baghdad
and the Joint Crisis Coordinating Center in Erbil.
The U.S. government has provided nearly $220 million for
humanitarian assistance to Iraqis in the region since the start of
Fiscal Year 2014. Of the nearly $220 million, USAID has provided $29.74
million; the State Department's Bureau for Population, Refugees and
Migration $182.3 million; and the Department of Defense contribution of
$7.5 million.
U.S. government humanitarian assistance is focused on the provision
of food and other relief commodities, shelter (including repairs),
water and sanitation, health care, protection (including specialized
services for women, children, and survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence), and humanitarian coordination and logistics. Rather than
being targeted to particular communities or locations, U.S.
humanitarian assistance is provided on a country-wide basis, and
focused on the populations in greatest need who can be reached by our
humanitarian partners. Currently it is too dangerous for many relief
organizations to work in ISIL-held areas, therefore, the majority of
U.S. humanitarian assistance is concentrated among Iraqi internally-
displaced persons and Syrian refugee populations in the north, center
and south of the country.
Despite the ongoing strong support by the United States to
vulnerable Iraqis, tremendous needs remain. We regularly urge other
donors to contribute generously to the U.N. appeal for Iraq, and we
continue to press the Government of Iraq to support its displaced
citizens.

Mr. Rohrabacher. Let us just note when we talk about--I
just came back from Egypt where they have a tremendous effort
that is going on with many other countries to help build an
economy. We should be very grateful for that.
And in terms of one last note about Pakistan, we have been
giving--we have given over $28 billion of assistance of one
kind or another over the last 15 years to Pakistan. I
understand next year's list is about $500 million.
I am wondering are we still going to be giving this money
as we--when we read reports where just yesterday a Christian
community church was blown up and 15 Christians were murdered,
where we see thousands of innocent people being murdered in the
Kurdistan region of Pakistan.
Are we going to continue giving Pakistan that money even as
it imprisons Dr. Afridi, the man who helped us bring to justice
the man--the people who slaughtered 3,000 Americans on 9/11?
Are we going to--when are we going to wake up and realize
that the Pakistani Government is engaged in activity that
actually murders Americans, murders their own citizens and is
involved with religious persecution? Anybody want to tackle
that?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher, but time is
up, and they will get to you in writing.
Dr. Bera, your time is----
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Last week, under the leadership of Chairman Royce we had a
chance to visit some of the--your staff, Ambassador, on the
ground in India. We visited the Vivekananda slum outside of New
Delhi where some of your staff is working on clean water and
sanitation efforts.
Doing a great job, by the way. Incredibly important work in
the sense of helping plan out a community, helping, you know,
put something as simple as toilets into a slum of, you know,
thousands of individuals.
Why this is incredibly important, as we are thinking about
empowering women and girls, as we are looking at safety, you
know, something as basic as giving them a place to go use the
restroom and privacy has dramatic effect.
So, again, I just want to compliment your staff for what
they are doing out there. This is an incredibly important area
to me as we look at maternal-child health and women's
empowerment around the world.
I am glad that I do see an increase in the budget request
of about 8 percent in USAID's budget. What I am curious about
is, you know, specific efforts on women's empowerment, specific
resources that are going to empower women and then, you know,
specific efforts on family planning and reproductive health in
the budget priorities, if you can briefly talk about that or--
--
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you
also for taking the time to visit India and seeing on the
ground first hand some of our work that is underway.
The support to India, and I can take it from the top--the
macro level--the strategic partnership is very important to us
and as we think about our shift to Asia and the support there,
India is a very important partner and besides being the
largest, you know, democratic democracy in the world.
Specifically as it relates to women, we have a number of
programs aimed at empowering women, starting with basic
education, creating an environment where women have the
opportunity--girls have the opportunity to learn, to grow and
eventually make a major contribution to their country and their
families and many other things.
We also look at women from the standpoint of how do we
protect them, how do we ensure that they are not victims of, in
the case of India as was reported in the news recently, violent
rapes and other assaults.
And so our programs are aimed at securing women, girls as
much as possible, keeping them protected from gender-based
violence as well as thinking about girls who are being forced
into early marriages. And so all of these efforts are aimed at
empowering women, keeping them safe.
You saw some of that when you were on the ground, and so we
feel confident that this is working for us but more work has to
be done. And so it is a--it is a constant routine for us to
reach out to empower girls.
Mr. Bera. Right. So let us continue to maintain a focus
and, certainly, this office will continue to work there.
On the U.S.-India relationship as well, as we build
momentum USAID is also launching a very innovative program, the
Diaspora Bonds, which I think is the first of its type of
program. Again, it is in the very early phases.
But it is to encourage the Indian-American diaspora to
invest in India and, you know, I would be curious to get your
sense on that and any specifics about that program.
Ambassador Lenhardt. I would have to come back to you. The
details of that, Congressman, I don't have that at hand. But I
will say that working with any diaspora is very important
because they have a voice.
They, certainly, have an opportunity to encourage and
supporting financially in many cases the country and,
certainly, the issues that are present in India. And so I will
have to come back to you with the specifics as to the program.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Ami Bera
USAID's Indian Diaspora Investment Initiative (IDII) enables U.S.
investors, particularly the Indian American diaspora, to support the
expansion of social enterprises (businesses that tackle poverty) across
India, working in sectors including agriculture, education, energy
efficiency, healthcare, and water and sanitation.
U.S. investors (including the Indian American diaspora) will be
able to purchase a ``Diaspora Investment Note,'' issued by the Calvert
Foundation, a social impact investment fund. The Calvert Foundation
will pool this capital and lend it to multiple partners (with strong
track records of supporting social enterprises) which will use the
proceeds to lend to small- and medium-sized social enterprises
operating in USAID's target sectors in India. Once the social
enterprises repay their loans, the partners will repay the Calvert
Foundation, which thereafter will repay investors their principal plus
nominal interest.
A key component of the IDII is an innovative USAID Development
Credit Authority (DCA) partial credit guarantee of the loans from four
Indian financial institutions (two banks and two non-bank finance
companies) to small- and medium-sized social enterprises operating in
USAID's target sectors in India. DCA partial credit guarantees reduce
the risks of lending, thereby helping financial institutions lend to
underserved sectors aligned with USAID's development objectives.
The goals of this innovative and cost-effective initiative include
1) increasing access to finance for social enterprises operating in the
target sectors in India, 2) providing a systematic pathway for the
Indian diaspora to invest in the development of their country of
origin/heritage, and 3) unlock sources of capital beyond USAID's grant
resources through a credible investment vehicle.
President Obama announced the broader IDII in January 2015. USAID
anticipates that the related DCA partial credit guarantee will be
signed by all partners by September 2015 and the Calvert Foundation
Diaspora Investment Note will be issued later in the year.

Mr. Bera. Great. There is a relatively new program that was
just announced by the President in January when he visited
India and, again, it is to leverage a diaspora that has done
every well here in the United States and empower them to invest
the resources through these bonds to, again, help some of the
social impact programs that, you know, specifically in this
case in India.
It looks like my time is up and, again, thank you both for
the work that you are doing.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Doctor Bera.
And now we will turn to Mr. Scott Perry, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, ladies and
gentleman, for being here today.
Ambassador, thank you for your service. I am wondering--the
Fiscal Year 2016 budget request provide the OIG $63 million
increase, an increase of over 16--of 16 percent over Fiscal
Year 2015.
Can you explain in light of that why--succinctly, if you
can, why the inspector general position has not been filled--
there is no nominee--1,200 days? If you can explain, what is
your perception? What is happening? What is the problem?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you for the question,
Congressman.
I don't think it is a question of anything that is short of
the fact that the search is underway.
Mr. Perry. Twelve hundred days? I mean, what about the
acting inspector general? Is that person not qualified? I mean,
how many days is appropriate?
Ambassador Lenhardt. That I can't respond to specifically
as much as to say that the function of the Office of the
Inspector General goes on. The work continues, the oversight,
the--certainly, the opportunity for our programs to get
reviewed, that is taking place.
Mr. Perry. Sir, I can appreciate that. But 1,200--to me, it
is inexcusable and maybe it has absolutely nothing to do with
you. I suspect that is the case.
But you must understand the American people demand
accountability, and while the work goes on there is not one
single person at the top that can really be focused upon for
the failings, and there are failings and they might not have
anything to do with you.
But it just shows to me a lack of commitment to the
oversight of a lot of money and in the face of large request it
seems antithetical.
But let me--let me move on to why I think there needs to be
more oversight. There have been some reports that the money in
Gaza for reconstruction some has been diverted to continue the
construction of tunnels by Hamas. Is there any truth to this?
Do you know of any?
Is there any truth to that other than reports and has the
money that USAID spent in Gaza in the past has any of that been
used for the making of tunnels--the construction of tunnels by
Hamas?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thanks for the question, Congressman.
The answer is no.
Mr. Perry. To which one? Both?
Ambassador Lenhardt. No. No to the fact that tunnels--money
for building tunnels, that is not something that I am aware of
that is taking place.
Mr. Perry. Okay. You are not aware of it but you don't know
that--you are not aware of it. So there is no proof at this
point. It could be happening but you are not aware?
Ambassador Lenhardt. I am not aware of.
Mr. Perry. Okay.
Ambassador Lenhardt. In fact, I would be very surprised
that that is happening and in fact, again, I mentioned earlier
that we have mechanisms to check on the progress of programs
and so none of that has come to our attention at this point.
Mr. Perry. Can I get a list of the projects that USAID has
funded in Gaza and how much money has been spent on each
project and what the status is of those projects?
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Scott Perry
Since the onset of the July-August 2014 conflict in Gaza, the
United States has committed $231 million in humanitarian assistance to
Gaza. This assistance has been provided to established United Nations
and non-governmental organizations, including the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency (UNRWA), the World Food Program, the United Nations
Development Program, UNICEF, the International Committee for the Red
Cross, and others, to provide urgently needed humanitarian relief
(water, food assistance, and hygiene and medical kits) and meet
immediate needs such as psychosocial support for children and families
and rubble removal. We are not currently aware of any reports that U.S.
assistance for humanitarian aid in Gaza, including reconstruction, has
been diverted for other purposes. The United States takes very
seriously any reports of diversion of its assistance, and we have long
required our partners in Gaza to take appropriate steps to prevent U.S.
funding from being diverted for non-intended purposes.
Consistent with statutory requirements, USAID has appropriate
procedures in place to ensure that Economic Support Fund (ESF)
assistance for the West Bank and Gaza is not provided to or through, or
diverted to, any individual or entity that is known to be involved in
or advocating terrorism, including Hamas. USAID's vetting process
checks non-U.S. individuals and entities within certain thresholds
against law enforcement and intelligence community systems prior to
local prime or sub award issuance. Worldwide, USAID requires grantees
to sign its Certification Regarding Terrorist Financing in order to
receive funds. In the West Bank and Gaza specifically, the annual
Appropriations Act requires annual audits of all USAID direct awardees,
as well as an annual Government Accountability Office audit of the use
of all ESF assistance.

Ambassador Lenhardt. Congressman, yes, you can get that
list but I will tell you that the work that is being done is
humanitarian assistance. It is providing food aid. It is
providing water. It is providing health----
Mr. Perry. I understand, but I want to make sure that all
of the money is going to those programs and none of it is going
to tunnel construction by Hamas.
That is what--that is what I am trying to ensure without--
with all due respect, without an IG present I am concerned that
some of that is slipping through the cracks.
But moving on, getting to what Ms. Ros-Lehtinen was talking
about regarding the Rome Statute and the Palestinian Authority,
I am curious to know what will happen to funding in Gaza to the
PA if they pursue criminal--war crimes charges against Israel.
Do you see that as an issue that will--that will trigger a
reduction in funding or a conversation of a prohibition of
funding or is that not relevant to the conversation?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you for the question.
I think all of that is relevant and at this point in time
we are reviewing----
Mr. Perry. So if they pursue war crimes against Israel,
what do you do? What can we expect from you?
Ambassador Lenhardt. War crimes against Israel--sir, I
can't answer that question in a way that would----
Mr. Perry. If it has an impact on your funding, on the
funding of USAID--what the Palestinian Authority and Hamas does
in the International Criminal Court, understanding Hamas is
recognized terrorist organization, if they pursue war crimes
against Israel are you telling me it will have no effect on the
funding----
Ambassador Lenhardt. No.
Mr. Perry [continuing]. From the United States Government
to the Palestinian Authority?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Congressman, I am not saying that at
all. I am saying that at this point in time that because of the
last several weeks and months, the Fiscal Year 2016 request is
under review with respect to our continued support to the
Palestinian Authority, and so that is happening. But answering
a hypothetical at this point I cannot provide that to you.
Mr. Perry. I understand. Thank you for your time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
And now we turn to my good friend, Mr. Ted Deutch, the
ranking member of the Middle East and North Africa
Subcommittee.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Nice hairdo.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much.
Welcome to our witnesses. Appreciate your being here in
your new capacity and commend the good work that both of you
do.
As ranking member of the Middle East and North Africa
Subcommittee, I have been particularly focused on the
humanitarian challenges stemming from the complex crises in the
region, in particular, Syria.
We are now more than 4 years in. There is no end in sight
and the humanitarian crisis grows larger every day, and as we
know, even if there was a political solution tomorrow, even if
Assad left tomorrow, the humanitarian crisis would continue for
years.
With 12.2 million people in need of assistance both inside
and outside of Syria and the daunting task of assisting the
growing needs in Iraq as ISIS forces wreak havoc on towns and
villages, forcing civilians to flee, the United States has
stepped up.
We have played the largest role as humanitarian donor, $3
billion already spent. The budget request this year includes
$1.6 billion for humanitarian needs in Syria and Iraq.
And my question, Ambassador Lenhardt, first, to you is what
is the ability of USAID partners to operate in regime-
controlled areas of Syria and what is their ability to operate
to the extent there is any in ISIS-controlled areas? What is
the status of these besieged communities?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you for the question,
Congressman.
I would, first, say that people who operate in these
areas--conflict areas--are doing so because they are motivated,
because they feel they can make a commitment to something
larger. They are, in many cases, heroes and heroines and so we
applaud what they are doing across the board.
With respect to our emphasis on safety, we continually talk
about safety. We ensure that they are--by causing them to be
situationally aware of what is going on or in and around the
areas where they operate it is the kind of thing where, quite
frankly, we are concerned about, certainly, the danger but
these people rise to the top.
They come fore--to the fore and implementing partners are
doing the work that, quite frankly, needs to be done in
threatening environments. We are providing aid to the Syrian
refugees as well as internally displaced people at a time when
others perhaps would not. But those people out there--the
courageous folks are doing that day in and day out.
Mr. Deutch. They do, and they are courageous, and if you
would pass on our sincere thanks to them for the work that they
do.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch. I am--I want to just shift gears in the
remaining time I have and talk about--just follow up on an
exchange that you had with Dr. Bera on the issue of girls and
women and empowering girls and educating girls--the issue of
gender-based violence, forced marriage, and we know that the
impact that it has throughout the world.
But the question I have is if, I think--Ambassador
Lenhardt, I will ask it differently but the issue is, you know,
we are considering a piece of legislation that I don't expect
you to comment on.
But the International Violence Against Women Act would
officially create an Office of Global Women's Issues so that we
can have someone in the administration at the ambassadorial
level to focus on these issues every single day.
This is an issue that, as far as I am concerned, should not
be controversial. My question is not for you to comment on the
legislation but to just let us know if it would--the extent to
which it is helpful to have someone at that level as an ally
for the work that you do, Ambassador Lenhardt, and Ms. Hyde, in
your case to the extent that countries express interest in
these gender equality issues and want to make that a part of
what they do with you.
Again, what would it be like to know that you have got that
ally, going forward?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
I can certainly speak from my own experience at the State
Department which is a fantastic instrument and tool of American
diplomacy and is organized in a way that has both regions and
functions.
And one of the perennial challenges is to integrate issues
across the globe and I think the position that you described,
and I saw this first hand, is how we can take that effort and
not just make it a siloed effort of women and girls but,
rather, how do we put it in both the regions and the functions
from humanitarian assistance to economic development and the
like.
So that, from my own experience, was an effective approach
to that. We work closely with that core group, and I will say
at MCC we have country teams. For every country we work with
there is an economist on the team, there is an M&E person on
the team and there is a social and gender person on every team.
So we matrix it that way.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Dr. Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I appreciate it. I
appreciate you two being here.
I am looking for answers or solutions. I want solutions,
because there is a lot of questions and with the money that the
American taxpayers have put in to foreign aid, and we hear all
kinds of numbers--it is less than 1 percent.
But when the military goes into Afghanistan or Iraq and
builds roads is that considered foreign aid? Because we don't
bring those roads back. Somebody is paying for those and it is
the American taxpayers, and when we look at all this money
going around the world can you tell me, say, any country, pick
a country.
We give $500 million to Pakistan or the Palestinian
Authority. Does that come out of the money that goes to you or
does that come out of State Department? Or the money we give--
or the money we give Mexico? Does that come out of USAID or MCC
or does that come out of the State Department?
Ms. Hyde. So thank you for the question. I will take a stab
at it, based upon my experience at OMB but it was in a
different context.
Those funds are all part of what is the 150 function. That
includes assistance that funds MCC, that funds the Peace Corps,
that funds the State Department and the like.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. So all that money goes out to you--goes
out?
Ms. Hyde. Goes--correct.
Mr. Yoho. Does it go out as cash, commodity, training,
equipment or other?
Ms. Hyde. Oh, I see. I see. So taking the conversation from
the account structure to the program level, each one of the
programs--my program in particular--has certain controls around
those funds.
I wouldn't speak to USAID but Ambassador Lenhardt can speak
to the controls around different types of funds. In MCC's case,
when we partner with a country we have at least five sets of
controls on disbursements. It starts with we are working with
countries that are in the upper half of well-governed
countries.
Second, we put a fiscal agent and a procurement agent on
the ground that is an outside entity in every program that we
have. Third, we oversee a completely open and transparent
procurement process where we have authority at every step of
the way before anything is verified as complete.
Fourth, the funds sit in the U.S. Treasury until we have
done the verification and then we are paying vendors directly.
So we are not putting the funds directly to the government.
And then finally, we maintain a 24/7 hotline, a robust set
of training----
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Let me stop you there. Because you talked
about transparency and accountability. We gave the country of
Afghanistan $1 billion in 2012--2013, I think it was.
There was $300 million unaccounted for. So if there is
transparency and accountability where did our $300 million go
that we don't know about and who is responsible for that? And
the person at the top of that organization, if they can't
account for it, they need to be fired.
The American taxpayers where I come from want to see that
happen. And when we give money and we are doing it for
democracy and human rights and we are promoting all this stuff,
which I agree--I think it is a great thing--but when we are
going in there and, as Dr. Bera brought up, we are putting in
toilets, we are doing, you know, civil law, we are doing these
in countries that have corrupt governments. How do you do that
and why is that our responsibility?
Why is that not the responsibility of that government and
if we are giving them money, a cookie, and it's a good cookie
and they want our cookie, why are we not willing to take that
back if they are not following the procedure if we have
transparency, if we have accountability?
Because I hear this story over and over again. I have been
here for 2 years, going into my third year, second term, and I
hear the same story over and over again.
But I don't see the end results, and with all the money we
have spent over the course of the last, you know, again 1
percent, $37.8 billion over 10 years--that is $370 billion of
American taxpayers' money--but yet has the world gotten safer?
Has our relationships gotten safer around the globe? Ambassador
Lenhardt.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman.
I believe our relationships and our security and our
prosperity has been enhanced as a result of our foreign aid.
Mr. Yoho. May I stop you there? Because as I get
Ambassadors that come in from countries all around the world,
they say when they look at America they don't want us around.
In Bob Gates' book talking about Pakistan, when they had
the floods that they came, they took the stuff. There wasn't
high five and they weren't excited to see the Americans there
because they don't trust us, and that was when we came in there
as a humanitarian relief.
And so we are not--we are missing something as we go out
and try to do this humanitarian thing and I see us spending a
lot of taxpayers' money and we are at $18 trillion in debt and
I don't see where we can afford to give money away when we are
broke.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman.
My experience is different both as the Ambassador to
Tanzania as well as the Ambassador to the East African
community with four other countries.
We were loved, and in Tanzania we has a 90-plus percent
approval favorable rating for the American people in our
outreach to the Tanzanian people. So my experience is
different.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Dr. Yoho.
And now another Florida colleague, Ms. Frankel, of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madame Chair, and I thank you both
for being here. I am sorry I was in and out because I have
another meeting, like many, across the hall. But my son has
worked for USAID so I have a special place for it in my heart.
I have a couple of questions, first, having to do with
women's education. If you would comment on some of the work
that USAID is doing in regards to women's education and I
also--I would like to know a little bit about the safety today
for USAID workers, given what is going on around the world.
I think we were all concerned. There was recently the death
of Kayla Mueller who I believe--I don't believe she was working
for AID but she was working for some other humanitarian
organization.
So if you could just address those two issues for me, and
thank you for what you do.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We do a great deal in terms of training, teaching young
girls and, for that matter, women and their empowerment. To
begin with, at any point in time there are significant--
millions of girls who are not going to school and who are being
victimized in many ways either by gender-based violence or, for
that matter, forced into early marriages.
And so our program are designed and are carried out to
encourage girls to go to school and to work with parents of
those girls to encourage also the fact that the girls are
significant.
They have value, and in places where our programs have been
allowed and people--parents support it, we are very successful.
Last week, I attended a program at the White House, Let Girls
Learn, where the First Lady has taken the opportunity to reach
out to girls across the world.
That is a very effective program. We are contributing to
that--USAID. But more globally, we are contributing to teaching
children, many of whom are girls, and where girls grow up to
be--become parents themselves or mothers.
They, as I mentioned earlier, are involved in taking care
of the family and creating an environment where their children
then grow up to become contributing members of their--of the
country that they--certainly, where they live in.
And so it is a program whereby girls flourish and they are
protected. With respect to security of our personnel, we are
very conscious of that. As I said earlier, we focus our
activities in ensuring that we either provide the training and/
or the visibility, reaching down with our implementing partners
as well as our own situational awareness of our own staff to
ensure their protection, ensure that these locations around the
world where they operate they are aware of what is happening
and they can protect themselves.
Or if the situation--the conflict is so severe then we will
pull them out and protect them from any further potential harm.
So that is happening across all of our programs. We
integrate, by the way, gender in all of our programs so that it
is not simply teaching but it involves everything that we do.
Women's issues are very important to us.
Ms. Hyde. I appreciate the question. I would just highlight
quickly two areas where MCC is working. First, gender is
integrated across the programs through our indicators. On our
scorecard there is a gender in the economy indicator.
There is also a gender in education subset of the education
indicator. So we are assessing a country's investment in their
girls and in education.
Our programs themselves tend to be more toward the
vocational end, the nexus to jobs and economic growth, as well
as a great program that we have in Georgia, for example, which
is in STEM--science and technology--and it is a partnership
with San Diego State.
So that is the area in which we are working. But third, one
area that I am really excited about is on data. MCC has helped
take gender data and we have made a commitment as part of the
initiative that is called Data 2X to release all of our sex-
disaggregated gender data by the end of 2015 and to do more as
we go forward to collect information about the impact that we
are having on girls specifically so they are counted, they are
heard.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
And now this committee is taken over by Florida. Mr.
Clawson of Florida.
Mr. Clawson. Okay. Thank you all for coming today.
I want to start by saying that when I lived overseas, you
know, I would bump into folks from USAID and my impression was
that you had really good people in difficult places trying to
do difficult things, and although I am always worried about
accountability, as we should be because you all--this is
taxpayer money--my personal experience with folks out there
working in the field is that they do really good stuff under
really difficult circumstances.
So please pass along my personal compliments in that
regard, and I appreciate what you all do. I would like to
follow up with something that was said earlier about Cuba and
for you all to give me a sense now that what has happened has
happened with Cuba.
And, you know, we are going through this normalization
process and I think that there is maybe some stakeholders that
were left out of that conversation. So now we are going to--we
have been involved in the past, from what I read.
I kind of struggle with what is discreet and what is secret
and where USAID--you know, where you ought to end and the CIA
ought to start.
And so I kind of--if you would give me an overall picture
of where the money is going to be going in Cuba, what is
discreet and what--you know, what our goal for that discreet
money is, I would really appreciate it.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman, for your
comments and I echo your opening thoughts about USAID
personnel. They are truly heroes and heroines doing work around
the world.
I thought leaving the military after I retired I would
never find a group of people who were as highly motivated,
committed to the task as well as patriotic. But I find them
here in USAID and I think we can do nothing less than
continually talk about the goodness and the work that they do.
Mr. Clawson. With no creature comforts, by the way. I mean,
they live a tough life.
Ambassador Lenhardt. And in threatening environments, sir,
that many of us don't appreciate, don't understand. But they do
it nonetheless and they do it with great aplomb and they do it
for all the right reasons, and that is the outreach of the
American people to wherever it is around the world that they
find themselves. So thank you for your comments.
With respect to Cuba, we are committed to programs for
democracy, civil society and independent media, and so that was
the emphasis, that was the direction being in Cuba.
It was--there was nothing nefarious. There was nothing that
we had any design on other than helping the Cuban people have
an alternative and causing them to understand that America is
reaching out to them in ways that was productive and positive.
We also do humanitarian work with respect to family members of
prisoners----
Mr. Clawson. Can I interrupt--can I interrupt just a
second, just to follow up on what you said with--sorry for
butting in.
In the case of Cuba, the government doesn't want us there.
In other places where I have seen you'all's organization the
governments usually do want us there. That's an important
distinction or am I wrong--am I missing something on that?
Ambassador Lenhardt. No, sir. You are not. But I think it
is also for us to think through the fact that our work is
extended to people, the American people to wherever people are
around the world who are in need, as opposed to governments.
In many cases, we don't work with governments but we
certainly provide relief, humanitarian assistance to people and
so that is the focus. And so if we were to simply cut out the
fact that people around the world are suffering because of
their governments is that a reason for us not to help?
I don't think that is the intent. So we reach--we reach out
wherever people are in need and so that is why were in Cuba
trying to provide assistance to the Cuban people at a time when
their own government does not provide that assistance.
Mr. Clawson. And the Cuban Government would look at this as
espionage. Is that right?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sir, I am not sure how they would look
at it as much as to say our focus is on people, bringing the
American people to the Cuban people in this case.
But we do it in other places around the world, closed
societies and, by the way, again, talking about the protection
of our people and the work that they do, we have a program
whereby a new design where we specifically encourage and
counsel people working, independent contractors and the like
are partners, how to protect themselves, what to look for, how
to ensure that they are continually mindful of the threat, and
where that threat is sufficient enough we pull them out or we
will curtail the contract.
Mr. Clawson. Yield back. Thank you.
Mr. DeSantis. Gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Castro for 5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Ambassador, and
thank you, Ms. Hyde, for your testimony this morning.
And, Ambassador, thank you. First of all, congratulations
on a distinguished career and thank you for overseeing USAID
for us now.
Let me ask you about the Global Development Lab and the
wonderful work that you all are doing in development there. If
you could describe that for us and some of the innovations that
have taken place because of that work.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman, for your
question.
The Global Lab, if I can describe it and looking at it from
the standpoint of what we are doing, the lab offers us the
opportunity to think more about leveraging science, technology,
innovation and partnerships in all of our work.
They--the lab represents what might be described in other
businesses as our research and development--how to become
better at what we do, using the lab to identify ways in which
we can extend the resources that are entrusted to us as well as
looking at new opportunities for us to bring in new equipment,
new partnerships around not only in America but around the
world.
And so the lab is that one entity that brings that all
together. I can use some examples. In the Ebola crisis, for
instance, they developed a very unique suit that protected
personnel who were responding--the health workers. They have
also developed as a result of a challenge we put out various
creams that would block the Ebola virus.
But beyond that, we are looking at ways where using things
like geospatial techniques, how do we do a better job of
mapping potential problem areas around the world, looking at
either climate, looking at places where poverty is extensive
or, for that matter, extreme ideology--where looking at a
model, putting that all together in terms of how the lab then
could pinpoint potential problem areas before they occur.
Mr. Castro. Sure.
Ambassador Lenhardt. So the lab is something that we see as
beneficial both today but more importantly long term----
Mr. Castro. Well, and thank you for that.
Ambassador Lenhardt [continuing]. And figure out a way to
institutionalize it into everything that we do.
Mr. Castro. Sure. And the reason that I bring that up is
because sometimes there is the impression about U.S. foreign
aid and the work that USAID does as though the United States is
simply giving and the countries are taking.
But the Global Development Lab is an example of how not
only is it accelerating and improving our development work but
also leading to technologies and innovations that can be
helpful in the United States and in countries of the world
where we are not necessarily even giving aid. So I think that
is at the cutting edge of the innovative work that USAID does.
My second question is I just--I left for a little bit to go
meet with some foreign ministers from Central America--El
Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras--and let me ask you about the
President's proposal to offer about $1.14 billion in assistance
to the Central American countries. Six hundred and thirty-five
million of that would be through USAID. What kind of work are
you all anticipating doing there?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman.
We are looking at continuing much of the work that we are
doing now and expanding that. We are doing work with respect to
security in the countries of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras
and providing those opportunities for reducing violence,
lowering youth unemployment, spurring broad-based economic
growth in some of the fragile locations, fostering public
sector accountability, transparency and effectiveness.
I will tell you also that one of my jobs was President of
the National Crime Prevention Council here in our country where
we did a great deal of work in South America and Central
America with the things like community policing, causing
communities to have a better sense of security within their own
neighborhoods by encouraging them to work with local police.
And in many cases where that came together they were more
secure and they eliminated the threat both from the standpoint
of the physical threat but also from the drug cartels, and when
those neighborhoods came together the drug cartels--they left.
They got out of the picture.
So this money then would extend many of those programs and
offer an opportunity for--through Central America's security
and prosperity to extend to our own because truly that is part
of our own back door.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Mr. DeSantis. Gentleman's time has expired. The chair now
recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Ambassador, have you determined--and I apologize if you
have answered this before. I was down the hall for another
hearing.
But has the administration determined whether the
Palestinians have violated U.S. law by seeking to enter the
International Criminal Court and supporting judicially
authorized investigations against Israel?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sure. We have--the Fiscal Year 2016
budget is under serious review in terms of our support to the
Palestinian Authority and so I will leave it at that.
We will come back to the Congress for your counsel as well
as working with the administration and State Department to
determine what actions we take going forward.
Mr. DeSantis. So it is possible that as you examine that
that you think that funding is not appropriate in light of
those actions. Is that what you are saying?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sir, I am not commenting on that as
much as to say our programs with respect to the Palestinian
Authority is under review.
Mr. DeSantis. And when you--when will you let us know what
the conclusion is?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Chair, let me make the commitment to
come back to you when that does occur and we will respond at
that point.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Ron DeSantis
USAID, in conjunction with the State Department, continues to
examine our assistance to the Palestinians to determine how it can best
be used moving forward. Although our view is that the legislative
restrictions related to Palestinian initiation or active support for an
International Criminal Court (ICC) judicially authorized investigation
have not been triggered to date, we are deeply troubled by Palestinian
action at the ICC and continue to voice our opposition to further
actions to both the Palestinians and the international community.
We continue to believe that U.S. assistance to the Palestinian
people is an important tool in promoting regional stability, economic
development, and increased security for both Palestinians and Israelis.

Mr. DeSantis. So beyond the ICC issue, it has been the
administration's position, I think, that the unity government
with the Palestinian Authority between Hamas and Fatah did not
trigger a defunding which is in the law and I think the reason
for that is that the administration said Hamas was not
exercising a ``undue influence'' on the government. So is that
still the administration's position?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sir, again, as I said, it is under
review and so we will have to come back to you.
Mr. DeSantis. What can you report on--I know Secretary
Kerry last year pledged U.S. money to help, you know, rebuild
the Gaza Strip after the conflict last year and I know other
Middle Eastern countries like Qatar have pledged billions of
dollars.
So what is the status of that? Has the United States
obligated funds for the rebuilding of the Gaza Strip?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Sir, I can't comment on that because I
don't have any specific knowledge. I will tell you about our
programs--our humanitarian programs, assisting people with
water, food, health and hygiene products as well as doing some
teaching, basic education.
But those are our programs. I cannot comment on something
that, certainly, I can't control.
Mr. DeSantis. So but those programs have continued unabated
in the Palestinian areas?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Again, our focus is on people and so
those programs are based on previous years' moneys. For as long
as those moneys are available we continue to reach out and
provide humanitarian assistance. But, again, the Fiscal Year
2016 request is in fact under review.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. Well, what I would say is money that
is going to rebuild the Gaza Strip there is a great danger that
that money is going to be used by Hamas and I think that would
be a huge mistake if we go down this road where they are
building more tunnels and they are acquiring more rockets and
maybe the money goes to the PA.
But since money is fungible, if there is other money at
stake that can be diverted for some of those illicit measures.
I also am concerned about just having traveled over there that
you still have the Palestinian Authority educating its youth to
hate Israel, to hate Jews and to seek Israel's elimination.
And I just think that that is just so toxic and we
continue, you know, pouring money over there. But if that
underlying dynamic does not change, you know, I think you are
going to continue to see a lot of substandard results.
I yield back the balance of my time and I will--the chair
will now recognize Mr. Cicilline for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin by really congratulating you, Ms. Hyde, on
the terrific leadership at MCC--as you know, identified as the
most transparent aid agency in the world and the model that is
used at the MCC, I think, is really a great example for
development aid and I have seen very--personally the work done
in Cape Verde and the kind of success that has happened there
and I really want congratulate you on that.
I would like to ask you specifically, I know that Liberia
is currently seeking to work with the MCC in developing a
compact. As you know, the Ebola outbreak has had a tremendously
devastating impact on that country and on the institutions and
the personnel, and the government, obviously, dealing with an
already limited capacity has also been constrained by budget
obligations as well as impact on personnel.
And I am wondering how MCC and you will be working to
ensure that they actually have the capacity to benefit from an
MCC compact. It is, I know, a country that is in serious need
of support and just wondering how sort of we are thinking about
that.
Ms. Hyde. Thank you, Congressman. I appreciate your
comments as well about Cabo Verde. It has been a model for us
in many respects, the work that we have done there on the ports
and in the water management program.
With respect to Liberia, as you know, there was certainly a
lull among the development community for their work in Liberia
and my impression and understanding is that there are many
efforts underway simultaneously now, and there is a great
opportunity for us to look at economic growth, for us to work
together with other donors. And I certainly echo the
Ambassador's comments about partnerships in what we do and how
to put the pieces of the puzzle and the funds together.
So I think we have a real opportunity now to do that in
Liberia. We have re-engaged vigorously with our colleagues from
USAID and we have engaged particularly around the energy
sector. So before the outbreak we had conducted a constraints
to growth analysis.
It had, clearly, shown that the energy needs that President
Sirleaf speaks about so often are the impediment to private
investment. We know that, and so our efforts are likely to be
focused on the energy sector, working with Power Africa, and
the efforts that USAID and OPIC and others are undertaking
there and to see if we can double, triple the capacity in the
country.
We will be doing so mindful of the policy reform
environment, not just what we will build but what the sector is
going to look like at the end, and work together with them and
I think they are enthusiastic for our involvement in that.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Hyde. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Ambassador, thank you for your service
and thank you again to the heroic staff and personnel of USAID
for the work they do all over the world.
I want to just put out three questions and to the extent we
have time if you can answer them. Otherwise, if you could just
answer them in writing that would be terrific.
I am very pleased that the State Department recently
followed USAID's lead in appointing a special envoy for the
human rights of LGBT persons, Randy Berry.
We hope that the offices of USAID's senior LGBT
coordinator, Todd Larson, and the State's envoy receive robust
funding to allow them to work together to carry out their
mandate to protect the basic human rights of LGBT individuals
globally.
Many foreign governments have recently proposed or enacted
discriminatory and sometimes dangerous anti-LGBT legislation.
So my first question is what role do you see USAID's senior
LGBT coordinator will play to combat this and other
discriminatory actions against LGBT individuals around the
world.
A second questions is that USAID has done incredible work
as part of the U.S. participation in the effort to end the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Liberia has gone more than 3
weeks without a new Ebola case.
This is a monumental achievement, but as new cases continue
to be diagnosed in Sierra Leone and Guinea it is clear we must
remain vigilant in our efforts. Can you provide an update as to
our efforts that are underway to end unsafe burial practices
and improve communication in communities that are still seeing
new cases of Ebola being diagnosed?
And, additionally, we are hearing reports that survivors of
Ebola who can continue to infect other individuals with whom
they have sexual contact. They are not being properly educated
about these risks or provided with appropriate contraception.
Can you identify what steps if any the United States is taking
to help address this risk?
And, finally, as my colleague mentioned, sexual and gender-
based violence continues to hamper our efforts to reduce global
poverty. I saw this, particularly, in Liberia last year.
What steps is USAID taking to address this issue both on
our own and in partnership with international NGOs? Are there
successful models? What can we do more effectively and what can
Congress to do to respond to this really insidious and horrific
level of violence against girls and women all across the world?
So I know I have left absolutely no time for you to answer
those three questions but I look forward to hearing your
responses in writing and I thank you again for your service.
Mr. DeSantis. Gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I want to pick up on the comments of the
gentleman from Florida, who is leaving as I applaud his
comments. And that is there may be a real question here as to
whether aid to the PA is legal today, given the actions that
they have taken.
So it is not a matter of conducting a view with regard to
next year's budget. You may be illegally spending funds this
year. So I am hoping that you will come back to us not just
with a report as to whether the aid is good public policy and
good development policy but also whether it is legal, and that
even if you think it is wonderful policy that if it is illegal
you will stop, not waiting for next year.
So I wonder if we can count on that kind of legal analysis
being given to the committee on a prompt basis. Ambassador?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question. I will commit to you that we will take that under
review and come back with a response.
Mr. Sherman. The two agencies you represent are doing work
that is important in and of itself. You are helping the poorest
countries in the world and the poorest people in the world.
But the American people are funding these programs not just
for that purpose but for our geopolitical and to be safer. And
it would be easy to say well, if only there was economic
progress then we wouldn't have anything to worry about from a
geopolitical standpoint.
But 19 out of 20 of the 9/11 hijackers came from a country
already way richer than you hope to make the countries that you
are working in. So it is not enough for our geopolitical
purposes to just have economic progress in the world.
That is why Congress has required what I call ``flag on the
bag''--that you have to aggressively let people know where the
aid comes from. What I would like to know from each of you is
do you have public polling to show that people in these
countries know what the United States is doing or are we just
hopeful that if you put the flag on the bag people will know
about it? Ms. Hyde.
Ms. Hyde. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate the question.
I think it is a very strong point and it is something that
at MCC we are taking a close look at. We don't have public
polling.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. That is the answer. Ambassador, do you
have public--have you done any polling?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Yes. We--thank you, Congressman, for
the question.
Yes, we do, in fact, have a program whereby we focus on
marketing and ensuring that where it is appropriate that----
Mr. Sherman. If you have the polling I would like to make
it part of the record of the hearing.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Well, we do----
Mr. Sherman. I know you have marketing. That is not the
question I asked, though. And I am glad you have it but I want
to know if you have polling because it is not----
Ambassador Lenhardt. Well, we do--in answer to the
question, yes, we do for to assess how are we doing with
respect to getting our message out--messages out.
I can tell you that from my experience in Tanzania, very
powerful. It produced the results that we wanted. As I
mentioned earlier, Tanzanians are favorably----
Mr. Sherman. What I will ask you to do is furnish for the
record the polling because you can have any company--I mean,
Coca Cola may say we got a great adverting campaign, we are on
the Super Bowl.
But then they check to see whether people are buying Coke
and they do polling to see whether people saw the frisky polar
bear.
I want to move on to another question. Pakistan is, I
think, the most important area for our concerns. We have spent
$155 million to improve education in Sindh and we have this
audit report on those efforts.
I commend you, Ambassador, for those efforts. But the
inspector general says the program is not achieving its goal,
hasn't built schools, there hasn't been an improvement in early
grade reading, community mobilization. Are these problems being
addressed and are you following the IG's recommendations?
Ambassador Lenhardt. In answer to the question, yes,
Congressman. We are in fact looking at the report. But I will
say beyond that report we also do our own assessments, our own
evaluations. And so they tell us a different picture that isn't
perfect but it is certainly making progress.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Brad Sherman
Public awareness polling has been at the heart of USAID's
``branding and marking'' requirements since the Agency first issued a
regulation requiring branding and marking in 2004. USAID has continued
to conduct public polling as part of efforts focusing on increasing
awareness of U.S. civilian assistance in critical countries. A recent
example is Pakistan.
Starting in 2011, as one component of a broader communications
strategy formulated and implemented with the Department of State,
USAID/Pakistan began implementing a multi-media, multi-lingual media
campaign, employing a local Pakistani implementer, with a focus on
increasing awareness of USAID assistance to the Pakistani people. To
measure the effectiveness of the campaign, USAID/Pakistan also
contracted with an independent company to conduct nationwide polling.
Since the beginning of the paid media campaign, USAID aired 78,500
TV spots, 47,000 radio spots, 31,000 movie theater spots and 221,040
cable TV spots. The campaign also reached 69,566,000 digital
impressions. USAID is currently in the process of procuring a follow-on
media campaign activity.
During the three-year campaign, now completed, polling showed an
increase in awareness of U.S. assistance, from 34% in 2011 to 47% in
2014. The polling also showed a direct correlation between Pakistanis
aware of USAID's work and increased favorability towards the United
States.
Since 2011, USAID has also run a weekly Urdu-language radio show
that is broadcast across 70 percent of the country. Each weekly radio
show features a specific USAID program and includes a discussion with
USAID staff, implementers, and beneficiaries.

Mr. Sherman. I want to thank you for the effort. I think it
is very important. I think it is the most geopolitically
important country to us.
And, finally, I am going to shift over and maybe you can
furnish some information to the record, Ms. Hyde--what does
Armenia have to do to get another compact? And since I have
zero time that will probably be a response for the record
unless the chairman wants to hear you orally.
Mr. Yoho. We will give you 30 seconds.
Ms. Hyde. The board just recently set forth criteria for a
second compact. The three criteria are success in the first
compact, progress on the scorecard and a commitment to reform--
policy reforms going forward.
I know that Armenia has made progress on the political
rights indicator which was the challenge in our first compact.
We will be looking to evaluate a second compact against those
criteria.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair will now recognize Ms. Gabbard from Hawaii.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much.
I met yesterday with a woman who is the chairman of the
Kurdistan regional government's High Council on Women's Affairs
and I am wondering if you can speak to what work or what types
of assistance you are providing there to the either the Kurdish
Government directly or to the NGOs who are operating there.
A few of the areas that were brought up of concern,
obviously, are the ballooning numbers of refugees and IDPs who
currently exist there and the costs that that is taking there
on infrastructure and resources, both in the economic sense.
But, specifically, they spoke about the assistance needed
which they are not currently getting for many of the women and
girls who have been rescued from ISIS who are coming back with
unimaginable types of trauma and violence that they have lived
through.
Yet they are being welcomed back to their families and
communities but not having the resources and tools to be able
to help both these, you know, Christian and Yazidi women and
girls but also their families.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you, Congresswoman for the
question.
We are providing humanitarian assistance to the entire
populations in the country as opposed to targeting specifically
the Kurdish population.
They are included in that--our outreach specifically as you
relate this story. I am not aware of that. It is something that
I certainly will take back and look into and see what if
anything we can learn from and focus on.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from the Honorable Alfonso E. Lenhardt to
Question Asked During the Hearing by the Honorable Tulsi Gabbard
The U.S. government has provided nearly $220 million for
humanitarian assistance to Iraqis in the region since the start of
Fiscal Year 2014. Of the nearly $220 million, the State Department's
Bureau for Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM) has provided $182.3
million, USAID has provided $29.74 million, and the Department of
Defense has provided $7.5 million.
U.S. government humanitarian assistance in Iraq is based solely on
vulnerability and need, and delivered on an impartial basis by trusted
partners. These partners include United Nations (U.N.) agencies, public
international organizations such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the International Organization for Migration, and non-
governmental organizations. No U.S. humanitarian assistance is
channeled through government bodies in Iraq. Overall coordination of
the humanitarian effort in Iraq is facilitated by the U.N. under the
leadership of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, Lise
Grande. To ensure the most effective response and to avoid duplication
of efforts, the U.N. coordinates with relevant government bodies such
as the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Center in Baghdad and the
Joint Crisis Coordinating Center in Erbil.
U.S. government humanitarian assistance is focused on the provision
of food and other relief commodities, shelter (including repairs),
water and sanitation, health care, protection (including specialized
services for women, children, and survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence), and humanitarian coordination and logistics. Rather than
being targeted to particular communities or locations, U.S.
humanitarian assistance is provided on a country-wide basis, and
focused on the populations in greatest need who can be reached by our
humanitarian partners. Currently it is too dangerous for many relief
organizations to work in Islamic State In Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-
held areas, therefore, the majority of U.S. humanitarian assistance is
concentrated among Iraqi internally-displaced persons and Syrian
refugee populations in the north, center and south of the country.
Despite the ongoing strong support by the United States to
vulnerable Iraqis, tremendous needs remain. We regularly urge other
donors to contribute generously to the U.N. appeal for Iraq, and we
continue to press the Government of Iraq to support its displaced
citizens.
Finally, I would note that key humanitarian staff from USAID and
the State Department also met with the Chair of the Iraqi Kurdistan
Region (IKR) High Council on Women's Affairs to hear her perspectives
and view from the field--part of a constant effort to meet all actors
on the ground involved in addressing the humanitarian crisis in Iraq.

Ambassador Lenhardt. But we are providing humanitarian
assistance to the area and the Kurdish people are, certainly,
within that envelope.
Ms. Gabbard. Through the Iraqi--through all of the dollars
that you are providing are going through the government in
Baghdad or are you providing direct assistance to the Kurdish
Government?
Ambassador Lenhardt. It is going through--it is a
combination and so there are resources going to Baghdad and
then they further put that out. But we also have implementing
partners who are working within the country who are--have a
contract with us and they are doing that work based upon that
contract.
Ms. Gabbard. I would be interested to get the details of
how that breaks down because both yesterday and time and time
again, both in the area of defense but also with humanitarian
aid, what we hear constantly from them is that they are not--
they are only seeing a fraction of what is sent through
Baghdad.
So actually getting a breakdown of what ends up there
specifically in Kurdistan where you are seeing all of this
activity is something, I think, is important for us to know.
The other question I had was with regard to the funding
being provided. I know there was a 17-percent increase in
funding toward Syria and fighting the Islamic State. The CRS
report that we have here mentions that most of the requested
funding is going to address the impact of the crisis on Syria's
neighbors, including $1 billion to help counter ISIS and
mitigate Syria-related economic and security concerns in Jordan
as well as another $335 million to strengthen Iraq's
counterterrorism capabilities.
I guess, specifically, I am wondering same--similar
question, how that is being distributed and what--to what--to
what end if you are talking about countering ISIS using USAID
funds. How is that being used?
Ambassador Lenhardt. The last part--I am sorry, ma'am.
Ms. Gabbard. How are the specified intent of these funds
both going to Jordan and Iraq and other countries as stated as
countering the Islamic State and I am wondering how are those
funds being used.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Thank you for the question. But,
again, it is about humanitarian assistance as opposed to
countering ISIL or anyone else, for that matter. These funds
are intended to help people and so that is the focus.
Let me correct one other thing as well. I didn't want to
leave the impression that we provide humanitarian assistance
through the Government of Iraq. Those--that assistance takes
the form of infrastructure, large projects. Humanitarian
assistance goes directly to people. So that is what we do more
than anything that----
Ms. Gabbard. How do you do--what do you--you say directly
to people. Through what avenue or what platform?
Ambassador Lenhardt. Through implementing partners on the
ground who are actually on the scene providing that assistance,
take the form of food, water, health care, as many other
commodities that we produce.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. I thank you for the clarification.
I would love to--if you could send us information on some of
the partners who you are working with specifically to deal with
this issue of the women and girls who have been rescued and who
are going through this post-traumatic stress and how those
services are being provided. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. The lady's time has expired and we have come
close to the conclusion of this and we want to thank you guys
both for being here.
But I have one follow-up question. I am reading the CRS
summary here and it says, ``Persistent challenges to effective
evaluation include unclear aid objectives, funding and
personnel constraints, emphasis on accountability for funds,
methodological challenges, compressed time lines,'' and this is
something I find--I hear over and over again, ``country
ownership and donor coordination.'' It goes on and on.
My question is how do you increase the want of the
government and the citizens with the aid we give? And we were
on a CODEL in South America and the people that were doling out
our money, helping a situation--and this was dealing with
narcotics--they said, we have got all these resources, we have
got the equipment, we have got the money but they just don't
want to do it.
And it reminded me of when I was a little kid and my mom
wanted me to play the piano, and she worked two jobs to pay for
the piano lessons and for 7 years she did that and I would sit
there and I didn't want to play the piano, and she finally got
it and walked away.
And I see that so many times. We offer this money and you
have a breakdown of--you know, maybe they are a corrupt
government, we are giving them money and they are not using the
money the way they are supposed to and you talk about the
accountability you have.
How do you increase that want? Just if you have an idea how
we can do that to make our money more effective--our aid more
effective.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Yes. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
It has to come from a desire to want to do more, having a
sense of ownership, having a sense of commitment. I will tell
you how we did it in Tanzania.
We asked the Tanzanians themselves, what are the--what are
your priorities, what are things that you hope to achieve. And
in thinking, looking at it and assessing, evaluating those
priorities and their desires with our own national interests,
and where those same came together if we could support it then
we supported it. And, miraculously, and not surprisingly the
Tanzanians were much more enthusiastic about carrying that out.
And so part of this has to be how to we involve the
country--how do we involve that government to have a good sense
that this is something that we want to do and then how do you
hold their feet to the fire.
Mr. Yoho. Exactly.
Ambassador Lenhardt. Causing reforms to be realized and it
is a carrot and a stick.
Mr. Yoho. Ms. Hyde, anything else you want to add to that?
Ms. Hyde. The tool--the scorecard. So we have countries
that are vying for MCC assistance, and it is interesting to see
when you put out 20 indicators and you say to leaders, you are
only ranking here and your neighbor is ranking here. It is a
competitive-based system that is incentivizing countries to
change their laws to try to get MCC assistance.
So we have partners that come to the table with the want.
With that we pursue a country ownership model that says you
will have controls and oversight but we will have final
authority on accountability. We need to be accountable for
these funds and so we will pursue it that way.
And, finally, we do 100 percent independent evaluations on
both performance and impact of our programs. So we are
evaluating what we do. We pay for that. But we think that is a
wise investment.
Mr. Yoho. All right. I appreciate your time. I appreciate
you being here and taking time out and the committee's--and the
committee stands adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
