- CALLING ON THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAN TO FULFILL THEIR PROMISES OF ASSISTANCE IN THIS CASE OF ROBERT LEVINSON, THE LONGEST HELD UNITED STATES HOSTAGE IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY; RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNITED STATES-ISRAEL ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP AND ENCOURAGING NEW AREAS OF COOPERATION; GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT LAB ACT OF 2015, AND ENHANCING OVERSEAS TRAVELER VETTING ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CALLING ON THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAN TO FULFILL THEIR PROMISES OF
ASSISTANCE IN THIS CASE OF ROBERT LEVINSON, THE LONGEST HELD UNITED
STATES HOSTAGE IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY; RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF
THE UNITED STATES-ISRAEL ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP AND ENCOURAGING NEW
AREAS OF COOPERATION; GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT LAB ACT OF 2015, AND ENHANCING
OVERSEAS TRAVELER VETTING ACT

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

ON

H. Res. 148, H. Res. 551, H.R. 3924 and H.R. 4403

__________

FEBRUARY 24, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-144

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-828PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP ON

H. Res. 148, Calling on the government of Iran to fulfill their
promises of assistance in this case of Robert Levinson, the
longest held United States hostage in our Nation's history.....     2
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H. Res. 148 offered
by the Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Florida, and the Honorable
Theodore E. Deutch, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida.............................................     6
H. Res. 551, Recognizing the importance of the United States-
Israel economic relationship and encouraging new areas of
cooperation....................................................    11
H.R. 3924, To establish in the United States Agency for
International Development an entity to be known as the United
States Global Development Lab, and for other purposes..........    17
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H. Res. 148 offered
by the Honorable Joaquin Castro, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Texas......................................    25
H.R. 4403, To authorize the development of open-source software
based on certain systems of the Department of Homeland Security
and the Department of State to facilitate the vetting of
travelers against terrorist watchlists and law enforcement
databases, enhance border management, and improve targeting and
analysis, and for other purposes...............................    34

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................    46
Markup minutes...................................................    47
Markup summary...................................................    49

CALLING ON THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAN TO FULFILL THEIR PROMISES OF
ASSISTANCE IN THIS CASE OF ROBERT LEVINSON, THE LONGEST HELD UNITED
STATES HOSTAGE IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY; RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF
THE UNITED STATES-ISRAEL ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP AND ENCOURAGING NEW
AREAS OF COOPERATION; GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT LAB ACT OF 2015, AND ENHANCING
OVERSEAS TRAVELER VETTING ACT

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 2016

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. All right, House Resolution 148. So the
committee will come to order. Pursuant to notice, we meet today
to mark up four bipartisan measures, and without objection, all
members may have 5 days to submit statements for the record and
extraneous material on any of today's business.
As all members were notified yesterday, we intend to
consider today's measures en bloc and so without objection the
following items previously provided to the Members of the House
will be considered en bloc and are considered as read.
First, House Resolution 148, calling on the Government of
Iran to fulfill their promises of assistance in the case of
Robert Levinson. Ros-Lehtinen Amendment 31 in the nature of a
substitute offered on behalf of herself and on behalf of Mr.
Deutch, which is the text adopted by the Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa on February 11th.
And then we have House Resolution 551, recognizing the
importance of the United States-Israel economic relationship.
Also, H.R. 3924, the Global Development Lab Act, along with
the Castro Amendment 218 in the nature of a substitute.
And lastly, we have H.R. 4403, the Enhancing Overseas
Traveler Vetting Act.
[The information referred to follows:] H. Res.
148

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. And after recognizing myself and the
ranking member, Mr. Engel, I will be pleased to recognize any
member seeking recognition to speak on these measures.
Let us start with House Resolution 148, calling on the
Government of Iran to fulfill their promises of assistance.
This is in the case of Robert Levinson. And I want to thank
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen for quickly marking this and I thank Mr.
Deutch for his steadfast dedication to Mr. Levinson's cause.
This calls on Iran to assist in the case of Bob Levinson.
Last month four U.S. hostages held by Iran were released as
part of a prisoner swap. Absent from the celebration was the
family of Bob Levinson. The father of seven remains the longest
held U.S. hostage in history and with many unanswered questions
about his location and current well being, we must continue to
press the administration to do more.
In testimony before this committee, Mr. Levinson's son
highlighted the importance of our maintaining a public focus on
his father's case. He argued that while one hearing might
generate some press, we need continued action to keep his
father's fate at the forefront and frankly, it is hard to
remember a time when Iran didn't have U.S. citizens in its
prisons. As Bob's son testified, ``No family should ever have
to go through what we all are going through.'' So we will
continue to work to bring Mr. Levinson and other American
hostages home.
Then we have House Resolution 551, recognizing the
importance of the United States-Israel economic relationship,
Mr. Ted Lieu's bill. And this emphasizes the strong history of
that economic cooperation and encourages us to build on our
shared entrepreneurial spirit and drive to collaborate in a
range of areas from energy to water in terms of offsetting
drought to agriculture to medicine and to neurotechnology.
Despite Israel's security threats remaining severe, Tel
Aviv, once a target of suicide bombers and Scud missiles, is
now a bustling city of dotcoms and biotechs and mobile
companies. We can learn much from each other such as to how
Israel treats and reuses 70 percent of its wastewater for
agriculture. As a Member from the drought-stricken State of
California, I certainly see great promise in a partnership with
Israel that explores ways to conserve water and to desalinate
water. And I want to thank Representative Lieu for introducing
this resolution that has strong bipartisan support. I am proud
to be an original co-sponsor, along with Ranking Member Engel,
of Ted Lieu's legislation.
H.R. 4403, Enhancing Overseas Traveler Vetting Act, I
acknowledge Mr. Heard for his work on this. The Homeland
Security Committee's Bipartisan Task Force on Combating
Terrorist and Foreign Fighter Travel highlighted the lack of
any comprehensive global database of foreign fighter
identities. The task force found that the U.S. and other
countries instead rely on a patchwork system for exchanging
extremist identities and that this weak arrangement, as they
call it, increases the odds that foreign fighters will be able
to cross borders undetected.
This legislation authorizes the Secretaries of the
Departments of State and Homeland Security to develop open-
source software platforms to vet travelers against terrorist
watch lists on law enforcement databases. It permits the open-
source software to be shared with foreign governments and
multi-lateral organizations like INTERPOL. So I thank Homeland
Security Chairman McCaul for his leadership as well on this
bill.
H.R. 3924, the Global Development Lab Act of 2015. This is
the last bill we consider. Extreme poverty breeds insecurity.
It undermines the economic security and health interests of the
United States. Yet, for too long, we have relied upon
approaches that yield mediocre results. The Lab represents a
new approach to development. It embraces science and
technology. It rewards innovation. It utilizes partnerships and
it opens the door for new ideas from unexpected places. It
utilizes a pay-for-success model in which a development
challenge is identified. Proposals are submitted and financing
is made available after success has been demonstrated. So I
thank Representative Castro for introducing this important
bipartisan measure.
And I now recognize the ranking member for his remarks.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this markup.
I would note that in the last few weeks the President has
signed a number of measures into law that this committee
advanced and that is a real great reflection of the way we work
across the aisle to get real results. That should always be our
focus, and I am glad we are going to advance these four
measures in that vein and keep the committee's work chugging
along.
Let me start with Mr. Deutch's resolution. Americans
breathed a collective sigh of relief when five of our fellow
citizens were released by Iran earlier this year. But when it
comes to American citizens being wrongly held, there are
obviously no partial victories. So the fact that at least two
more Americans are still missing or detained in Iran means that
we need to stay laser-focused on getting these people home.
One of those missing is retired FBI agent Robert Levinson
and we have mentioned him a great many times with all the
hearings we have done on Iran. He disappeared in Iran in 2007
and it has been 5 years since his family has received any
evidence that he is still alive. As in so many cases, we have
heard a lot of promises from the Iranian Government that they
will assist in locating Mr. Levinson. And again, as in so many
cases, the Iranians have failed to follow through. This is a
slap in the face to our diplomatic efforts with Iran and it is
a cruel affront to the Levinson family who have already dealt
with so much pain and heartbreak. This resolution calls on
Iran's leaders to live up to their word and help us find Mr.
Levinson.
I want to thank Mr. Deutch for offering this measure and
for his hard work on trying to bring Mr. Levinson home. Mr.
Levinson is a constituent of his and he has been a tireless
champion in trying to get him back. I wholeheartedly support
this resolution and I thank Mr. Deutch for his good work.
I also support the measure sponsored by Mr. Lieu and Mr.
Poe which recognizes the importance of the economic ties
between the United States and our ally, Israel. We often look
at Israel through a security prism, but our bond with Israel,
of course, is much more dynamic than that. We have had a free
trade agreement with Israel for more than three decades. In
that time, trade between our countries has increased tenfold.
Our economic ties have been good for both countries, creating
jobs and driving growth. Over the years, the United States and
Israel have established a number of institutions to help
strengthen these ties even further: The U.S.-Israel binational
Science Foundation, and the Industrial Research and Development
Foundation, the Agricultural Research and Development Fund.
This resolution calls for even greater cooperation in
energy, water, agriculture, medicine, neurotechnology, and
cyber security. It encourages the administration to hold
regular, expanded, economic dialogues and to push for more
private/public partnerships. I am happy to co-sponsor this
measure and I again thank Mr. Poe and Mr. Lieu for bringing it
forward.
Next, let me commend Mr. Castro for his hard work on the
Global Development Lab Act which will strengthen one of our
best tools for promoting new innovations in global development
efforts. A development lab was established within USAID to help
develop and deploy poverty-reduction technologies more widely
and at a lower cost. The Lab works with NGOs, corporations, and
universities to bring in the best ideas to stay on the cutting
edge of development. It is also expanding USAID's impact
through a public/private dollar-for-dollar matching program
that allows us to scale these innovations up without expanding
USAID's budget.
We are seeing real results. In 2014, the Lab invested in
362 new solutions that touched nearly 14 million people around
the world. For example, the Lab funded an initiative to produce
more food where fresh water is hard to come by. The securing
water for food grant challenge led to a system that makes
seawater or brackish water usable for drinking or agriculture.
It consumes so little energy that the cost to use it is low,
even in areas off the power grid. This is what we mean when we
talk about innovation.
This bill would build on the Lab's success by creating new
authorities for the Lab to expand and manage its partnerships.
It will give the Lab greater flexibility for hiring experts on
a project-by-project basis and it will allow the Lab to award
small, targeted grants that have proven so effective in
supporting healthcare providers.
I commend Mr. Castro for his hard work on this very good
bill. It makes a good initiative better and I am pleased to
support it.
And lastly, I am pleased that we are taking up the
Enhancing Overseas Traveler Vetting Act. One of the best ways
to crack down on violent extremism is to catch terrorists
trying to cross borders--not just our borders, but borders
around the world. The bill would allow the State Department and
the Department of Homeland Security to develop open-source
software to vet travelers crossing borders and sound the alarm
if a terrorist is trying to sneak through. That software could
then be shared with allies, partners, and multilateral
organizations like the European Union. Existing safeguards
would ensure that the software is developed in collaboration
with our intelligence community and that it only gets into the
right hands. This is an innovative way to help ensure that
terrorists don't slip through the cracks and I am happy to
support it.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. We go to Mr. Smith of
New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of all,
I would like to thank you, Chairman Royce, and Ranking Member
Eliot Engel, for marking up these four bipartisan bills and
especially for marking up H. Res. 148 and I want to thank again
Ted Deutch for authoring this resolution which keeps the
spotlight and the pressure on both the administration and Iran
to resolve the case of missing American Robert Levinson. Robert
Levinson is now, as you pointed out, the longest held hostage
in American history. His daughter and son-in-law used to live
in my district in Monmouth County, along with his six other
children, numerous grandchildren, as well as his wife,
Christine. They all desperately await word of his whereabouts.
Mr. Levinson, as we all know, is a retired FBI agent, who
disappeared on a business trip to Iran in 2007. His captors
last released photos and video of him back in 2011. Mr.
Levinson is elderly, suffers from diabetes, and appeared sickly
in the last photos in which he was seen. He has been captive
for almost 9 years and needs to be immediately returned to his
broken-hearted family. I urge my colleagues to show their
continued commitment to bringing Mr. Levinson home by
unanimously supporting this resolution.
And I ask unanimous consent that my comments on each of the
other bills pending before the committee be made a part of the
record.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. Castro of Texas.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for bringing
my bill, H.R. 3924, for markup today. I want to say thank you,
first of all, to my co-sponsor, Representative McCaul of
Austin. Thank you and your staff for all of your hard work as
well as the staff of the committee. I know there is a lot of
work that goes into preparing these bills and most of all,
thank you to USAID for developing the Global Development Lab
and now working to improve it. It essentially democratizes
problem solving and crowdsources ideas and applications to
combat poverty and our greatest poverty challenges throughout
the world, whether it is access to clean water, access to
electricity, immunizations, birth defects, any of those gray
challenges that are faced by many countries throughout the
world. This makes sure that there is a competition of ideas and
applications to solve these problems. And so I am very proud of
the work that USAID has done and very proud also that this is a
bipartisan bill.
Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Castro. Mr. McCaul of Texas.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to thank
my colleagues from Texas, Mr. Castro, for his leadership and
the staff for working so hard on this. It is important
legislation. It is bipartisan. The Global Development Lab will
harness the U.S. entrepreneurial spirit to create cost
effective, sustainable solutions to global poverty.
As we have seen time and time again, creating opportunity
in impoverished countries is a powerful catalyst for our
foreign policy abroad and as chairman of the House Homeland
Security Committee, I know that this legislation will help us
fight terrorism by providing the most vulnerable with the means
to create a better future for themselves and their loved ones,
rather than falling victim to the false narrative of extremists
who prey on the impoverished and who fill these vacuums and
turn them into safe havens for terrorists.
So again, I want to thank Mr. Castro for his hard work and
ask that the committee support passage of this bill.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I would like to
thank you and the ranking member for holding this markup. I
want to thank Mr. Lieu and Mr. Poe for their important
reaffirmation of the many ways that the United States and
Israel both benefit from expanded economic cooperation. I want
to commend Mr. Castro and Mr. McCaul for the Global Development
Lab Act and the innovation developed by that Lab which will be
enhanced and expanded. And I am proud to support the Enhancing
Overseas Traveler Vetting Act.
I want to especially thank my friend, Chairman Emeritus
Ros-Lehtinen, for introducing the Levinson resolution with me
for the past several years, along with our Florida colleagues,
Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz and Congressman Diaz-Balart.
And I thank the many members of this committee who have co-
sponsored this resolution for their continued support and to
the chairman and ranking member and Mr. Smith and others who
have spoken powerfully this morning about Bob. Many of you have
heard me speak of my constituent, Bob Levinson, many times over
the past 6 years. Today, I will be brief. The recent return of
our American citizens from Iran brought renewed focus to Bob's
case. And while we celebrated the joyous reunion of the
Americans who had been held hostage who were returned home,
unfortunately, we do not--and the Levinson family has yet to
feel that same joy.
Two weeks ago, the Middle East Subcommittee held a markup
of the resolution where we were joined by Bob's wife,
Christine, and his eldest son, Dan. By passing this resolution
today and sending it to the floor of the House, we have the
opportunity to remind Christine, Dan, and Bob's six other
children that we won't forget about Bob.
Mr. Chairman, 9 years is too long. It is too many
anniversaries. It is too many birthdays, weddings, the births
of grandchildren for Bob to miss. Bob must come home now. This
message is resonating from Washington around the country and to
the community that I proudly represent in South Florida. On
Saturday, March 5, Bob's own community in South Florida will
come together for a rally in support of the Levinson family to
send a united resolute message that Bob must come home. And to
those around the country watching this at home today, I
encourage them to Tweet using the #WhatAboutBob to keep Bob's
name and his story front and center. And by passing this
resolution, Mr. Chairman, we as Members of the United States
Congress reaffirm that we will never stop fighting until Bob is
home with his family.
I appreciate the support and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you very much. I
appreciate that, Mr. Ted Deutch. We now go to Mr. Steve Chabot
of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be brief
because my colleagues have already spoken much better than I
could about this. I want to commend both Mr. Deutch and Ms.
Ros-Lehtinen for their unrelenting determination to do
everything within their power to assist the Levinson family and
to try to get Bob home. I mean to think 9 days would be a long
time, 9 weeks, 9 months. It has been 9 years and it is
incomprehensible how hard this must have been on him and on his
family. I know the administration has repeatedly called for the
safe return of Mr. Levinson, but this should always be at the
forefront of any talks, when we ever talk with Iran, this
should be discussed, whatever it is. And I would encourage that
to occur.
And I would also like to rise in support of H. Res. 551,
the resolution with respect to U.S.-Israeli economic relations.
They are obviously one of our strongest--if not our strongest--
allies on this globe and ensuring a comprehensive and
sustainable alliance and increasing trade ties, economic
dialogue, this is all for the better, will improve the
relationship between our two nations which is one of the most
critical relationships that we have.
So I want to thank all our colleagues involved in both of
these and I would like to yield back.
Chairman Royce. Do any of our Democrat colleagues seek
recognition at this point?
We will go to Mr. Mark Meadows of North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership and I would gladly yield the balance of my time to
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul.
Chairman Royce. Mr. McCaul is recognized.
Mr. McCaul. I thank Mr. Meadows for yielding time, Mr.
Chairman. Ranking Member, I want to thank you for collaborating
with my Committee on Homeland Security on H.R. 4403, Enhancing
Overseas Traveler Vetting Act. It is a bipartisan bill, passed
unanimous out of my committee. It implements an important
recommendation of the Task Force on Combat
t deg.ing
Terrorist and Foreign Fighter Travel. The bipartisan panel
found that many of our foreign partners lack crucial tripwires
to detect extremists when they are moving across borders.
Without adequate screening and watchlist systems, these
countries are letting jihadists slip through their fingers.
This puts America and our allies at risk. We cannot allow
foreign fighters to crisscross the globe undetected. This
legislation will help our most vulnerable partners put in place
vetting systems quickly, rather than taking years to develop
their own. We must shut down the jihadi superhighway to and
from terrorist safe havens overseas and this bill that we are
considering will help do exactly that.
I commend also Representative Heard who is on the task
force for writing this legislation and I urge my colleagues
here on the Foreign Affairs Committee to support it. With that,
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Mike McCaul. Do any other
members seek recognition? Hearing none, the question occurs on
the items considered en bloc.
All those in favor, say aye?
No, for those opposed?
In the opinion of the Chair the ayes have it and the
measures considered en bloc are agreed to. Without objection,
the measures considered en bloc are ordered favorably reported
as amended. And staff is directed to make any technical and
conforming changes.
Also without objection, the Chair is authorized to seek
House consideration of those measures under suspension of the
rules. And that concludes our business for today. I want to
thank Ranking Member Eliot Engel and all of our committee
members for their contributions and their assistance to today's
markup. The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:27 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
