- U.S. ECONOMIC AND MILITARY ALLIANCES IN ASIA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. ECONOMIC AND MILITARY ALLIANCES
IN ASIA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 15, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-73

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-515 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

MATT SALMON, Arizona Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Randall Schriver, president and chief executive officer,
Project 2049 Institute.........................................     6
Mr. Walter Lohman, director, Asian Studies Center, The Heritage
Foundation.....................................................    12
Balbina Hwang, Ph.D., visiting professor, School of International
Service, American University...................................    21
Mr. James L. Schoff, senior associate, Asia Program, Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace..............................    35

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Randall Schriver: Prepared statement.........................     8
Mr. Walter Lohman: Prepared statement............................    14
Balbina Hwang, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.........................    23
Mr. James L. Schoff: Prepared statement..........................    37

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    60
Hearing minutes..................................................    61

U.S. ECONOMIC AND MILITARY ALLIANCES IN ASIA

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1 o'clock p.m.,
in room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Matt Salmon
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Salmon. The subcommittee will come to order. Let me
start by recognizing myself and the ranking member to present
our opening statements. Without objection, the members of the
subcommittee can present brief remarks if they choose to, or
they can submit them for the record.
Our presence as a Pacific power is amplified and
underpinned by strong alliances. Each of our alliances contains
its own history and significance and has promoted security and
prosperity for the United States and the world for decades.
In a shifting geopolitical landscape, with China
integrating itself with other Asian economies and militaries,
maintaining these alliances and strengthening the U.S.-led
framework has become very complicated. Where the United States
used to command unfettered dedication from its regional
partners, the combination of U.S. attention in the Middle East
to domestic, economic, and political obligations; historic
tensions between our allies such as Korea and Japan; and the
pull of China's economic, military, and diplomatic overtures
has tempered this trend.
I look forward to hearing from our panel of distinguished
witnesses today, which will discuss the status of our alliances
in the region and evaluate strategies to maximize their mutual
benefit in the face of a new era of security challenges and
great power competition.
The first ally in the region, Japan, has served as perhaps
the most vital military relationship in the Asia-Pacific. Prime
Minister Abe's recent visit to Washington highlights the
dedication between the two countries to remain close allies as
Asia's strategic and economic outlook evolves.
Though concerns persist over opposition to U.S. presence at
the local level, Japan remains a critical partner for our
military with 54,000 troops, an aircraft carrier, and
innumerable other assets stationed there. Prime Minister Abe is
also seeking to increase Japan's defense stature outside the
confines of the U.S.-Japan alliance by broadening Japan's
military capabilities and forging new roles in and missions in
Asia.
On the economic front, with the recent passage of the Trade
Promotion Authority and the finalization of the bilateral trade
issues, Japan is leading the effort alongside the United States
to make a potential Trans-Pacific Partnership deal a reality.
Korea. In 1953, the United States and Korea signed a mutual
defense treaty and our partnership has grown exponentially ever
since. Korea is also one of our most valued trading partners in
the region. With the U.S.-Korea free trade agreement, U.S.
goods and exports to Korea reached a record level of $44.5
billion in 2014, up 7 percent from 2013. To this day we
continue to make strides in our economic and security relations
with Korea. And in April we also signed the U.S.-ROK 123 civil
nuclear agreement which supports U.S. nuclear industries and
promotes peaceful uses of nuclear energy between our two
countries.
We maintain a very strong military relationship with the
Republic of Korea and that relationship is our most important
asset in countering the rogue North Korean regime. As Korea's
capabilities continue to grow and mature, our relationship has
evolved toward greater equality and burden-sharing. Our two
countries still have several issues to resolve, however,
including the transfers of wartime Operational Control,
realignment of U.S. Forces, and whether Korea would be
interested in deploying a THAAD missile defense system.
We looked forward to welcoming President Park Geun-hye to
the United States earlier this year and she didn't let us down.
She did a great job discussing many of the salient issues in
our bilateral relationship. Unfortunately, the tragic MERS
crisis in the region has forced President Park to delay her
summit with President Obama, but we look forward to welcoming
her when she reschedules.
The Philippines is also another incredibly important ally,
and has a long history of extensive military cooperation,
disaster assistance, and converging economic and security
objectives. Our continued cooperation is especially important
in light of China's contested legal interpretation and
increased military aggression in the South China Sea, and I
look forward to hearing about how we can work with the
Philippines to help them modernize their military, improve our
economic relationship, and deter coercive Chinese behavior in
the disputed territories.
Thailand continues to serve as a regional operation
platform for over 50 U.S. Government agencies. Despite some of
the concerns with democracy, human trafficking, and other human
rights issues which continue to strain our relationship, we
still have, I think, a pretty robust relationship with them.
We have expressed concerns about the Thai Government's
behavior since the coup in 2014, and we have since reduced
participation in the Cobra Gold military exercises. Right now,
the prospects of future cooperation are unclear, but the
potential for stronger relations in the near future--while they
are narrow--are not evaporated, and I welcome any ideas and
thoughts from witnesses on how we could gain leverage and
address major concerns about Thailand's domestic circumstances.
With a rising China that competes for influence with our
allies, partners, and friends, our alliances serve a very
paramount role in both providing reassurances against
aggressive and unproductive behavior, and strengthening
interdependence and capacity among Asian countries. I look
forward to hearing from all of our witnesses not just about how
we work with our allies, but how our allies can work with each
other to accomplish our mutual foreign policy and security
goals in Asia.
Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record, and
without objection the hearing record will remain open for 5
calendar days to allow statements, questions, extraneous
materials for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules. And I now recognize the ranking member, Brad
Sherman, for any statements he might have.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we will focus
on our alliances, economic and national security with Japan,
South Korea, Thailand and the Philippines. As we speak, the
Obama administration is negotiating the Trans-Pacific
Partnership which will for the first time include Japan as a
free trade partner with the United States.
As I have said before in this subcommittee, this is a
mistake. The TPP will result in our trade deficit ballooning
and the loss of American jobs. We need only look at the results
of the deal with South Korea where the Economic Policy
Institute is now able to look backward to see the effect of
that agreement and has shown that it has cost us some 75,000
jobs here in the United States as our trade deficit with South
Korea has grown.
Now I believe in massive increases of trade, but we will
have free access to foreign markets only when we sign result
oriented trade agreements that require trade balance. Otherwise
we are in a circumstance where other countries with very
different cultures and very different legal systems are able to
use every non-tariff barrier they wish, and we simply do not
respond.
Now as to national security, our national security policy
is influenced tremendously by the Pentagon and every entity
looks to meet its own institutional needs. Look at the history
of America and our military during the 120, 130 years that we
have spent on the world stage outside our own continent. Every
time the Pentagon faces a uniformed enemy we win with glory,
and in the case of the Soviet Union without actually having to
engage in a major military effort.
From the Spanish War through the Cold War, every time we
confront a non-uniformed opponent, an insurrection or something
asymmetrical it has been an extremely painful, sometimes
winning sometimes losing but always painful, process for our
military. Start with the Philippine insurrection right through
the Vietnam War through Fallujah and Afghanistan.
So needless to say, it meets the institutional needs of the
Pentagon that we face a worthy foe that is uniformed and
conventional and technological. And so the country that is not
the official subject of our hearing today, China, is the only
country that can fill that institutional role. And everything
at the Pentagon is designed to say how can we ignore or at
least downplay the problems we face in the Middle East and
elsewhere and do our procurement and our research to confront
China in a glorious war or, better yet, non-war over islets of
incredibly little value to their purported owners and of no
value, or at least we don't own them, to the United States?
Looking at Japan we see a country that spends 1 percent of
its GDP on their military. We spend supposedly 4 percent on our
military, but that is only by ignoring the cost of veterans'
benefits which is incredibly bad cost accounting. The cost of
our defense includes the compensation package we give our
soldiers and that includes their veterans' benefits. Imagine
what would happen to a car company that didn't include in the
cost of producing the car, the pension benefits it pays to its
workers.
So we are spending much closer to 5 percent of our GDP on
our military. Japan is on the front lines. They are their
islets in their own estimation, China would say otherwise, and
they stick to 1 percent. And it is useful that the Lower House
in Japan is considering adopting the collective defense
principle, but a change in principle was nice; I would like to
see a change in effort and money. And keep in mind these islets
are not valuable, they are just an excuse for countries to
fight and to renew the conflicts they have from World War II
and the bad blood and who did what to whom. And if they are
valuable, they are not valuable to the United States. If there
is any oil, and there isn't, it is Japanese oil, it is Korean
oil, it is Chinese oil, it is certainly not our oil.
Also I pick up on the chairman's comments that we need to
get our allies to work together. The Japanese could stop
relitigating World War II and that would make it a little
easier for them to coordinate with Korea and our other allies.
As to Vietnam, they are spending only 2.4 percent of their
GDP on their military. They are literally on the front lines.
We are not talking about islets here. We are talking about
their continued existential existence. And they are managing to
spend--usually the supporting actor, the United States, would
be spending less and they would be spending more.
As to the Philippines, our military relationship has
changed. We appreciate the use of eight military bases on a
non-permanent basis. As to Thailand, we do not have the treaty
structure for our military cooperation, but for over 60 years
Thailand has served as an operational platform for our defense
efforts. We have seen challenges to Thailand's democracy and we
look forward to Thailand hopefully reaching a greater level of
social harmony and adherence to the rules of law and democracy,
and I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. The chair recognizes Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Chairman. I have a markup in
Homeland Security and that is why I am going to have to go, but
I just appreciate the opportunity to make a couple of
statements. First off, I will align myself with your opening
comments.
And the second thing is, one thing I would love to hear
from the hearing had I been able to stay is I am very, very
concerned about the Spratly Islands and China's incursion there
and what it means for the Philippines, but what it means for
our broader posturing in the region by China. And it is the
Spratlys today; is it somewhere else tomorrow? And I hope the
panelists will touch on that because I very much value the
relationship we have with the Philippines.
And so I would look forward to maybe following up with you
at another point about that, but anyway, with that, Mr.
Chairman, I thank you so much and I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Chabot, did you have an opening
statement?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. I don't really have a statement. I
will just be brief. I was listening to my esteemed colleague
from California's statement. I just thought I would comment on
the trade portion of it briefly because I happen to disagree
with his points on that.
And would just say that I think TPA and ultimately TPP and
perhaps TTIP down the road are vital to our economy and trade
and job creation here in this country. I know that some jobs
are lost, but I think that we create far more jobs than we
lose. And the United States, if we don't move forward with
these types of agreements are really cutting ourselves out of a
whole range of opportunities. We are letting others draw up the
rules, principally China, who isn't part of TPA or TPP but
ultimately they will be the ones writing the rules, we will be
following and the rest of the world, particularly that portion
of the world which is an ever more important part of the world.
So we need to be involved in this and so I would encourage
my colleagues. And he is a dear friend. I really enjoy
listening to him and he is very knowledgeable. I would
encourage him to listen to the administration on TPA and TPP
and----
Mr. Sherman. Can we just freeze the record and say
encourage him to listen to the administration?
Mr. Chabot. That is right. Let me just complete my
statement. I would encourage you to listen to them very closely
with respect to TPA and TPP and ignore them with respect to the
Iran deal. I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. I would like to introduce the panel
members. We are really appreciative that you could take the
time. Thanks for being so understanding on the flexibility with
the votes. Those votes get in the way all the time, but that is
part of our job.
Today we are joined by Mr. Randall Schriver. He is the
president and CEO of Project 2049 Institute. He is also
founding partner of Armitage International LLC and a senior
associate at CSIS. Prior to his time in the private sector he
served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs, and before that as chief of staff and
senior policy advisor to then Deputy Secretary of State Richard
Armitage. Thanks for being here today.
Do you know Dick Nanto very well over at CSIS? Oh, he
actually handled Japan there for quite some time. Good guy.
Really good guy.
Mr. Walter Lohman is director of the Heritage Foundation's
Asian Studies Center and an adjunct professor at Georgetown who
leads graduate courses on American interests in Southeast Asia.
Before joining Heritage, Mr. Lohman was senior vice president
and executive director of the U.S.-ASEAN Business Council and
was a staff member of the Senate.
Dr. Balbina Hwang is currently visiting professor at
American University and until recently was visiting professor
at Georgetown. Earlier in her career she was special advisor to
the Assistant Secretary of East Asian and Pacific Affairs at
the State Department and worked as a policy analyst in the
private sector.
Mr. James Schoff is a senior associate at the Carnegie Asia
Program. He previously served as senior advisor for East Asia
policy at the U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense and as
director of Asia Pacific Studies at the Institute for Foreign
Policy Analysis.
Thank you all for joining us. The lighting system is very
much like a traffic intersection. Green means go, amber means
go really fast, and red means stop. You have 5 minutes, so
thanks a lot. Mr. Schriver, we will start with you.

STATEMENT OF MR. RANDALL SCHRIVER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PROJECT 2049 INSTITUTE

Mr. Schriver. Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Sherman and Mr.
Chabot. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today. I also
appreciate being seated beside colleagues that I respect and
admire so much. This is a great opportunity for me. Your staff
asked me to focus specifically on Japan so my written statement
reflects that and I will make a few opening comments along
those lines.
Since Prime Minister Abe returned to office in December
2012, I think he has provided energy, vision, he has been busy
implementing the vision and doing real things, and that energy
extends to the alliance as well. We have seen a number of very
significant developments. 2015 alone, Mr. Chairman, you
mentioned his successful visit here to the United States. We
have completed our work on the joint defense guidelines,
completed or near complete our bilateral discussion with
respect to TPP. We are moving into another phase where we are
talking about roles and missions and how we implement the
defense guidelines.
So there is a great deal happening and I think real
significant accomplishments. There are some challenges and we
shouldn't overlook those. I think we have to continue this
momentum. We do have to get TPP across the finish line. We do
have to continue this process on the defense side going from
defense guidelines to roles and missions and looking at
contingency and getting into more realistic planning.
We of course have longer term challenges. I think on
Japan's side whether they can fire that so-called third arrow
with economic reform and put their economy on a better long
term footing, because if they don't demographics loom with an
aging population and that will affect our alliance because more
resources would have to go to the social programs and perhaps
then less available for our security cooperation.
On the U.S. side, I think it was made mention that we
occasionally have diversions to the Middle East and other
crises. Those are understandable, but I think for our allies
that does create some anxiety and from time to time we do hear
about that. They are interested in whether or not we will have
the resources on the defense side if we are continuing to live
with sequestration what can be done in other forms to ensure
that the Asia-Pacific, our best forces are forward deployed and
we are able to meet our obligations and our commitments in the
alliance.
China is certainly a challenge and it cuts multiple ways.
Their assertive behavior, I think, in one respect has really
breathed life into the alliance. It has really incentivized our
Japanese partners to take these endeavors seriously. On the
other hand, the Chinese are very involved in a political
warfare and propaganda directed at the Japanese to try to drive
a wedge in our alliance, and these are challenges that we have
to be aware of and develop counterstrategies to.
So I think going forward there are some things that we need
to focus on. Getting TPP across the finish line, your comments
notwithstanding, Mr. Sherman, I think is very important for the
alliance, the region and really our strategic position in Asia.
I think that is the minimum. I think that Japan and the U.S. at
the conclusion of TPP should look immediately to broaden into a
second round. Look at countries like South Korea, look at
countries like Taiwan, and see if they can be brought into this
broader trade liberalization effort.
On the security side, I very much agree Japan could spend
more. We encourage that. They have had modest increases, which
by maybe some standards look indeed modest, but for Japanese
standards given their history, I think, are significant. But it
is really not just the spending. We want, as I said, to go from
the roles and missions process to get into real contingency
planning and have a very good discussion in the context of our
alliance about the Korean Peninsula, about the Taiwan Strait,
about East China Sea and South China Sea.
I think also it was made mention about bringing in other
partners and encouraging our allies to do things with other
allies so that we move away from the traditional hub and spokes
and into something that is more networked, and I think Japan is
poised to do that. They have joined some of our multilateral
exercises. U.S., Japan, Australia have exercised together.
There is discussion that Japan may once again join the Malabar
exercise with the U.S. and India.
So I think these are very positive developments and it
needs to be continued to encourage, because I think Japan has a
very good role to play beyond just the defense of Japan. They
bring a lot of credibility. They bring capacity capability to
help other allies improve. They are involved in defense
programs with the Philippines, possibly Australia. So in short,
I think Japan can be a valuable security partner for us, not in
just the things we do with one another but in strengthening our
regional strategy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schriver follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Mr. Lohman?

STATEMENT OF MR. WALTER LOHMAN, DIRECTOR, ASIAN STUDIES CENTER,
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Lohman. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to
the members of the subcommittee for having me here today
focusing on this very important issue and particularly
Southeast Asia. I focused on it because too often Southeast
Asia gets left off of the agenda when we talk about these
things.
I want to start just at the outset by saying that although
I do serve at Heritage Foundation as the director of the Asian
Studies Center, what I am saying today does not reflect
necessarily the views of the Heritage Foundation or anyone else
on my resume.
Let me just get right to it. I thought about what I could
do of most value here, and I think maybe just give some
perspective on where Southeast Asian security alliances fit
into our vision for the region, that is, America's historic
vision. There is a caricature of geopolitics often reflected in
the media headline that pits the U.S. against China in some
sort of great game, something more reminiscent of Europe than
today's Asia. It is a convenient mental map, I think, and it
makes for very good headlines, but it is not really the way the
world works today. In this day and age, a great game in Asia
could not be effectuated without targeting the international
economic sources of China's power, and no one, not the United
States, not Thailand, not the Philippines, not even Taiwan, has
any interest in doing that. If not for any other reason then
because targeting China's economy would hurt all of us as well.
America's geopolitical task in Asia-Pacific is pursuit of a
liberal international order characterized by such things as
freedom of navigation and overflight, free commerce, political
liberty, and peace and security. U.S. alliances with the
Philippines and Thailand represent two distinct strands in this
effort.
The Philippines is instrumental in managing the downside
risk that is pushing back on China's effort to disrupt our
vision, and Thailand's values lies in its potential for
maximizing the order's upside. That is all of the cooperation
that we can do with Thailand. They are far from conflict with
the Chinese, far from the South China Sea. They have much more
positive value in their relationship there.
And I should mention briefly, we are not covering Australia
today but it is worth mentioning that Australia is another
important piece of American's security network in the Asia-
Pacific. The Philippines in particular is at the forefront of
the contest for freedom of the seas in the Pacific. The case
that is presented for arbitration under UNCLOS is the single
most important development in the South China Sea dispute in 20
years. It will either lead to peaceful effective management of
the dispute or it will provide critical context and motivation
for increased U.S. presence and defense cooperation with the
Philippines and with others in the region.
Thailand is the other side of the coin. The cost-benefit
calculation in the China-Thailand relationship is much more
positive. The utility of the U.S.-Thai alliance therefore lies
in maximizing its massive capacities for service in the cause
of our liberal vision. Its biggest challenge is political, and
I think you referenced that in your opening statement. And the
coup last year in Thailand following months of political unrest
upended U.S.-Thai relations requiring a cutoff in U.S. grant
assistance to the Thai military.
The answer in Thailand is not prioritizing security over
democracy--the U.S. has to encourage Thailand to return to
democracy--but in properly balancing the two priorities. I have
my doubts that the current crisis is being handled in a way
that will allow us to quickly recover once Thailand does return
to democracy.
So based on these quick observations what should the United
States do with regard to the Philippines? I would suggest that
Congress double the FMF budget, the foreign military financing
budget, for the Philippines. Among the many other sort of
hardware things we are talking about, get the Philippines the
third coast guard cutter that they have requested and has been
talked about. Those things have a way of derailing in the
middle of the process, so that is something that we need to
keep an eye on.
I think we should change our position on the application of
the U.S.-Philippines security treaty to cover features in the
South China Sea that are currently occupied by the Philippines
and under its jurisdiction. Currently we are ambiguous in that
regard.
With respect to Thailand, the U.S. should, first of all,
continue our full complement of military exercises to the
greatest extent possible under current circumstances. Make
clear our interest in a rapid return to democracy, but in more
private settings may be better befitting an ally such
longstanding mutual sacrifice.
Number three, prepare to hit the ground running with
resumption of full military to military contact to include a
doubling of IMET assistance and to send an Ambassador to
Thailand. The last time we went through this sort of crisis
with Bangkok, having an Ambassador there, the right one, made
all the difference in the world and we currently don't have one
and haven't had one for about a year.
So this concludes my testimony. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lohman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Dr. Hwang?

STATEMENT OF BALBINA HWANG, PH.D., VISITING PROFESSOR, SCHOOL
OF INTERNATIONAL SERVICE, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY

Ms. Hwang. Good afternoon, Chairman, and distinguished
members of the committee. Thank you for the kind invitation to
testify before you today. I am honored for the opportunity to
share with you my views on the status of our alliance with the
Republic of Korea and to offer strategies that will serve the
national interest of both our countries. I have prepared
written statement for the record but will provide a brief
summary now.
Almost a decade ago, in 2006, I testified before the House
Committee on International Relations on this very topic, but
under quite different circumstances. The question at the time
was whether the U.S.-ROK Alliance was at risk as the issues
confronting us seemed quite dire and challenging. At the time,
the alliance was endangered primarily by differences on how to
address the North Korean threat.
Today, I am happy to appear before you amidst a much more
satisfactory environment. Today, the alliance is overall strong
and robust due to much dedicated hard work by both governments
over the last several years. Domestic political changes
including changes of administration in both countries were
certainly also contributing factors and must not be overlooked.
Today, while both allies remain frustrated over the lack of
progress in addressing North Korea's nuclear programs, there is
nevertheless a renewed and strong shared commitment to the
alliance itself and its primary function to deter and defense
against North Korean aggression.
We should be careful, however, to not be complacent that
all remains perfect with the Alliance, nor that the current
satisfaction will continue indefinitely. Several flashpoints
remain as issues in the alliance which have the potential to
become political issues in South Korea, which has a very strong
and vociferous civil society that is often opposed to the
alliance. Therefore it is imperative to understand the ROK's
perspective on the alliance which has evolved over time due to
the changing strategic environment in the region.
Now South Korea's defense posture since the Korean War has
remained largely constant, relying on three reinforcing
pillars: Defensive deterrence, forward active defense, and the
alliance with the United States. But South Korea's security
challenges have grown more complex and multifaceted in recent
decades and has grown far beyond the conventional military
threat posed by North Korea. These changes have evolved in the
context of South Korea's rapid development which, today, has
propelled it into a solid middle power status.
South Koreans today are proud of being a global Korea, and
this is not just a hyperbole. Today South Korea is the 13th
largest economy in the world and the 6th largest trading
partner of the United States. Total bilateral trade with the
U.S. totaled almost $114 billion last year. What is more
astonishing is how highly dependent the ROK is on international
trade for its prosperity. Ninety 7 percent of its GDP is
comprised of international trade, and 99.7 percent of the
nation's trade is conducted by ocean transport.
Now this is important, because for a country entirely
dependent on oil imports, and by the way Japan is too, but 80
percent of its oil imports are transported from the Middle East
through two major choke points: The Straits of Hormuz and the
Straits of Malacca. What this means is that any disruption of
the open sea lanes of communication, or SLOCs, are immediate
and would devastate the South Korean economy.
Now the security of critical SLOCs in and around Asia has
been guaranteed and underwritten by the U.S. Navy for the last
six decades as part of the U.S. commitment to its treaty allies
in the region. Undoubtedly this has contributed to South
Korea's ability to rapidly develop its economy into an
industrial powerhouse today.
While the U.S. remains maritime Asia's strongest military
and economic presence today, it is conceivable that China may
become the dominant regional naval power during this century.
It is precisely these challenges posed by China that have
created deep anxieties in the region about the future
distribution of power. There is a profound uncertainty in the
region about continued U.S. commitment and presence in the
region, and unfortunately the so-called Pivot has done little
to allay these fears. And complicating this uncertainty is the
very complex relationship that Korea has with China, perhaps
more so than with any other country.
Today, South Korean public broadly supports the United
States. A recent Pew survey shows that 84 percent of the public
has favorable view of the United States. But by no means does
this indicate that South Koreans favor the U.S. over China.
Indeed, South Koreans are increasingly resentful about a
growing perception that their country is being pressured to
choose the alliance against China.
Now I do not believe this is a correct choice, but this is
an increasingly common view. Such a dynamic is played out over
the growing controversy over the possible South Korean adoption
of THAAD, and note that the public debates are framed about
arguments about negative Chinese reactions more so than about
whether THAAD serves to contribute to South Korea's defense and
security. And so these concerns about upsetting China
essentially reveal that Korea feels the perennial twin fears of
an alliance relationship, the twin fears of entrapment and
abandonment.
And so let me conclude by saying that any close cooperation
in the future is dependent on continuing the achievements of
the past few years and that future political leaders should be
mindful not to sacrifice the achievements and hard work. But we
ought to be aware there are challenges ahead, and one of the
biggest challenges will be on how we frame this argument about
China's interests vis-a-vis the alliance interests. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hwang follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Schoff.

STATEMENT OF MR. JAMES L. SCHOFF, SENIOR ASSOCIATE, ASIA
PROGRAM, CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE

Mr. Schoff. Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member Sherman,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
talk about the U.S. alliance relationships in Asia. I will
focus on Japan and the Republic of Korea today.
I have prepared separate testimony for the subcommittee,
but would now like to highlight two observations about these
alliances. First, we should take a moment to appreciate how far
we have come, from a paternalistic relationship helping these
countries rise from the ashes to more equal and dynamic
partnership spanning the globe in areas of security, trade,
investment, technology, global health and many others. This is
not to pat ourselves on the back, but instead to recognize how
diverse and mutually beneficial these alliances have become.
Second, we should consider the fact that the next 60 years
of these relationships and the environment within which they
will operate are unlikely to resemble the past 60. In Asia, I
expect a much finer line between productive harmony and
potentially devastating conflict. Greater wealth and capacity
in the region together with enhanced communication and
interaction converging interests in the regional commons give
me optimism.
But nationalism, poor governance, competition for
resources, rising military investments and other factors
provide reason to worry. This is a time of transition in Asia,
and therefore a delicate balance must be struck between U.S.
reassurance and in viewing U.S. power and presence within a new
regional framework built upon the foundation of our alliances
and emerging partnerships.
U.S. priorities will remain the maintenance of stability,
openness and access in the region, but we will not be able to
do this on our own. And so we must accomplish this in concert
with other nations, and China should be a part of this process.
Overall, the U.S. response to changing dynamics in Asia should
include concrete steps to reassure allies and deter Chinese
coercion combined with active diplomacy and networking in the
region to foster a more collective approach to rulemaking and
enforcement as Asia grows. This can ultimately help spread the
burden for maintaining peace and territorial integrity beyond
the traditional hub and spoke alliance system, although for the
time being these alliances are the primary means to preserve
stability and prosperity.
The United States must be a leader in Asia in a
comprehensive way not just in military terms, and we should
support closer cooperation among our allies and partners
particularly encouraging our stronger security partnerships
between Japan and Australia and Japan and the Philippines. For
example, progress toward an ASEAN economic community, and even
the fragile Japan-Korea-China framework that can reinforce U.S.
policy goals vis-a-vis China via the words of trusted allies.
For the sake of time I would like to highlight three points
on Japan. First, Japan's reaction on the defense front remains
modest in budget terms and it is taking reasonable steps to
loosen restrictions on how its forces can cooperate with
others. Japan is going beyond mere presence in its EEZ and
actually considering how to fight and contain a low level
conflict. This is a more credible form of deterrence, and
positive, I think, for the alliance as long as the alliance can
become more integrated and Japan can plug into multilateral
security cooperation activities more effectively.
Second, Prime Minister Abe is trying to do this and this
alliance integration opportunity is embodied in our new defense
cooperation guidelines. The new alliance coordination mechanism
mentioned in the defense guidelines should become a more
valuable tool to coordinate decisions with a higher degree of
political and operational accountability.
Third, Japan is also reaching out actively to Southeast
Asia in order to diversify economic interests beyond China and
attempt to balance along its periphery. This is an opportunity
for the United States to coordinate with Japan and reinforce
our own Asian strategy.
Two points on Korea. First, North Korea remains the number
one security concern, and allied solidarity is vital to
managing any dangerous scenario. A conditions based approach to
transfer wartime operational control, or OPCON, to South Korea
is appropriate given the security challenges, but I think we
should stay focused on this objective. I believe OPCON transfer
is the correct policy because South Korea is capable, it can
enhance our leverage vis-a-vis North Korea and China, and it is
the right thing to do. Implementing OPCON transition, however,
must not diminish our ability to operate in a joint fashion
when necessary or undermine mutualized confidence.
Second, although South Korea has become an increasingly
important partner in multilateral institutions and responding
to crises overseas or problem solving be it health, security,
development, and despite Seoul's understandable focus on the
Peninsula, the U.S. should keep looking for opportunities to
involve South Korea in multilateral partnerships to support
regional governance. They are too important and capable a
player to have on the sidelines and it will serve their
interests too.
Finally, with regard to the poor state between Japan and
Korea over historical perspectives, this is a situation that
Washington can neither solve nor ignore. I applaud recent
efforts by Seoul and Tokyo to improve ties, and long term, I
think, a deep politicized process of grassroots truth-seeking
will help solidify relations, but that will take time and is
beyond U.S. control. Meanwhile, trilateral cooperation with the
United States on not only North Korea but also in other shared
security concerns is an opportunity to create a safe haven for
Japan-Korea collaboration. We should strive to get the public
in both countries to see such cooperation as a matter of course
independent of bilateral grievances. And so conducting some of
our trilateral activities at a higher public profile, I
believe, might be useful. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Lohman, I am going to direct my
first question to you. Thailand's ongoing military rule and the
significant human rights issues that have come with it has made
justifying military cooperation with Thailand more difficult
for us. But despite this, Thailand is still a critical partner
and U.S.-Thai cooperation is important for U.S. security
efforts in the region. What kind of leverage do we have to
encourage the military government to move toward elections?
Mr. Lohman. Well, I think in the case of Thailand, our
leverage really comes from our long term friendship with the
country. We do have a security alliance with Thailand, in fact
we do also have a treaty basis for that alliance dating back to
1954. So in this case I don't really think of it so much as
leverage because you don't really use leverage over a friend,
you try to work it through the difficult times.
I think ultimately Thailand will return to democracy, but
they have a couple underlying, very deep political challenges,
one involving the health of the king, and the other very deep
social divisions within the country that they have to work
their way through. In the meantime, I think we need Thailand to
help us address a lot of the security challenges in the region,
and so I don't think we want to throw that away in the process
of pushing for a return to democracy.
Mr. Salmon. So in response to--this will be for Dr. Hwang
and Mr. Schoff--the evolving threat posed by North Korea over
the past several years, the United States and South Korea have
developed a new counter-provocation plan and a tailored
deterrent strategy. What should Congress know about these
plans, and have the various agreements between the U.S. and
South Korean militaries on responding to North Korean
provocations made the alliance function more smoothly?
Mr. Schoff. Sir, I happened to be serving in the Defense
Department at the time of the Yeonpyeongdo shelling and that
was a perfect example of the alliance dealing with a low level
provocation that in many ways in conjunction with the Cheonan
bombing had prompted this idea of developing a counter-
provocation strategy.
And I think as tight as our alliance is and as well as I
think we manage that process, those situations are inherently
difficult, because the main responsibility of the low end of
escalation is our ally partner but they want to bring the
United States in kind of relatively quickly or early or show us
up to help force the other to stand down. At the same time we
don't necessarily want to get too deeply enmeshed and yet we
want to be supportive of our ally.
So I think that process was a very useful way to help
deepen mutual understanding about what to expect from each
other, and I think what Congress should know about this process
is that it is a continual process. As people change in and out
of these positions in the Secretary of Defense and in the White
House and over time, continued communication at the very high
levels so that mutual expectations are shared about what to
expect from each other, this reassurance deterrence balance, I
think, is a very tenuous one.
We have done okay with Korea on this front, and in the
tailored deterrent strategy it is even more important because
the stakes are so much higher on the nuclear side of things. So
the communication and the Extended Deterrence Policy Committee,
I think, is extremely valuable. I have been in those meetings
and we share, we learn things about each other in that process.
And continued engagement in that process, I think, is the main
thing I would recommend.
Ms. Hwang. Well, this is where history is important,
because, and you talk to any military commanders that have
served in Korea and they will tell you that it is one of the
closest alliances, and this is because the U.S. has fought side
by side with South Korean soldiers. I mean you often hear about
the blood, sweat and tears, but not only obviously during the
Korean War but also during the Vietnam War when South Korea
sent so many troops to reinforce U.S. troops. And this makes
the U.S.-ROK lines quite different from the U.S.-Japan which,
in essence, is theory in terms of how they work together.
I think it is important to understand that for the last 60-
plus years we have actually had a very effective deterrent that
has evolved against North Korea's conventional threat. So when
you ask about North Korea's threat it is important that
currently and in the future North Korea now really poses
threats on several different fronts. One is the conventional
one, which I believe our alliance has worked very successfully
to deter and that is essentially manageable.
What is more challenging are the asymmetric threats
increasingly from North Korea, and these include not only
missile threats, certainly potential use of WMD and now things
like cyber threats. And the 2015 Strategic Digest published by
the U.S. forces in Korea essentially identifies North Korea's
missile threat and comes up with four specific ways in order to
address them including detect, defend, disrupt and destroy, the
so-called 4D lines.
And I believe that South Korea is complementing this. They
just announced an increase in $8 billion to the 2016-2020
Fiscal Year budget specifically to address the missile threats.
So this is an ongoing process, but again the North Korean
threat is evolving over time.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. How is Prime Minister Abe's
government--I am going to direct this to Mr. Schriver--planning
to implement the reinterpretation of the right to engage in
collective self-defense? What is the legislative process ahead
and what is the expected time frame, and how will the new
policy affect bilateral security cooperation, and how do the
revised mutual defense guidelines reflect this change?
Mr. Schriver. Thank you. That process is unfolding right
now. They have pursued implementing legislation as a follow-on
effort to the decision to reinterpret the constitution. It is a
fight that Prime Minister Abe is willing to take on even though
in many cases it is not very popular.
I think right now the legislation that has gone forward and
actually was approved in the last couple days, that polls under
50 percent. So he is taking some risks here, but it is a
follow-on to the previous decision. It is something he is
committed to. And the timeline will depend on the politics and
whether or not he wants to go quickly with the separate pieces
of legislation. At one point I think there were 17 pieces,
maybe one of my colleagues could refine that. But it is a
significant number of pieces of legislation in order to fully
implement this decision.
For us, I think it gives us greater flexibility. Again we
have to further define that alongside the Japanese and have
that discussion about roles and missions, but breaking out of
this self-imposed limitation on collective self defense opens
up a wide range of possibilities for our alliance in potential
conflict talking about known contingencies such as the Korean
Peninsula, Taiwan Strait, but also peacetime activities,
humanitarian affairs, disaster relief, freedom of navigation
operations in the South China Sea. I think, in short, it just
gives us a lot more flexibility to act as an alliance where our
shared interests are concerned and this is something that I
think is a good thing.
Mr. Salmon. So a segue onto that would be the disputed
islets of, well, Japan would probably contend they are not
disputed. It is a settled issue. But the Senkaku Islands, the
Diaoyu Islands in the East Sea: It has been our policy since
1972 that the 1960 U.S.-Japan Security Treaty covers the
islets, because Article V of the treaty stipulates that the
United States is bound to protect the territories under the
administration of Japan, and Japan administers the islets.
So what are Japan's expectations regarding U.S. involvement
in a hypothetical contingency between China and Japan over
these islets, and under what conditions do you think that the
United States would be required by that statute to use force to
defend the islets or defend Japan?
Mr. Schriver. Well, I think Japan's expectations should
rightfully be that we would honor our word. And as you say, the
treaty has been interpreted that way. President Obama when he
visited Japan last year articulated that specifically that the
treaty applies to the Senkaku Islands. So I think they should
have an expectation that we would honor that word and help them
defend the Senkakus should there be a crisis there.
They are fully prepared to do things on their own before
bringing in the United States, and I think the response that
they have had to Chinese incursions has been quite robust. And
if you look at how they are doing their own defense planning,
they are shifting more resources and attention to the south
specifically for this purpose to deal with this potential
contingency.
So I think Japan's first notion would be to see about their
own defense, but of course given that we have provided our
reassurance and our word at the highest level, I think they
would rightfully expect us to be involved should there be a
conflict of that nature. Hopefully it is one that we can avoid,
and I think so far the Japanese response has been pretty
effective in terms of deterring more Chinese aggression.
Mr. Salmon. At least for now it is on hold. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I will pick up on that. On 9/11, forces under
the protection of the de facto Government of Afghanistan killed
over 3,000 Americans. NATO recognized this as an attack on the
United States and NATO countries put their own soldiers in
harm's way in order to respond. Japan did not put any of its
forces in harm's way.
Is this security agreement we have with Japan explicitly
created as a one-way street? That is to say an attack on Japan
is an attack on America, but an attack on America is something
for Japan to sympathize about? Is this a two-way agreement like
NATO or a gift from the American people to Japan? Mr. Schriver?
Mr. Schriver. Well, I think as a reminder, of course we
essentially wrote Japan's----
Mr. Sherman. I am not saying that this agreement was
written in Tokyo, it may have been written in Washington. But
it has got to be evaluated today.
Mr. Schriver. Right. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman. Is it a mutual defense agreement or a one-way
defense agreement?
Mr. Schriver. Well, it is moving in the direction of a
mutual defense agreement because----
Mr. Sherman. Moving in the direction. But we lost 3,000
people and they exposed no soldiers to harm.
Mr. Schriver. They did commit peacekeeping troops under
their constitution and what was allowed at the time, and we
have long----
Mr. Sherman. So is there anything in our treaty with Japan
that says they have to come to our aid if we are attacked? Is
there a line you can point to?
Mr. Schriver. It is not the same nature----
Mr. Sherman. So it is a one-way deal, the wisdom of which
may have existed in prior centuries. I visited Japan not too
long ago, was shocked by the jingoistic views of some of the
very top leaders that I met with, with regard to World War II.
A major leader who played even a more critical role before I
met him put forth the idea that nanshoku benefited from
Japanese occupation. What do we do to get the Japanese to build
bridges like the Germans and to not relitigate World War II?
Mr. Schoff.
Mr. Schoff. Sure. Thank you, sir. Well, I think one quick
point to make is that the Japanese opinion is diverse. That
there is not one Japanese view, but what you described is
certainly a worrying or an uncomfortable portion of the
Japanese population that I think does not fully appreciate how
severe and subjugating their actions were during that time, and
therefore does not really understand why the feedback from
parts of South Korea and parts of China are the way they are.
Mr. Sherman. And part of it is a matter of when the events
took place. Their conquest of much of China wasn't any more
brutal than European expansion in Africa or even in Indonesia.
It is just that it took place in the 1940s not the 1840s and it
is very hard to make an argument that conquering China was a
fair thing to do in the 1940s.
Mr. Schoff. I think that is a valid point and certainly one
that some in Japan would say we were kind of following the lead
of many of the other imperial powers. I think the point, or
what I try to encourage Japanese friends who may feel this
way--plenty do not feel that way; plenty learn very
sufficiently about the history--is to say the focus should not
be on kind of what was right or wrong in the context of what
was going on at that point, but here we are now and you have
neighbors that feel the way they do and we have an education
process that I think needs to be continued.
Mr. Sherman. And trivialize the concerns of those who are
concerned about the so-called comfort women, which I think is
perhaps not a good euphemism, then you are going to have a
great difficulty doing business in East Asia.
What do we do to get the Japanese to spend more on their
military? We are told we have to defend the oil of the Middle
East. Why? Well, because the world economy is dependent upon
it. Why? Because Japan burns Middle East oil. So how do we get
Japan to spend more than 1 percent, and how is it they have
stuck us with the responsibility of defending their oil
tankers, which by the way don't even have American flags or
American troops?
Mr. Schoff. Well, sir, just quickly responding, I believe
Japan does contribute in a variety of ways. Certainly when they
are helping the Syrian refugees in the Middle East that is
helping the overall situation. When they are contributing to
counterpiracy operation in the Gulf of Aden that helps. I
understand that it is not an additional percent or two of GDP
necessarily, but they do have legal and political limitations.
Mr. Sherman. Well, it is all wrapped up in 1 percent of
GDP.
Mr. Schoff. Well, those other expenditures are beyond that
on different line items. But I think we need to continue to
encourage. To me it is less about the money right now. They
don't necessarily get the best value for money in the way that
they procure and the way they maintain their forces, so I think
they are moving in a direction to be able to have a more
competitive defense industry that may reduce procurement costs;
they may get more value for the dollar. But it is also about
loosening legal restrictions on being able to be a more equal
partner in multilateral security cooperation.
Mr. Sherman. When you save hundreds of billions of dollars
by keeping legal restrictions it is hard to loosen legal
restrictions.
Dr. Hwang, South Korea is developing its own missile
defense system. They could be buying the American system. They
run a huge trade surplus with the United States. We are
supposed to be partners in their defense. Why are they creating
their own instead of buying ours?
Ms. Hwang. Well, I certainly can't speak for the South
Korean Government. Clearly though there are obviously economic
reasons they want to develop their own system domestically.
There are some political ones though too. There is this
impression among South Koreans, and again this is the civil
society that is opposed to the alliance. They view the alliance
as an outdated form essentially of dependence on the United
States. They don't necessarily trust the United States. And so
by relying on a U.S. system this perpetuates this notion that
somehow South Koreans are dependent on the United States.
Personally I think that obviously South Korean adoption of the
THAAD does make the system much more interoperable and makes
much more sense for the South Korean defense.
Mr. Sherman. I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Lowenthal?
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to kind
of follow up. I found the discussion of Japan very interesting.
And I want to talk, and I know this is a little bit off the
topic, but I want to talk, this past weekend I was honored to
host the United States Ambassador to Vietnam, Mr. Ted Osius, in
my district. I represent a very large section of Little Saigon.
Well, the largest part of Little Saigon, and I was pleased that
the Ambassador came. And much of the discussion was about the
Trans-Pacific Partnership, and he heard many of the concerns of
my constituents who have deep misgivings about efforts to
strengthen ties, economic ties especially between the United
States and a Southeast Asian country such as Vietnam because of
human rights issues in Vietnam.
And so I want to ask you if you have any thoughts about
that. How do we balance our strategic interests with human
rights interests if you have, I mean we are really talking
about, it kept coming up in the polls that 92 percent of the
people in Vietnam want closer economic ties with the United
States and not China. And I am going to talk a little bit about
that also, about China.
And so we see this on both countries, but I am also very
concerned about human rights issues and what we can do about it
and what your thoughts are, how we strengthen this alliance
when we know that there are countries that we are talking about
that have terrible records on human rights, like Vietnam. So I
am wondering, any thoughts about that?
Mr. Lohman. Well, I think of the TPP and some of these
trade connections that we are making less in strategic terms
than I do in economic terms. I don't really see inclusion of
Vietnam in the TPP as a way of building strategic connections
to Vietnam. It is really a way of helping them liberalize their
economy. And so the connections from the econ side and the
liberalization side to the human rights side, I think----
Mr. Lowenthal. But people also see it there as a way of
breaking the dependence of Vietnam from China too. That is
critically a part of the equation. And it may not be directly
as you are talking about, but in that equation. And whether it
is in, I am going to ask you also to tell me whether it is
because of the issues in the South China Sea or whatever, but
they see this as that relationship with China is also part of
that equation.
Mr. Lohman. They may see it as a way to diversify their
ties. I mean, I think they still do have significant economic
interests in China and with China, trade connections and
investment connections and that sort of thing. So maybe they
want is fully diversify, and in that sense the TPP does that
for them as well. But I just don't see it as a tie-up. I
think----
Mr. Lowenthal. But what about in terms of economic issues
though?
Mr. Lohman. What is that?
Mr. Lowenthal. What about us lifting the lethal weapons ban
with----
Mr. Lohman. Well, no, I mean on those things----
Mr. Lowenthal. It is beginning this, well, I am just
wondering how do we deal especially around when we know there
is strong human rights violations.
Mr. Lohman. Yes. I think the restrictions that we have on
lethal shipment of arms to Vietnam is a prudent thing and
something that we have to take on a case by case basis. We just
sent them these P-8 aircraft or just sold them P-8 aircraft in
a way to help them address a problem we have in a nonlethal
way, but help them contribute to something that we both have.
But it is not the same as giving them tanks or guns and that
sort of thing. So I think that is something that we can manage
with them. It is a very different relationship than we have
with Thailand.
So right now Thailand is going through a hard time but we
have this long history with Thailand. So you have different
venues of working through these issues with a country like that
where you have a treaty alliance than you do with Vietnam. We
are still emerging from a long period of enmity.
Mr. Lowenthal. Anybody else about the human rights? Dr.
Hwang?
Ms. Hwang. I really appreciate this question, and I think
the example of South Korea can actually be quite instructive.
We have to remember that all during the years of the alliance,
I mean South Korea for the '60s and '70s during rapid
industrialization also had a really bad human rights problem.
It was a brutal authoritarian regime. And the United States
privately, the government had serious problems with South
Korea's, the government's behavior.
But the point here, I think, is that what history has shown
us on the northern half of the Peninsula, basically North
Korean human rights record and the world's response, correctly,
I believe, has been to try to isolate them, place economic
sanctions, and human rights violations is a tremendous part of
it. But it has not improved the situation. So in other words,
threatening to cut off economic engagement, threatening to cut
off economic opportunities has not worked in North Korea.
Now I think the key point here is that through economic
vitalization that TPP brings with increased U.S.-Vietnam trade,
it is precisely as you said, sir, that it is an alternative to
China. And the reality is, if U.S. has vigorous economic
contact and trade with Vietnam we can be a much more positive
influence than China can be in Vietnam.
And in terms of what can we do about human rights, I think
the very fact that you even brought up this issue and to
constantly state this as not necessarily as a condition but as
a parallel to increase economic engagement, I think, is very
helpful.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. And I also wanted to know, what I
heard also, and I went on a CODEL led by Chairman Salmon to
Vietnam, much about the fear of what is going on in the South
China Sea and what role the United States can play or should
play, and the great fear of Chinese expansionism in the South
China Sea and which may be part of the driving force of Vietnam
which we picked up of wanting to, at least part of the reason
of wanting to be closer to the United States, although that
love-hate relationship between China and Vietnam goes on long
before what has taken place.
Any comments about what our role should be and what you
perceive how this will affect our alliances, the actual
activities of China in the South China Sea?
Mr. Lohman. Well, I think Randy referenced one impact it is
having, and it is pushing the alliances closer to us and that
has definitely happened with the Philippines. I think a couple
of things we could do in the case of the Philippines, because
it is on the front lines, is continuing to help them build
their military, build their maritime awareness, build their
presence in the seas in a way that they can at least monitor
their claims full time, if not defend them, and maybe one day
be able to defend them. I think we could also be more vocal
about the application of our treaty with the Philippines to
certain areas of the dispute.
Mr. Schriver. I will just add that I think what Secretary
Carter said in his speech in Singapore about fly, sail, operate
is very important. The areas that we regard as international
waters we need to exercise in a way that demonstrates that,
freedom of navigation exercises. Clearly we can't deter the
Chinese from the land reclamation. They are building the air
strips and militarizing the islands. But challenging the
broader sovereignty claim of the so-called 9-dash line is very
important, and I think Japan and Korea have important roles to
play here. Because they are also nonclaimant countries and
their participation then underscores that for us it is about
freedom of navigation. It is about free flow of commerce. It is
about international law. It is about how you address these
disputes. And so having other nonclaimant countries such as
Korea and Japan who count on those sea lines of communication
alongside us in these efforts, I think, is very important.
Mr. Lowenthal. Mr. Schoff?
Mr. Schoff. Sir, could I just add briefly on that? For
example, when Japan began to engage Vietnam in terms of trying
to transfer build capacity for maritime domain awareness,
maritime surveillance that helped prompt Vietnam to actually
develop a coast guard authority and a separate entity non-
military that would begin to operate these, because that was
the only actor that then this aid could be given, and there are
now coast guard exchanges between Japan and Vietnam. So I think
whether it is Japan or getting other countries involved in this
capacity building process physically improves their capacity,
but then in terms of human capital and exchange, I think, is
also very important.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Ms. Meng.
Ms. Meng. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member. I
wanted to go back a little bit to the issue of specifically
comfort women, but just in general historical tensions which
have long colored Japan's relationships with its neighbors,
specifically China and South Korea. China and South Korea and
many Americans as well argue that the Japanese Government has
never sufficiently atoned nor adequately compensated them for
Japan's occupation and belligerence in the early twentieth
century.
How should Japan approach the question of history going
forward? How serious is Japan's historical past to building new
relationships? And just out of curiosity, recently Prime
Minister Abe visited the United States and spoke in front of
Congress, and would love to hear your thoughts and analysis on
what you thought about the words and his tomes specifically in
relation to a comfort women issue. Thank you.
Ms. Hwang. Well, I actually think that focusing on the
specific historical disagreement is actually distracting. And I
have to be careful here because I think we as the United States
should be very careful to not be dismissive. That these are
very, very highly emotional and deeply and profoundly important
issues for Asians. And I don't think it helps for us to lecture
our allies and say this is trivial, get over it and move on,
there are more important things.
However, having said that, I don't think it is actually the
specific, all the disagreements about the actual wording and so
on. I don't think that is really what is at heart here. What it
really is is what it represents. And I think there are deep
uncertainties and anxieties felt by Japan as well as by,
certainly by China, but South Korea and others in the region,
and it is uncertainties about the future. And I think
especially for South Korea, Japan's inability to express what
Koreans believe is adequate apology, which by the way I don't
think Japan will ever be able to meet South Korean bar for what
is adequate, that represents uncertainties, deep uncertainties
about the future.
So it is really not so much about the past, but the fact
that if Japan can't account enough about the past what will its
behavior be in the future? And so I think as the United States
with these allies and this complex relationship with China,
what we should do is focus on those strategic objectives that
Japan and South Korea share in the future. And I think on that
they can find common ground.
Mr. Schriver. Maybe I could add. I think particularly on
the so-called comfort women, I agree it is a terrible
euphemism. Japan can and should do more and they should do it
quickly, because this is a population that is literally dying
off and they have an opportunity to address it directly in
meaningful ways now. Prime Minister Abe will have an
opportunity in August, the 70th anniversary of the end of the
War to make a statement. There is a lot of attention and focus
on that statement. And I do expect he will say something to
correctly take responsibility and address that. Whether or not
it meets a threshold that the South Koreans will approve of
that is more difficult to say.
Yes, ma'am. In fact the other part of your question was
about his address. I thought his address was excellent for a
U.S. audience, for the U.S. Congress. You were probably there.
And he, I think, chose to focus on our difficult past and was
able to turn it into a positive by having veterans there talk
about how we rebuilt this relationship into one of the closest
alliances we have.
I personally don't think that that was the forum where he
is going to talk about Korea and China. And by the way I am
very skeptical on China. They are not exactly the guardians of
historical accuracy here. If you go through their museum, no
mention of the Cultural Revolution, no mention of the Great
Leap Forward, no portrait of Zhao Ziyang, and he was General
Secretary of the Communist Party.
But I do think with Korea he has got this opportunity on
August 15th. He has the possibility of meeting with Park Geun-
hye at various international fora. They haven't had a bilateral
meeting yet. And I think we should push him not in a
disrespectful way but among allies that there is some urgency
on this Korea problem, because this is a community that is not
going to be around forever and he can do things to positively
address it.
Mr. Schoff. I was just going to add that there was a time
during the 1990s, I think, when Japan and Korea were able to,
in many ways, paper over a significant difference in historical
perspective about what exactly happened during the colonial
era, but they managed to paper over that. Subsequently in more
recent years enough holes have been poked in that paper and
that hole that now what used to look like an okay, a seamless
part of the wall is now a bit of a gaping hole there right now.
And these efforts in August and other anniversaries are
opportunities to begin to move in the right direction, but I
still think fundamentally if you are going to fix that problem
it is a long term process of education and engagement between
the two so that sons and daughters of those today have a deeper
appreciation for what actually happened and they have gone
through a process of discovering that together. That is
ambitious and time consuming, but there is not a real
substitute for that over the long term.
Mr. Salmon. Well, the buzzers have rung and it looks like
we have got some votes. This has been a very wonderful panel. I
appreciate you taking the time to answer all of our questions
and I am sure we have a million more, but thank you very much.
And this committee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:51 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[all]
