- THE SYRIAN HUMANITARIAN CRISIS: FOUR YEARS LATER AND NO END IN SIGHT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE SYRIAN HUMANITARIAN CRISIS: FOUR YEARS LATER AND NO END IN SIGHT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,

GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 12, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-7

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-286 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          AMI BERA, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ms. Kelly Tallman Clements, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and Migration, U.S. Department of State..     9
Mr. Thomas Staal, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Democracy, Conflict and Humanitarian Assistance, U.S. Agency
for International Development..................................    18

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Ms. Kelly Tallman Clements: Prepared statement...................    11
Mr. Thomas Staal: Prepared statement.............................    20

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    46
Hearing minutes..................................................    47
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    48
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa: Statement for the record by Ms.
Sharon Waxman, Vice President for Public Policy and Advocacy,
International Rescue Committee.................................    50

THE SYRIAN HUMANITARIAN CRISIS: FOUR YEARS LATER AND NO END IN SIGHT

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa and

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committees met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the Subcommittee on Middle East and North
Africa) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. With all due apologies to the members who
are not here yet, I am going to start because pretty soon we
will be going back into the session and be voting. So, thank
you very much. I know that the members will be coming right
quick. When they come here, I will recognize them for their
opening statements.
So, the joint subcommittees will come to order.
After recognizing myself, Chairman Smith, Ranking Members
Deutch and Bass, as soon as they come for 5 minutes each for
our opening statements, I will, then, recognize any other
members seeking recognition for 1 minute
s deg.. We
will, then, hear from our witnesses.
Without objection, the witnesses' prepared statements will
be made a part of the record, and members may have 5 days in
which to insert statements and questions for the record,
subject to the length limitation in the rules.
Before I begin my opening remarks, I want to take a moment
to offer our most sincere condolences to the friends and family
of Kayla Mueller. Our thoughts and prayers are with them in
this most trying of times. Kayla was taken hostage while doing
humanitarian work in Syria, which is the subject of our
hearing, helping those who are in such dire need of her help.
All of America mourns her loss and the family's loss.
The terrorists have proven time and again that they have no
respect for human rights, and that is why we must redouble our
efforts to defeat this scourge and its radical ideology.
Kayla's legacy will be the work that she had done to alleviate
the suffering of a countless many in Syria and around the
world.
It is important that our Government will continue to
respond to this humanitarian crisis, but also that we will make
the respect for human rights across the globe a priority and
not just an afterthought.
With that, the Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Next month will mark the fourth anniversary since the start
of the Syrian conflict, and there are no signs that the crisis
will abate anytime soon. Assad has demonstrated no remorse,
and, indeed, his intransigence has only hardened as he
maintains his grasp on power and the enclaves of Syria, thanks
to the support from Iran and the United States' unwillingness
to engage both ISIL and Assad in a comprehensive strategy. ISIL
and other terror groups have managed to wrest control of other
large areas of Syria, and they, too, have no intention of
giving up the territory they have claimed.
Since President Obama announced strikes against Syria last
September, ISIL has actually gained more territory. That leaves
little territory for those Syrians who wish to flee the
fighting and flee the violence. What we are seeing unfold in
Syria is one of the worst humanitarian crises in the region in
recent memory, and it isn't just limited to Syrian and Iraq.
Jordan and other neighboring countries have been forced to bear
the brunt of a massive influx of refugees fleeing the fighting.
That has tested the limits of their already-strained
capabilities.
Last Congress Ranking Member Ted Deutch and I convened four
hearings on the humanitarian situation in Syria. One we were
pleased to join with Congressman Smith's and Congresswoman
Bass' subcommittee in an effort to continue to shine a light on
this aspect of the conflict that gets ignored.
When we held our first subcommittee hearing on the
situation Syria, 80,000 Syrians has been killed and 1.5 million
people had been displaced. Less than 2 years later, those
numbers have swelled. Over 200,000 have been killed, more than
3 million have fled, and now more than half of Syria's
population is in dire need of humanitarian assistance.
The U.S. has been the largest provider of humanitarian
assistance in response to the crisis, providing much-needed aid
to Syria, to Iraq, to Jordan, and other countries that have
been severely impacted by this crisis. We have spent over $3
billion since the start of the conflict, and the President's
budget request, released last week, is seeking an additional
$1.6 billion to address the humanitarian needs in Syria and in
Iraq.
While some of this goes directly to the neighboring
countries that host refugees and directly to the NGOs, the vast
majority of our funding for Syria supports multilateral
initiatives through the United States. I worry that some of the
assistance we provide that goes to the U.N. and its
implementing partners might get diverted to ISIL or other
terrorist groups or the Assad regime by force or through
bribes, in order to gain access to certain areas.
While I understand there are some very real and dangerous
obstacles in place to reaching the maximum amount of people,
Americans are concerned over where this $5 billion is going,
especially if most of it could be going through third and
fourth parties, as evidence shows that it is.
There have been reports that some of the humanitarian
assistance is going through middlemen in Syrian when the
implementing partners can't get access to the locations that
they are trying to reach. More recently, food rations have been
handed out by the World Food Program, and they are tagged with
the Islamic State symbol.
So, there are some very real and pressing problems that
need to be corrected. Congress and the administration, we have
a responsibility to the American public to be good stewards of
their tax dollars. So, it is imperative that we find the right
balance of efficiency and transparency. Our comprehensive
strategy toward Syria must take into effect the humanitarian
crisis that we are confronting today.
That is why it is so important, it is imperative, that we
hold these hearings not only to hear from the vital work that
we are doing and the lives that we are saving, but also conduct
our proper oversight role. It is also why I was joined this
week by Ranking Member Deutch, Mr. DeSantis, and Mr. Connolly
in sending a request to the Government Accountability Office,
GAO, requesting a report to ensure that our aid is reaching its
intended recipients and to get a better understanding regarding
our visibility into the large sums of money that we send
through the U.N.
The Syrian humanitarian crisis is not a problem that is
going away anytime soon, not until we defeat ISIL and Assad,
and Assad is removed from power. But the U.S. cannot afford to
continue to provide billions indefinitely. It is imperative
that we have confidence that what we are providing is not
subject to waste, fraud, abuse, or diversion to terror groups,
so that we can continue playing a key role in responding to
this crisis and maximize our effectiveness.
With that, I am proud to yield to the ranking member of our
subcommittee, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I, too, would like to associate myself with the chairman's
remarks about the tragic death of Kayla Mueller at the hands of
the barbaric ISIS terrorists. Our thoughts and prayers go out
to Kayla's family and friends during this difficult time.
Please know that we will continue to honor Kayla's memory and
her life's work by giving this humanitarian crisis the
attention that it deserves.
I want to thank the chairman for starting this Congress
with a hearing specifically focused on the humanitarian aspect
of the Syrian conflict, a followup to four humanitarian-focused
hearings that we held last Congress.
The title of this hearing speaks volumes to the situation
inside Syria and in neighboring countries. There is no end in
sight. Members had the opportunity to discuss the political and
security components of this conflict in the full Foreign
Affairs Committee this morning, but this afternoon we are here
to focus on the growing humanitarian crisis.
There are now 2.2 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance. As Mr. Staal's testimony notes, that is the
populations of New York City and Los Angeles, the two largest
cities in the United States combined. There are 3.8 million
refugees in neighboring countries. There are 241,000 people in
besieged areas inside Syria. There are 9.8 million people who
are food insecure. Madam Chairman, these numbers are truly
staggering.
The situation inside Syria has complicated the ability of
humanitarian organizations to effectively deliver aid. Despite
the first authorization of cross-border aid deliveries in the
United Nations Security Council Resolution 2165, it is becoming
increasingly difficult to get aid safely into the country and
to its intended recipients.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Clements, I hope you will speak
to the effectiveness of cross-border and cross-line aid. We
continue to engage in a political process that is yet to even
yield a sustainable truce inside Syria, an effort that would at
least help deliver aid to those with the most critical needs.
Syrian refugees have flooded into Jordan, Lebanon, and
Turkey at a staggering rate. Jordan has 622,000 registered
refugees, and in Lebanon the Syrian refugees now make up one-
fourth of the population. These overwhelming numbers do not
even include potentially hundreds of thousands of unregistered
refugees that have been absorbed into urban areas. We have got
to continue to support these host communities and help to
mitigate the understandable strain that it places on their
resources.
The United States has now provided over $3.5 billion in
humanitarian assistance. We are the largest individual donor. I
offer my full support of continued humanitarian funding for
this crisis, but I also want to make sure that our aid is
effective and not falling into the wrong hands.
I was troubled by reports last week that showed ISIS
fighters handing out U.N. food packages. That is why, as
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen had mentioned, I joined with her and
Congressmen Connolly and DeSantis in commissioning a GAO
report, so we can be absolutely sure that the proper mechanisms
are in place to spend our aid dollars most effectively.
I have got to say I have been shocked and truly dismayed
throughout this crisis at the lack of financial support coming
from the international community. Last year only half of the
U.N. budget was funded. These unfulfilled pledges of assistance
led to the World Food Program literally having to stop its
operations while an emergency fundraising campaign took place.
That is unacceptable.
I recognize that most of us were unprepared to deal with a
protracted crisis. Now, after 4 years, we are at risk of losing
an entire generation; 5.6 million children have been affected.
We have seen the outbreak of formerly eradicated diseases
like polio, simply because infants and children couldn't get
vaccinations. Refugee children have been absorbed into
unfamiliar school systems, many of which didn't have the staff
or resources necessary to shoulder these additional students.
Many have been forced to abandon school altogether and find
work to help support their families.
Women and children have borne the brunt of this
humanitarian crisis. I hope that Mr. Staal can address some of
the programs that we are funding aimed at protecting these
vulnerable populations.
Before I close, I want to remind everyone of one critical
factor. Despite the horrific brutality of ISIS and its
devastating attacks in Syria and Iraq and against American and
other Western citizens, it is still the ruthless Assad regime
that remains the biggest threat to the Syrian people. We may
share a common enemy in ISIS, but we are not partners with this
deadly regime that has the blood of hundreds of thousands of
its own people on its hands.
Finally, I want to commend the work of State and USAID.
This is a tremendous challenge, and we recognize the work you
do is not easy. The work of your partners on the ground who
risk their lives to help those in need deserves to be
recognized in this body and in capitals around the world every
day.
I thank our witnesses for being here.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
I am so pleased to yield to the subcommittee chairman,
Chairman Smith, who has made it his life's mission to fight
human rights violations and to spearhead humanitarian missions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Madam Chair, thank you so very much. It is an
honor and a privilege to join you, for both of our
subcommittees to be receiving this testimony and really
broadcasting to all who will hear our solidarity with the
victims, those men, women, and children who are being savagely
beaten and killed and raped and tortured by Assad and by other
players and other actors in Syria. So, thank you again for
pulling us together for this hearing.
As we all know, since the beginning of the Syrian conflict
in 2011, the U.N. estimates that more than 200,000 have been
killed. It would be terrible enough if we could count the dead
in Syria as collateral damage from a civil war gone completely
out of control. Unfortunately, the truth is far more horrific
than that.
According to the U.N., the government of Bashar al-Assad
initiated the conflict to crush the opposition to his brutal
rule. In the process, he has used chemical weapons, barrel
bombs, and other weapons of mass destruction to kill his own
people. This regime has been involved in widespread killings,
including children, torture, again, against children, as well
as hospital patients, arbitrary arrests and imprisonment on a
massive scale, deployment of tanks and helicopter gunships in
densely-populated areas, heavy and indiscriminate shelling of
civilian areas, enforced disappearances, systematic destruction
of property and looting, systematic denial of food and water in
some areas, and prevention of medical treatment, again,
including children. So depraved has the Assad regime been, that
it has been reported to have indiscriminately shelled bakeries
with artillery rounds, even though the targets were civilian,
and not military, targets.
David Nott, a British volunteer surgeon in Syria, reported
in 2013 that ``Victims of government snipers would display
wounds in a particular area of the body on particular days,''
indicating that they may have been targeted in a gruesome game.
The Syrian Government came to view doctors and nurses as
collaborators because they were willing to help rebels in need
of medical care. Early on in the conflict, the Assad regime
imprisoned hundreds of health workers and tortured many of them
to death. Others have just disappeared. Government forces
targeted health workers in medical facilities in attacks,
erasing the universal principle of medical neutrality.
However, the government isn't the only perpetrator of human
rights violations in Syria. The U.N. reports that armed
opposition groups, including militia supporting the Assad
regime, have been responsible for unlawful and indiscriminate
killings, tortured abuse, including hostage-taking. One rebel
commander told the Associated Press that his group had released
prisoners in bomb-rigged cars, turning them into unwitting
suicide bombers. Other groups have perpetrated crimes too
egregious to present today in detail.
In addition to armed groups such as the Free Syrian Army
and the Syrian Revolutionaries Front, al-Qaeda and its
offshoot, including al-Nusra Front, ISIS, operate within this
conflict committing heinous crimes against those unable to
leave Syria.
We know--and this was in the testimony by the Deputy
Assistant Secretary Clements--half of its prewar population in
Syria has been displaced. Half of a country gone, displaced,
and that is almost without precedent anywhere in the world.
The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network reported in
late 2013 that at least 6,000 women have been reported being
raped by one armed group or another, and that the genuine
figure was likely much higher due to underreporting. In fact,
the International Rescue Committee reported 2 years ago that
the primary reason for Syrians to flee their country has been
fear of rape.
The various armed groups terrorizing people in Syria
operate with impunity. Since Syria is not a party to the Rome
Statute, the International Criminal Court has no jurisdiction
over these human rights violators, although there could be a
referral, if they were so inclined, from the Security Council.
Even if the ICC could get involved, Russia has already
indicated its opposition to that kind of referral.
That is why again I introduced last year--and I will do it
again soon--a resolution to create an independent tribunal to
begin the process of investigating human rights crimes in Syria
and bring to reality the promise of justice to those who now
have no fear of any kind of accountability. It would be
patterned on what we had in Yugoslavia, Rwanda, and, of course,
the Independent Court in Sierra Leone.
The tribunal would prosecute the perpetrators of mass
atrocities, war crimes, and crimes against humanity, no matter
who committed the crime. Hopefully, these individuals would be
brought to justice.
Again, I want to thank you, Madam Chair, for doing this
hearing together with our subcommittees and for your
extraordinary leadership.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, a powerful statement.
Because Ms. Bass, the ranking member of Mr. Smith's
committee, is not here, I would like to recognize Ms. Frankel
and Mr. Boyle to share those 5 minutes, however way you would
like to divide them.
Ms. Frankel is recognized.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank both you and
the ranking member for this hearing, which I believe is very
important.
I want to share your sentiments on or sorrow for the loss
of Kayla Mueller.
We have heard from the administration, obviously, in the
past several months why we should train and arm Syrian rebels.
We now have a request for authorization for the use of military
force. So, I am very pleased that you are here to talk about--
it is a little change of pace; let's put it that way.
This is what I am particularly interested in, not only the
type of humanitarian assistance and answering some of the
questions about whether we are effectively getting it to those
who are suffering, but I am also interested in your opinion as
to the role that humanitarian assistance in the larger goal of
defeating those forces like Assad, like ISIL, that are causing
the pain.
Then, what else I would be interested in, especially in
light of what happened to Kayla Mueller, is how safe it is for
our AID workers in delivering this humanitarian assistance.
I thank you, and I will yield the rest of my time to Mr.
Boyle.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Mr. Boyle is recognized.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you very much.
I have to say, being on the Foreign Affairs Committee and
this subcommittee for the last 6 weeks, I keep waiting until we
get to have hearings about good news. I suspect that we would
be waiting a very long time.
The scale of the human tragedy that has taken place in
Syria is unbelievable, now over 12 million human beings, 12
million people, who have been dislocated. This has created
enormous instability not just in Syria, but, obviously, in
northern Iraq and in other nearby areas.
I would just ask--and a lot of my comments were echoed
earlier--so, rather than being repetitive, I would just ask
that, when you are giving your statements, while this subject
might be specifically about Syria, this is part of a regional
fight, part of a fight that King Hussein of Jordan said has
been going on for approximately 1,400 years, I would like you
to talk about, to the extent that you are knowledgeable about
it, the stability of the regime in Jordan. Because with being
bordered with Israel and what was going on last summer in Gaza
and the disruptions to a lesser extent in the West Bank, and
then, of course, what is going on, a de facto Shia-Sunni civil
war, and, also, at the same time a war between those who
believe in a very radical militant, violent form of Islam and
those who do not, with all that going in the region, we have
one little island of stability smack dab in the middle there. I
am deeply concerned, and you do not hear about this much, but I
am deeply concerned that the Syrian conflict, if it were to
spread to the West, would finally topple one of the few regimes
that we can actually count on as an ally. So, I hope that when
you give your comments, you will broaden it and talk about that
a bit.
I thank the Madam Chair. It is an honor to be on her
subcommittee. I thank the ranking member.
Also, to say this in person, I have watched the human
rights work that Chairman Smith has done for many, many years,
and am a big admirer of it. It is great to be a part of this.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. It is an honor to have you. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for calling this
important joint hearing.
The violence in Syria over the past 4 years has spiraled
out of control, as we know, yielding a serious and grave
humanitarian crisis. It was in August 2012 that the President
famously declared the red line. However, today nearly 200,000
people have been senselessly killed, over 3 million are
refugees in neighboring countries, with millions more
internally displaced, and we are no closer to ending this
humanitarian tragedy.
As this work continues, I believe that this crisis will,
unfortunately, only get worse. The refugee flows into Jordan,
Lebanon, and Turkey have hardly diminished, and these countries
are at their peak in terms of the numbers that they can
support. At the same time, unprecedented numbers are streaming
into Syria to join ISIL and other extremist groups, which are
further complicating and exacerbating this situation.
As the U.S. is the largest contributor of humanitarian
assistance, we need to implement a strategy that most
effectively deals with this growing crisis, while ensuring
those in most need are receiving our support. Various reports
have indicated that U.S. assistance is reaching the hands of
ISIS and other terrorist groups, and that is very alarming.
I hope that today's witnesses will discuss what is being
done to address this issue and all the other things my
colleagues have mentioned. There is, indeed, a lot to talk
about today.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back the balance.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Trott is recognized. Dr. Yoho is recognized.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to say I look
forward to hearing your information, so that we can come to
some common-sense solutions to the Middle East over there and
work with the AUMF and the President to get some resolution.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
So now, we turn to our witnesses. Let me introduce our
panelists.
First, we are pleased to welcome Deputy Assistant Secretary
Kelly Clements of the Bureau of Population, Refugees, and
Migration at the Department of State. She was detailed to the
Office of the U.N. High Commissioner of Refugees in Bangladesh
and has served on the State Department's Task Force on Kurdish
Refugees and Displaced Persons. She has also been a Special
Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs
and a Senior Emergency Office for Europe during the Balkan
crisis.
Welcome.
Then, we will also hear from Acting Assistant Administrator
Thomas Staal of the Bureau of Democracy, Conflict, and
Humanitarian Assistance at USAID. He has served in USAID since
the late eighties and has managed project developments in
eastern and southern Africa as well as in the West Bank and
Gaza. More recently, he has served as the Director of the Iraq
Reconstruction Office here in Washington, DC, and as Mission
Director in Lebanon, Ethiopia, and Iraq.
Excellent panelists.
We will begin with you, Ms. Clements.
The prepared statements will be made a part of the record.

STATEMENT OF MS. KELLY TALLMAN CLEMENTS, DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF POPULATION, REFUGEES, AND MIGRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Clements. Thank you so much, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen,
Ranking Member Deutch, Chairman Smith, and members of the
committee, for inviting us to this very important hearing on
humanitarian assistance for those imperiled and uprooted by the
worst human-made catastrophe of our time.
I have submitted my full testimony for the record, and I am
grateful for the opportunity to update you and to thank you for
your leadership and to Congress for its unwavering support.
The Syrian crisis has claimed nearly 200,000 lives,
forcibly displaced half of Syria's prewar population of 24
million people. Almost 4 million have fled to neighboring
countries and many will remain in exile for years to come.
The Assad regime and extremist groups target innocent
civilians already suffering from food shortages, inadequate
shelter, and preventable diseases. Right now, 12.2 million
people inside Syria need urgent humanitarian aid, and half of
them are children.
The humanitarian response has been the most expensive in
modern history, and the needs have outstripped available
resources. Although U.N. humanitarian appeals have grown
exponentially, the total amount pledged has plateaued. The 2014
appeals were just over half-funded, as you noted earlier.
The United States remains the single largest donor and has
contributed over $3 billion since the crisis began. In 2014, my
Bureau at the State Department provided more than a third of
all funding for the Syrian humanitarian response. That $725
million is the largest single-year contribution in our Bureau's
history. Roughly half of all U.S. humanitarian aid has gone to
conflict victims inside Syria and half to refugees and
communities hosting them.
Over the last 6 months, U.N. Security Council Resolutions
2191, 2139, 2165 enabled U.N. convoys to cross borders and
battle lines and to reach millions of civilians in
governorates, including Dar'a, Idlib, Quneitra, and Aleppo that
have been encircled, blockaded, and under siege.
In 2014, the U.N. Refugee Agency provided aid to more than
one out of every three Syrians in need, including 1 million
people in difficult-to-reach areas. USAID feeds nearly half of
all Syrian refugees, roughly 2 million people, and provides
relief items, everything from cooking pots to shoes and
blankets to insulated tents to help refugee families survive
the winter. Our programs aid survivors of gender-based
violence, elderly and disabled people, unaccompanied children,
and others who need services and protection. With U.S. support,
in 2014, the U.N. and its strong NGO partners were able to
triple the number of Syrian children enrolled in school.
But vast needs remain. Half of Syrian children are still
not in school. Last week Tom Staal and I saw thousands of them
while visiting the Domiz Camp in the Iraqi Kurdistan region. It
is bursting at the seams with an official tally of 35,000, but
far more are seeking services not available in overwhelmed host
communities.
Heroic efforts are underway to educate, feed, shelter, and
clothe the displaced, but everything is in short supply. More
than eight in ten Syrian refugees live outside of camps,
straining host communities across a region that was already
economically fragile and politically volatile. Syrian refugees
are crowded into communities in Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq,
and Egypt. In Lebanon, one in four residents is now a refugee.
In Jordan, housing shortages have doubled rents; schools and
hospitals are overcrowded; municipal services cannot keep up;
tensions are rising, and beleaguered governments have responded
by closing or tightly managing borders.
To ease these pressures, the Department and USAID are
coordinating humanitarian and development assistance and
funding projects that provide important services, clean water,
sanitization, education, and economic opportunities to both
host communities and refugees.
We have encouraged other donors to come forward, and many
have been generous, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. The
United States is also accelerating resettlement of Syrian
refugees. We have received referrals from over 10,000 Syrian
refugees and expect to admit between 1,000 and 2,000 this
fiscal year and many more in 2016 and beyond.
Thank you very much for your support, and I welcome your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Clements follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Ms. Clements.
Mr. Staal?

STATEMENT OF MR. THOMAS STAAL, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE,
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Staal. Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch,
Chairman Smith, and members of the subcommittees, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today and for highlighting the needs
of the Syrian people and the needs of the people in their
neighborhood. For me, it is especially important because I grew
up in the area and I have lived and worked there for many
years.
As Deputy Assistant Secretary Clements has mentioned, and
many of you know, the Syrian crisis is the largest and most
complex humanitarian emergency of our time. More than 2.2
million Syrians are in need of humanitarian assistance. You
mentioned New York and Los Angeles. It is also just about the
entire population of the State of Pennsylvania, is another way
to look at it.
We continue to do everything possible to help those most in
need, and our FY16 request that you mentioned, the USAID piece
of it at $735 million for the Syrian humanitarian response
demonstrates that continued commitment.
Now 4 years into this conflict, Syrians see no end in sight
to the violence. ISIL's abuses, including the death of Kayla
Mueller you mentioned, have been layered on top of the Assad
regime's indiscriminate killings and barrel bombings.
Our partners are heroically working through all possible
channels, often at considerable risk, to reach those in need,
including in regime areas, in opposition- and ISIL-controlled
areas of Syria. For over 3 years, we have provided emergency
care to nearly 2 million patients at 300 U.S.-supported health
facilities throughout the area. I saw some of those patients
myself last week at a hospital in Jordan.
Thanks to the aggressive vaccination campaign, by the
number of polio cases in Syria is now down to zero. We have
improved water and sanitation for 1.3 million Syrians,
repairing water networks, installing latrines and bathrooms in
camps. These efforts have helped to prevent the spread of
disease.
And then, for the third year we are working tirelessly to
help the most vulnerable cope with winter, especially those who
are living in makeshift homes and tents. So far, we have
distributed blankets, warm clothing, plastic sheeting to almost
\1/2\ million people. We have also distributed air heaters and
put up windows and doors to help insulate homes.
We know that women and children are the most impacted in
this crisis. And so, we also prioritize and integrate their
protection into all of our humanitarian assistance efforts.
As you mentioned, the United States is the largest donor,
and including the largest food donor, to the crisis, providing
more than $1.1 billion worth to date to feed more than 4.8
million people inside Syria and 1.7 million in the neighboring
countries. The food vouchers we provide to Syrian refugees so
that they can buy locally have also injected about $1 billion
into the economies of Lebanon and Jordan, Turkey, Egypt, and
Iraq. In fact, within Jordan, it equals to about .7 percent of
their GDP. And we have a robust system for monitoring our
humanitarian assistance to ensure that it does, indeed, get to
the most in-need people for whom it is intended.
We know that Syria's neighbors are stretched beyond
capacity. That is why we are also helping, working in host
communities, in cooperation with our State Department
colleagues, to build resilient systems that can withstand the
increased demand on services from the flow of refugees into
their countries.
In Jordan, for instance, we are working to conserve water.
With the Complex Crisis Fund resources, we have built cisterns
to collect rainwater in 90 schools in Jordan and provided more
than 2,200 no-interest loans, so that families can install
rainwater-harvesting systems. These efforts have saved 200,000
cubic meters of water, equal to 5.5 million showers.
In Lebanon, we are working to decrease tensions between
host communities and refugees. Following clashes recently
between militants and Lebanese armed forces in Tripoli, our
partners worked with the community to rehabilitate the old city
and involved young people to reduce the appeal to extremism.
So, we are doing everything we can, but important
challenges remain. Constrained access, insecurity, including
targeted attacks against humanitarian workers, are a prime
challenge. As Kelly mentioned, we are working with donors to
try to jointly meet the overwhelming needs for resources.
Despite many challenges, we remain committed to saving
lives and to helping host communities, recognizing this is a
long-term crisis.
Thank you for your support. Thank you for this hearing. And
again, I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Staal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Our members thank you for your
service, your dedication, your hard work in responding to this
serious humanitarian crisis unfolding before us.
As you both have said, the United States plays a critical
role in the international response as the largest donor
country, having contributed more than $3 billion. But, as I
mentioned earlier, we also have a responsibility to ensure that
we are being good stewards of U.S. taxpayer money and that
these funds are being used to maximize efficacy and
transparency.
How much of that $3 billion has gone directly to
neighboring countries or directly to NGOs and implementing
partners on the ground, and how much has gone through
multilateral initiatives through U.N. appeals? I will ask you
to respond.
It seems that the majority of our assistance, from what I
have read, actually goes to the U.N. and third-party
implementing partners. Also, while it was positive that the
U.N. Security Council passed Resolutions 1239 and 2165 calling
upon all parties to allow delivery of humanitarian assistance
and authorizing the U.N. to carry out relief delivery across
these conflict lines, that is really a fanciful notion to think
that the Assad regime, ISIL, al-Nusra, other belligerent actors
are actually going to adhere to these resolutions. Yet, since
those resolutions passed, the U.S. has been going into the war
zones and the most difficult-to-reach areas of Syria.
How are these resolutions of full access being enforced? We
have seen reports that ISIL and others have gotten some of this
assistance or that implementing partners are forced to go
through middlemen to get to some of these most dangerous areas.
Do we have an idea of how much of our assistance is being co-
oped by these belligerent actors or going through middlemen?
What kind of visibility do we have? How can we ensure that the
billions of dollars that we are providing are reaching the
intended recipients and not falling into the wrong hands? And
also, do we have any oversight over these U.N. agencies
operate? Is there a transparency or reporting requirements for
the agencies or implementing partners or is it more of a case
of, well, our responsibility ends once we hand the money over
to the U.N.? Finally, what are the reporting requirements for
the NGOs directly funded by the U.S. Government? Do we have
enough oversight mechanisms? Are they sufficient?
Thank you.
Mr. Staal. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen.
That is a critical question. I am really glad you brought
it up because I think we actually have a good news story there.
It is always important that our aid gets to the right
people. We realize the challenges in this crisis. So, we have
actually upped the ante and increased our systems for
overseeing that. So, in addition to the regular quarterly and
annual reports, we actually require now weekly reports from our
partners, where they identify particular issues.
Remember, in Syria we are working with partners that are
experienced. They have worked in these kinds of areas before
and know how to work in these areas. They are careful about
taking risk, but they also understand the importance of
oversight.
So, they have instituted multiple systems to ensure that
oversight. They work through local partners, but ones that they
know. They get their regular reports.
But, in addition to that, because it is a relatively-
sophisticated society--Syria was a middle-income country really
and people have cell phones, and so on--so, we actually have a
system where, when food is delivered, they can send a picture
taken from the cell phone with the barcode so we know exactly
where it went and when it arrived.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you. Let me interrupt you
here a second.
Mr. Staal. We have got multiple systems like that going on.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Let me ask about a majority of
assistance. Does it go through to the U.N. and third-party
implementing partners or directly to the partner?
Ms. Clements. Thank you for that question, Chairman.
About 72 percent of that $3 billion goes through U.N.
mechanisms. About $750 million goes to NGOs through a joint
effort really in terms of collaboration. You know our No. 1
humanitarian objective in this crisis is to get as much aid
through as many channels as we possibly can. Whoever is best
placed in certain circumstances are the ones that we ask to
deliver, obviously, to the extent that they are comfortable
delivering, given all the challenges that are actually there.
You asked, in particular, about the crossing lines and
cross-border, Ranking Member Deutch. Since the resolutions have
passed in the Security Council, we have had about 54 of those
AID shipments reach about 600,000 people in terms of the cross-
border efforts. That doesn't mean that we are keeping up with
need, though. So, I don't want you to be left with a good news
story. The needs are vastly outstripping the humanitarian aid
that we are able to provide.
Tom mentioned the enhanced monitoring. We, too, on the
U.N., at least the U.N. Refugee Agency and others that we
support, have asked for enhanced monitoring plans.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Ms. Clements. In terms of diversion----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. My time is up.
Ms. Clements. Okay.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we have votes on the floor.
But would you like for me to recognize you or we will
break? Mr. Deutch?
Mr. Deutch. Just for one observation. We have to go the
floor for votes.
But before we leave, I just wanted to say that listening to
the two of you give your testimony and respond to the chair's
questions I think reminds us that, it is a good reminder of why
we are proud to be Americans.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Amen.
Thank you very much. Excellent work.
And we will be back, and Mr. Smith will chair the remainder
of the hearing.
With that, our subcommittees are in recess. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Smith [presiding]. The hearing will resume its sitting,
and we will be joined by Mr. Deutch, who is under a time
constraint. I will yield to him when he comes back for any
questions he might have.
But let me, first of all, thank you again for the
tremendous work you are doing in saving lives. I think
sometimes people are very critical of foreign aid. They should
know the robust efforts you, the administration, the Congress
in a supportive role, are undertaking to save lives of the most
precious and the most vulnerable people, particularly women and
children. So, again, let me echo what we all said, I think, in
our openings, just how grateful we all are for the work that
you are doing for people who have been displaced, the refugees,
the IDPs, women and children who are being savagely attacked
and women who have been raped.
I will never forget years ago during the Balkan wars I had
hearings with women who had been raped. One, she was so
traumatized and she thought she could handle speaking what
other women were experiencing during the Balkan wars. Bianca
Jagger was actually here as well speaking to that. And she
froze; she couldn't speak. She had been so utterly traumatized.
And I know you are helping women who have been so
horrifically violated. So, thank you for that as well.
I do have a question. Secretary Clements, Deputy Assistant
Secretary, you mentioned with regards to the vaccination 2.9
million children require lifesaving vaccinations. I wonder if
you could break that out a little bit. They have not gotten it
or some of those have already received it? What vaccinations
are we talking about?
I have always believed that vaccinations like antibiotics
as well as anesthesia are among the wonders of the world in
terms of how they mitigate disease and pain. So, the question
would be, 2.9 million, what are they lacking and what is being
done to try to get those vaccinations to them?
Ms. Clements. Thank you very much, Chairman Smith, and
thanks for your kind words.
I have to say, to follow up on a point that the ranking
member made before he left, it is a moment to be proud as an
American in terms of what the U.S. taxpayer is doing to help us
provide this kind of humanitarian aid to so many people in
need. We deeply appreciate that.
In terms of the vaccination question--and we can take that
and get some more granularity for you certainly----
Mr. Smith. Great.
Ms. Clements [continuing]. But between USAID and the State
Department's humanitarian programs, both inside Syria as well
as in the neighboring countries, a very strong network of
health providers. And obviously, through UNICEF and through the
World Health Organization, with a large number of implementers,
there has been a great effort underway to try to vaccinate as
many kids as possible. I can speak more to the refugee side of
things in terms of in the neighboring countries, but it is a
core part of the health services that we are providing every
day.
Mr. Staal. Yes, thanks for that question. It is important.
I mentioned the polio vaccination, and that an indication
that they are actually able to get out to a lot of places that
you might not think they could. It is still not perfect, and we
continue to try to get as far as we can.
Last week when I was in Jordan, I visited one of our
implementing partners. They have been able to establish and are
continuing to expand their network of field hospitals and
clinics in opposition-held areas from across the border. That
is another way we can start to push out the reach of
healthcare, including vaccination. But that is a critical
issue, yes.
Mr. Smith. Let me ask you a question. I mean, we all know
from history that the Spanish flu epidemic, of course, had
nothing to do with Spain, but it was a terrible pandemic.
Following World War I, it infected some 500 million people. The
estimates are upwards of 50 million, some say more, some say
less, actually died, 5 percent of the world's population.
Health services have been disrupted with more than 73
percent of hospitals, 27 percent of primary healthcare
facilities, and 65 to 70 percent of the pharmaceutical
companies out of service. A couple of weeks ago, I met with Dr.
Peter Hotez, who has been here before to testify. He is the
leader on neglected tropical diseases. As a matter of fact, I
have a pending bill that we wrote with his very, very
insightful suggestions on what it should look like.
But I know he has said that he has concerns that a pandemic
could arise out of Syria or the region, war conditions, lack of
sanitation, cholera, all the other attendant problems. The
longer this conflict goes on--and again, the Spanish flu
occurred near the end or at the end of all of the blood-letting
in World War I. I am just wondering what your thoughts might be
on that. I know we are far more advanced than they were back in
1918. But when we and people like you don't have access to
contested areas or healthcare workers are being killed simply
because they are trying to assist, it makes it harder and these
things could happen. What are your thoughts on that?
Ms. Clements. I wonder sometimes whether or not you have
read so much into my bio that you know that my husband works on
pandemic preparedness at USAID, actually.
In terms of this, obviously, it is a huge concern. You
know, with the war that has raged on now for over 4 years, the
concern in terms of the health system inside Syria, losing 30
years in that time at least. As you well know, the medical
facilities and the personnel delivering those services have
been under attack. Until very recently, actually, even in some
of the cross-border/cross-line operations, some of the partners
we are trying to get aid out to could not put any kind of
medical health into their kits, into the aid that they were
delivering in communities. So, it is a real concern.
I think we do the best we can in terms of the areas we can
access. I think our support systems are much stronger in the
neighboring countries; in Jordan, in particular, in Lebanon,
and the Iraqi Kurdistan region, and so on, in terms of what we
are trying to do. Obviously, Turkey has done a tremendous
amount on the health side. But that is something that we need
to continue to work on, to try to prevent what you have just
outlined.
Mr. Staal. And I might add, it is all the more reason why
it is important that this U.N. resolution last year, 2165,
being able to work across borders, so organizations like WHO,
then, can move across those lines of conflict. We need to
continue to support that.
The other maybe helpful mitigating factor is that Syrians
are used to getting vaccination and they demand it. Okay? Some
refugees we work with or people in underdeveloped countries are
not used to it. They are used to it. And so, they are looking
for vaccination, and that does help mitigate some of the
problems.
Mr. Smith. Ranking Member Deutch?
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks again to both of you and thanks for being so patient
and for allowing us to do the other part of our job.
Ms. Clements, I would like to ask you about another issue
that I have raised several times in this committee. What are we
doing to increase our support from the international community?
It is really frustrating, as I said in my opening statement and
as you referred to as well, it is frustrating to learn that
last year's U.N. appeal was only 50 percent funded. It is clear
that, even if there is a political agreement, if there were a
political agreement tomorrow in Syria, the humanitarian crisis
is going for years to come. So, how do we get our partners
around the world to not only to continue to care about the
humanitarian crisis and talk about the humanitarian crisis, but
to actually do their part to help alleviate the suffering?
Ms. Clements. Thank you very much, Congressman.
This is the key issue. We have in terms of the Syria crisis
right now appeal levels of $8.4 billion. I mean, that is more
than $2 billion more than last year. We are approaching a year
where we are dealing with--and we have talked about this a
little bit--the global humanitarian crises. We have Sudan. We
have C.A.R. We have Iraq. I mean, all of that adds to the
attention that is being diverted somewhat from this crisis. So,
I think it is very important, for example, for this hearing to
take place and to continue to bring attention to it.
We have worked very hard with other governments, with
traditional and non-traditional donors, to try to increase
support. Obviously, we continue that effort. Tom and I were
actually in Kuwait City about 10 days ago at a top donors'
group meeting that was hosted by Kuwait to try to bring
attention to the Syrian response, what we are going to do this
year, and perhaps even more importantly, what comes next year
and the year after. Given that this is going to be protracted,
we need to continue that support, for example, to Jordan and to
the other neighbors that are shouldering the burden.
So, it is a very high priority. There is a lot of
engagement at very senior levels of our Government, and that
will continue.
Mr. Deutch. And what is that? What is the response? I
appreciate that there is engagement.
Ms. Clements. I think, as I outlined in terms of the number
of crises, the places that we are asking people to put their
money, unfortunately, it is increasing rather than decreasing.
We have seen, for example, Saudi Arabia, when WFP, as you
mentioned in your opening statement, had their fundraising
campaign in December, it was Saudi Arabia that stepped forward
with I think $72 million to help to close that gap. That was
unexpected.
We just saw the EU last week announce a $1 billion package
for both development and humanitarian support. The UK, the
visit of Prince Charles and the Secretary of State, just
announced another 100 million pounds.
So, we are seeing donors step forward. The problem is we
are not able to get to the levels, the astronomical levels, now
in terms of trying to meet the need.
Mr. Deutch. Okay. I would just make the observation that we
are about to begin a debate about AUMF to combat ISIS. We are
devoting an enormous amount of resources on security in the
region already, in addition to the security arrangements that
we have within the region that benefit, in particular, those
countries that we have asked to step up in providing
humanitarian assistance. I trust that in terms of engagement
that those points are made loudly and clearly to our allies
when we have those discussions.
Mr. Staal, I want to return to a topic that I focused on in
each of the hearings that we have had on humanitarian needs. I
would just love an update. That is the issue of branding.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen and I visited the Zaatari Camp in
Jordan this past summer, and we saw temporary housing stamped
with a green flag, the Saudi Arabian flag, many other donor
countries. We didn't see a lot of U.S. flags. And I understand
the difficulties of branding inside Syria, and we would never
want to put AID workers at risk. But in refugee camps and in
communities, have we increased U.S. branding, so that the
Syrian people know that they have the full support of the
United States?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you very much for that question,
Ranking Member Deutch.
It is an issue that we continue to discuss with our
partners. As you mentioned, inside Syria it is very dangerous.
And so, we don't require that.
Within the surrounding countries, we are asking them to
step up their branding. It may not be on every bag because some
of that goes into Syria and some doesn't. So, it is difficult
to differentiate. But at least to put up more signs around and
portray that.
Also, just in discussions with the officials who are
working in those camps to make sure they understand where the
assistance is coming from, and, in fact, we are able to do that
even inside Syria, in a quiet way to let people know the local
organizations that we are working with, where it comes from, to
get the word out.
Mr. Deutch. All right. Great.
Ms. Clements?
Ms. Clements. A quick add, because we are very familiar
with the Zaatari example. We have had a number of discussions,
actually, with UNHCR, Andrew Harper, in particular, about the
visibility issues related to Zaatari.
The challenge has been, as soon as a U.S. flag goes up, it
comes down. And so, we have a requirement, actually, in our
contributions that U.S. flags should be on items that we have
actually supported, particularly, for example, in Jordan and
northern Iraq, places where it is quite safe and we want to get
the word out. But it is a challenge keeping it visible for
extended periods of time.
Mr. Deutch. Okay. I appreciate it.
Thank you to the witnesses. Again, I would just ask if you
would please pass on our sincere thanks and appreciation to all
of those on whose behalf you appear here today. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows?
Mr. Meadows. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank each of you for being here. This particular issue
is not as telling from a standpoint of getting the American
people to act as perhaps other things that we see on TV on a
regular basis. But, yet, when it comes to asking for people to
give, either personally or allow their government to give on
their behalf, it is the one thing that typically can unite
people on both sides of the aisle.
The American people are very generous and caring and giving
people. It is hard for them, Ms. Clements, when you make
statements like, well, the American flag goes up and it gets
ripped down. It also makes it very difficult for a lot of
people to continue to say, why give money for humanitarian
purposes when they don't care?
So, getting back to the branding issue that the ranking
member was talking about, I think it is important for us to
tell the stories of the impact on the lives that we really are
affecting. Because not only in Syria and Jordan and some of the
other places where the refugee and the migration from this
conflict is huge, we are making real-life differences to moms
and dads and kids. We have got to do a better job of sharing
that, if we can.
And so, I guess my question to both of you is, how, as a
Member of Congress, can we do that? As either NGOs or the like,
how can we do a better job of thanking the American taxpayer
back home and telling the stories? I mean, we see ads all the
time of starving children, and people willing give because they
believe that they are making a difference. How can we do a
better job of that?
Ms. Clements. Thank you very much, Congressman.
I actually could not have said it better than the way you
just did in terms of telling individual stories. Because I
think with the way that this war has raged on and the number of
people it has affected, that, unfortunately, the public has
become numb to the numbers. And so, to try to pull out those
stories of people who are actually assisting and what important
work the partners that we are supporting are providing every
day under difficult circumstances, to try to disentangle saving
lives from the broader morass of extremist takeover of certain
communities and Assad's aggressions, and that sort of think, if
we can keep it focused very much on the lifesaving, we might
have a better chance.
Unfortunately, we have those pictures to go along----
Mr. Meadows. Sure.
Ms. Clements [continuing]. With the devastation. But the
individual stories I think tell the best story.
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Mr. Staal. If I might add, Congressman Meadows, thank you
very much for that question. It is sometimes tough. I know I
have got relatives back home and they ask, okay, what is
happening with all this assistance? You know, there is a big
story and, then, there are the individuals. As you say, that is
so important.
In the big story, even though you have got 12 million
people displace, yet there has been really no major
malnutrition problems. We had a small outbreak of polio, but
that was quickly stopped. And so, from a lifesaving thing,
nobody froze to death because of the winter. We were able to
get winterization. So, on a big scale, actually, it is pretty
good.
Then, even in our protection programs, for instance, we
have been training women in peacekeeping. It has actually made
a difference. Okay? There is a place like in what they call Rif
Dimashq--it is sort of the rural areas around Damascus--with
women peace circles, they were able to negotiate 20-day
ceasefires.
In the eastern Kurdish region, the women negotiated an end
to price-fixing that some of the merchants were doing. So, they
were able to step in and make a real difference to people on
the ground that way.
Then, when I visited the hospital in northern Jordan where
they are getting refugees coming out who have been injured, it
is not only medical support, but we are actually providing
psychosocial support. I visited with a small child that had
been injured. Obviously, they had not only the physical
injuries, but the psychological injuries. Part of our work was
supporting and training women who, then, provide psychosocial
support to that child, so that their issues can be dealt with.
Mr. Meadows. Well, let me close with a sincere thank you
for your work, but also a request. On those individual stories
like the story you just shared, if you can get that to
committee, most of the Members of Congress can tweet out,
Facebook out, and reach hundreds of thousands of people.
Mr. Staal. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. And if we can help tell that story, because if
we don't, the American people will grow weary of giving. If
they don't see that they are making a difference, it will
become very difficult to continue to fund worthwhile projects.
So, thank you both.
And I yield back. I thank you for your leadership, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Higgins? Oh, he left. I am sorry.
Ms. Frankel?
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I thank you for your service and for your testimony today.
I know that humanitarian aid, by its nature, the purpose is
to save lives and alleviate suffering, maintain human dignity.
I was interested in your discussion with Mr. Deutch because I
have heard people say that, if you give them food and medicine,
that helps shape people's minds also.
So, my question is the overriding goal of trying to defeat
ISIS and Assad, and so forth, I want to understand how the
humanitarian aid plays into that. Do the folks who are
receiving the aid, do they know that it is coming from--do they
have any idea where it is coming from? And this humanitarian
aid helps shape their thoughts or ideas, in your opinion?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you. That is an important question,
not always easy to quantify. Certainly, through our aid
programs, even within Syria, our partners are working through
local organizations. They make sure that the local
organizations know, even though it is not branded, that they
know that it is coming from the U.S. and that it is U.S.
taxpayers that are providing the funding for that. So, the word
is getting out, not as much as we would like, and it is an
ongoing challenge, but I think that it is important.
I think part of it is, yes, you have to provide the
immediate humanitarian assistance, but you also need to do it
as much as possible in a way that protects their dignity. Okay?
And so, we are trying as much as possible to move to a system
of distribution of our assistance that just doesn't make them
totally dependent on handouts.
So, that is part of the reason we have gone to these ration
cards. I actually have one in my pocket here. That way, instead
of getting a bag of rice and a can of vegetable oil, they get a
card. They can go to a supermarket and buy the goods that they
think they need. That gives them a little feeling of dignity,
and, of course, it helps the local economy.
Ms. Frankel. May I just change--oh, wait, you can answer
that. Why don't you answer the other question that I have also,
which is this: In terms of our AID workers, first of all, do we
have AID workers in Syria? Given what we just saw happen with
Kayla Mueller, I think we all have a concern whether our AID
workers in the region are safe. Could you also speak to that?
Ms. Clements. Maybe if I could just respond to the last and
let Tom----
Ms. Frankel. Yes, please do that.
Ms. Clements [continuing]. Respond on the other?
I think it was Congressman Boyle that mentioned this being
a regional issue. Often, when Tom and I are talking about
Syria, we will talk about Iraq, too, because we do actually
view this as very much a regional issue.
We, in terms of the anti-ISIL fight, humanitarian support
is one of those lines of efforts, but it is not to battle ISIL.
It is to aid those victims and those people in need. So, we try
very much to keep it as a needs focus as opposed to part of the
fight. So, it is a distinction that is very important to
protect the safety of humanitarian workers, allow us to
continue to save lives. I just wanted to make that clear.
Ms. Frankel. Good. Okay. Thank you for that.
Can you answer the question on the safety?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman Frankel.
Certainly, it is a dangerous place. I think I mentioned in
my written testimony 150 humanitarian workers have been killed
over the last 3 years. It is something that we continually have
on our minds.
The partners that we are working with and through, both
U.N. and international NGOs, are all ones that are well-
experienced in working these kinds of regions and these
conflict areas. So, they are even more careful than we are.
They work primarily through local partners, the NGOs. Some
of the U.N. folks are there in Damascus, especially in the
government-held areas. But in the opposition areas it is
primarily the NGOs. They, in turn, work through local
organizations. So, there are very few of our international
staff going in. It is more focused with the local organizations
who know the scene.
Ms. Frankel. And this is in Syria?
Mr. Staal. In Syria, yes.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate your testimony today.
You were stating that America is largest single donor in
that region, and then, Mr. Staal, you were saying that you
have, in virtually all the places you have looked, you have not
found people starving. Did I understand that correctly. But are
you talking about the refugees that are outside of Syria or the
ones within Syria that you work with? Because reading my notes
here, it says there are a lot of nutritionally-deprived people
there. What is the dichotomy of the difference there visibly? I
mean, is it distinctive?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you very much, Congressman Yoho.
It is an important distinction. Certainly, within Syria
they are worse off than outside of Syria, and they are
nutritionally-deprived, but they aren't to the point of
starvation.
Mr. Yoho. Okay, and that leads into my other question.
Mr. Staal. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. When you are going in and trying to get access
into Syria, are you running--I mean, you have got to worry
about the Assad government forces and, then, you have got to
worry about Freedom Fighters and ISIS and all those other ones.
It just seems like one of the things I have seen on these
other meetings that we have had, in particular, I think it was
Afghan last year when we were talking to Dr. Shah. He said that
Afghan was allocated or appropriated $1 billion in foreign aid
through USAID, but they couldn't account for $300 million.
As you are going from taking our aid--and I would feel a
lot better if it was branded. That is the American taxpayers'
money, and I agree with these other people that, if we are
sending our money over there, well, I think they need to know
where it is coming from. I know that is an issue in itself
because it causes resentment. But, as you go into those areas,
what are the biggest obstacles you are running into to make
sure that we have accountability of those products, or whatever
it is you are taking in there, and that it is not falling into
hands where they are using it to raise revenues?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you. That is an important issue that
we track very carefully.
The branding issue, it is less about the resentment; it is
more about the protection of our partners. Because if they are
seen as working for the Americans, then that could put them in
danger. So, that is the real issue, rather than the resentment
issue.
Mr. Yoho. How do other countries handle that? This is
another question. We have given $3 billion since the beginning
of this. The collection of other countries, have they come
close to that as far as monetary input? Ms. Clements?
Ms. Clements. Sure. Actually, we are about 30 percent of
the overall giving last year, was from the United States.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Ms. Clements. And collectively, we are, obviously, the
largest single donor. But, no, it is burden-sharing.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. So, you are seeing other countries step up
and help out?
Ms. Clements. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. This is only going to get worse until we have a
resolution to the problem within Syria. I think it is going to
wind up being a regime change, which at this point I think the
rest of the world would be safer off and the people of Syria,
obviously.
When you are going in and you are putting in, say, water,
are you building infrastructures or are you just taking
supplies in, like bottled water? I saw you had Jerrycans and
all that stuff. Are you putting in wells, septic tanks, or
sewer systems?
Mr. Staal. Yes, that is a critical question. Thank you very
much.
We are, indeed, putting in some small-scale infrastructure
as much as possible, where we can, in opposition-held areas and
even in some of the government areas. But it is at a small
scale, but, certainly, we are doing it, both water and other
types of local infrastructure, repairing health clinics,
schools, things like that.
Mr. Yoho. Okay, and when you go in there, like in a host
country that is housing the refugees, is the government working
with you or are you finding them an impediment of making the
situation better?
Mr. Staal. No, I was just referring now to within Syria.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Staal. But, certainly, in the surrounding countries, in
Jordan, in Lebanon, and other, the neighboring countries, we
have really stepped up our programs. In Jordan, for instance,
we have even put in a second Deputy Director for USAID and
increased our assistance to the Jordanians to build up their
systems to handle this big, huge influx.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Staal. So, you know, additional schools, additional
water systems, and so on.
Mr. Yoho. Well, I appreciate the work you are doing--and I
will get right back to you--that you are doing. If you could
over the course of the work you do over the next, let's say, 2
or 3 months, let us know what we can do better here to help you
do better there, especially on the accountability, so that we
are not wasting our money.
Ms. Clements, you had something to say?
Ms. Clements. Thank you. We really do appreciate the
support. It is hugely needed.
Just on the water issue, both inside Syria--Tom had
mentioned part of it, but I will give you an example. The
International Committee of the Red Cross, for example, has
worked very closely to try to put stop-gap measures in place to
actually make clean water available for about 10 million
people. This is not building big waste treatment plants, that
sort of thing. It is just trying to get the system that
currently exists to function. So, that is just an example of
support that has been tremendously important, yes.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Yoho, thank you.
In follow up to your question, could you provide the
committee a breakdown of what each country has pledged and how
much they have actually lived up to their commitment? And
secondly, for this new round, what countries are pledging, so
we can get it? I mean, 30 percent is certainly very, very
generous on the part of the American public, the
administration, and Congress, but it would be nice to know
where the laggards are and where those--as you mentioned, Saudi
Arabia stepped up on the food issue. So that we have contacts,
all of us, all the time with people from these countries. It
would be good to say, ``Hey, do more'' or ``Well done.'' So, if
you could provide that, that would be very helpful.
Mr. Staal. If I can just respond to that, Chairman Smith,
at the end of March, the Kuwaitis have already invited the
donors to come to Kuwait for a major pledging conference for
Syria and the neighboring countries. We are already encouraging
our friends out there to be ready to step up with some major
contributions.
Mr. Smith. Would a letter from Members of Congress, a
bipartisan letter, be of any help in terms of backing what you
are trying to accomplish?
Mr. Staal. Yes.
Mr. Smith. If you could give us some insights on how you
think that might boost the aggregate----
Mr. Staal. Right.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. It would be----
Mr. Staal. Especially to the parliaments of some of the
countries that we work with, yes.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Very good point.
Ms. Frankel?
Ms. Frankel. Thank you again.
I have a different point of view here. So, yes, thank you
again for your testimony.
I wanted to just follow up on a line of questioning that I
had when I was sitting at the other end of the table. This is
one way to move up in rankings, right? Send everybody else
away.
I think I understand your testimony of separating the
humanitarian effort from the fight against certain forces. So,
my question is in Syria, for example, ISIL or Assad, are their
forces, do they try to keep the humanitarian aid from getting
to the Syrians? That is one question.
Mr. Staal. Yes, that is a very important question, and it
is something we watch carefully and our partners, again.
As I mentioned earlier, we actually have some pretty robust
systems that are really tracking our aid very carefully,
literally truckload-by-truckload that goes in there. And so, we
have a very good idea of where it is going.
There has been very little pressure really to divert or try
to control it. When it does happen, the partners we are working
with, they are experienced. They have worked in Afghanistan, in
Iraq, in South Sudan, in Somalia, and places like this. So,
they push back very hard.
If it gets to the point where they feel they have to pay a
bribe or allow some of it to go to a local official, they will
just stop, and we don't go into that town. That has happened.
There are times when we just say, okay, we can't work there.
But, then, the surrounding towns continue to get it, and then,
we find they come back and say, okay, well, we will let it in
after all.
Ms. Frankel. Did you want to respond to that? Yes.
Ms. Clements. I would. I would. Thank you very much.
Yes, they are inhibiting humanitarian aid workers from
delivering aid. Just to give you an example, we talked earlier
in the hearing about those in besieged areas, about 212,000
that are in besieged. About 145,000 of them are besieged by the
regime. So, they are not allowing aid workers or aid
organizations to get in.
We probably come closest to your example of starvation in a
place like Yarmouk, the Palestinian refugee camp, where it has
been extremely difficult, for example, for the Palestinian U.N.
Agency to get in and actually provide health and food, and so
on.
So, it is administrative obstacles, bureaucratic obstacles,
you know, bombs, barrel bombing in terms of just not being able
to get into key areas. But it has been a huge issue.
Thank you.
Ms. Frankel. And in the surrounding regions, which
countries are actually helping you or assisting, both with
resources, but actually are friendly toward the efforts?
Ms. Clements. We are so fortunate to have the neighbors
that we do surrounding Syria. I mean, we could go through them
one-by-one, but Jordan, first and foremost, 650,000 registered
refugees, probably many more that are in communities. Most are
being supported outside of those two camps that are in Jordan.
Billions of dollars spent in terms of GDP or lost economic
revenue, and so on.
There has been a tremendous outpouring of generosity and
support from these neighbors to welcome refugees in, but the
welcome mat is starting to wear thin because of how many
refugees there are and the needs and the burdens, and so on, in
terms of the economic system and the infrastructure and water
and health, education, you name it. But I think in every
circumstance of those five we have support from the government
in terms of being able to help us help them in terms of
responding to these massive needs.
Ms. Frankel. So, I think what I hear you saying, also, is
that--and you may have said this before--is that this
humanitarian aid not only is to reduce suffering and dignity,
and so forth, but giving relief to some of these neighboring
countries that will prevent their destabilization. Okay.
Ms. Clements. It is a really important point,
Congresswoman, because we try very hard not just to target aid
toward the refugees or the displaced, but also the host
communities. And aid in state programs in the partners we are
serving, it is very much a dual approach because we do not want
to increase tensions, and we see tensions rising. As you said,
it is absolutely essential for regional stability.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield the
rest of my time.
Mr. Smith. Just a few final questions, and then, if my
colleagues have any further, if you would answer those?
As I think you may know, I am the prime author of the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000. It is a very
aggressive law that seeks to prevent/prosecute traffickers and
protect women and children especially who are overwhelmingly
the victims.
Syria is a Tier 3 country. In the recommendations page of
the TIP Report, it talks about child soldiers. I am wondering
if you could shed any light on how many child soldiers we are
talking about from either side or any side.
In your testimony, Mr. Staal, you very strongly pointed to
the barbarity of selling girls as young as 12 into sex slavery.
I am wondering if any of those girls are being rescued. How
many are we talking about, just like how many child soldiers
are we talking about? Is there any guesstimate as to how much
of this abuse is going on?
And what happens when there is a rescue? You know, some
young 12-year-old who has been so brutally abused finds their
way particularly in the area of psychological treatment. You
mentioned that generally before, those who are suffering trauma
of war.
And I am wondering, too, an additional question: Is our
response integrating a faith-based response, Muslim or
Christian, with best practices for psychological help? You
know, one of the things I have learned being in trafficking
shelters all over the world is that the healing process, the
sense of personal reconciliation with the trauma and coming to
a point where you reconcile with that you are a victim, you are
not in any way responsible for this, happens more effectively
in a faith-based setting where there is also the best
psychological practices by psychologists or psychiatrists being
employed. I am wondering what we are doing along those lines.
And again, if you could, speak to the trafficking part. Mr.
Staal?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you. Critical issues that you raise,
Chairman Smith.
As I mentioned, in all of our humanitarian assistance
programs we include protection issues. In addition to that, we
have put in $26 million specifically in protection programs,
gender-based violence issues, child protection, and so on.
Included as a piece of that has been tracking abuses that
could someday be a way of keeping records that could someday be
used later, as you mentioned, with the ICC, or whatever. And
then, also, the State Department DRL program is continuing to
try to track those kinds of abuses for future issues.
We will have to get back to you on the child soldiers. I
don't know that we have a number on that.
Mr. Smith. Are you coordinating with the TIP office on this
with regards to Syria?
Mr. Staal. Yes.
Ms. Clements. Yes. Perhaps I can respond in terms of the
trafficking piece because, obviously, this is something that is
of high priority to us, as it obviously is to you as well.
All of our programs actually have a GBV or prevention
element. When I say that, you know, protection is important.
There are a couple of things that we have tried to do very
explicitly.
Civil registration and identity documents, because often we
find that those instances of trafficking are because they don't
have something to be able to provide for themselves in terms of
livelihoods, or what have you. So, we have made a special
effort through partners to be sure that that is certainly in
place.
We have found that the best defense is robust assistance.
So, making sure kids are in school, for example, that
information is flowing in terms of the dangers of early
marriage, these sorts of things all combined have a
comprehensive approach to try to at least decrease the scourge.
But, yes, in fact, I was just talking with the trafficking
office yesterday about this very issue.
Mr. Smith. That would be great. Any further for the record
that you could provide on that, simply as it relates to sex
trafficking and child soldiers, that would be greatly
appreciated.
You have pointed out that 85 percent of those killed are
men. I am wondering with regard to the women, and especially
pregnant women, are they getting to safe venues to have their
children? Do they have access to safe blood, for example, if
there is an obstructed delivery, to a Caesarean section, or has
maternal mortality gone up because of the lack of that in
Syria, the way that we have seen in other war-torn areas?
Mr. Staal. Yes, a critical question. I think we have a
partial answer, but not a great answer. I mean, I think there
are still a lot of women who aren't able to get to a proper
facility. As you have mentioned, health facilities have been
targeted, especially by the regime. That has really reduced our
ability to help.
On the other hand, that is a major focus of some of our
programs. I mentioned earlier that the hospital I visited in
Jordan last week, they have an outreach program and are setting
up field hospitals in opposition-held areas in southern Syria.
And so, those kinds of things we are trying to address that
issue.
But, you know, certainly, in ISIL-held areas, we are not
able to get there and provide that kind of assistance. It is an
ongoing problem; no question.
Mr. Smith. Just a few final questions, if I could. You
mentioned, Mr. Staal, that history has been made in the number
of DARTS. As you have said, four Disaster Assistance Response
Teams and three Response Management Teams have been deployed.
Could you elaborate on that? Because many people, particularly
those watching, the C-SPAN audience, for example, you know,
what is a DART?
I have actually been in areas where they have been in
operation, and it is amazing how effectively they coordinate.
If you could elaborate on that?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you, Chairman Smith. That is one of
the things that I think we, as Americans, can be most proud of.
That is a unique aspect of our humanitarian assistance that
other countries can't do.
That is to actually put people on the ground within hours
and days of a crisis, whether it is a tsunami and an
earthquake, or in this situation a conflict-related crisis. So,
DART is a Disaster Assistance Response Team, and we send them
out to the affected area literally within hours or days,
sometimes even, if we know there is a big typhoon coming, we
will send them out a day or two ahead of time.
And they include whatever is needed in terms of technical
specialties. They coordinate the assistance. Ebola, for
instance, we have a huge DART there. We coordinate the
assistance provided by CDC, the World Health Organization,
other donors. The DART provides that platform, and it works
great.
The RMT, the Response Management Team, is the operation
center back here at headquarters that provides all the support
that responds to your questions about what is going on and to
our leaders in the administration. So, it provides that sort of
op center for that.
And so, we have a DART for Iraq, a DART for Syria that has
people both in Jordan and in Turkey. We have a DART for South
Sudan, and then, we have the huge DART for Ebola.
Mr. Smith. Thank you for that explanation and for that
work.
You point out in your testimony, Mr. Staal, that we have
improved water and sanitation for 1.3 million Syrians in all 14
governorates. You are absolutely right; in times of crisis,
clean water and sanitation are critical to survival.
How integrated or how expansive is our ORT, the Oral
Rehydration Therapy, salts, those packets being disseminated
for children especially, since diarrheal disease is one of the
leading killers of children?
Mr. Staal. Yes, thank you.
I don't have the exact details. If you like, I can try to
track those down.
Mr. Smith. We would like that, yes.
Mr. Staal. But it is certainly a part of whatever we do in
our health, in our WASH programs where we are working. There
are still areas we can't reach. But, as I said, I think it is
important that our humanitarian assistance also address some of
those sort of resilience issues, so that people are not as
dependent on humanitarian assistance.
If they have got clean water, then they are less likely to
get sick. If we have got a program providing flour to bakeries
across-line, so that people can get bread, that also helps the
economy. So, we try to do our humanitarian assistance in a way
that builds resilience, reduces cost, and then, reaches out to
the people.
Mr. Smith. You have testified that 9.8 million Syrians are
food-insecure. Is that number declining or worsening?
Mr. Staal. Yes, I think I will have to look at the exact
details, but I am afraid to say it is probably worsening. Their
situation is declining because of the scale of the crisis.
Mr. Smith. And one final question. You have pointed out
that, since 2011, PRM has expended $1.4 billion. Has that
impacted funding from other programs? Have you had to deplete
some accounts or draw down from other accounts? And have those
accounts been replenished, whether it be in Africa or anywhere
else, so that there is no diminution of assistance to those
other crisis areas?
Ms. Clements. Thank you very much, Chairman, for the
question.
It is thanks to you and Congress that I can that we have
not taken funding from Africa or other important programs to
meet some of those other mega humanitarian emergencies, because
you appropriated a generous amount to us in 2013, 2014, and
again in 2015. So, we appreciate that hugely. And you will see
in terms of numbers on our congressional presentation document
a significant upturn, not just in the Middle East, but in other
regions as well.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Frankel?
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to go back to my questioning on sort of, I guess,
the domino effects of humanitarian aid or not having it. I do
believe in humanitarian aid, but I want to sort of just play
the devil's advocate because of what we may hear constituents
saying. I think some of my colleagues mentioned it.
There is so much suffering in this world all over the
world, including the United States of America. And so, I would
like to hear your thoughts again in terms of, what if we did
not provide this aid? What are some of the dominos? What would
we see happening? What would be worse? What is the spinoff, and
how does it affect, you know, somebody who lives in Florida?
Ms. Clements. It is a terrific question, Congresswoman.
In terms of not being able to provide aid, we touched on it
a little bit earlier in terms of regional stability. I think in
terms of humanitarian aid the best way to be able to support
those that need to flee Syria is being able to provide that aid
to the host communities and the neighboring countries to keep
that protection space open, to make it possible for people,
because it is much easier for us to assist those in Jordan and
in Lebanon, frankly, than it is inside Syria.
You would see an implosion. You would see massive
malnutrition rates, for example, in terms of global acute
malnutrition, mortality rates through the roof. Most of the
deaths now, unfortunately, are because of the war. We would
probably see in terms of social indicators a much larger
humanitarian catastrophe without aid.
Mr. Staal. Yes, and I might add, obviously, if possible, we
want to try to get our assistance to people in their homes, so
they don't have to flee. They need to be able to flee if they
feel they have to, but it is better to get it there. And then,
that reduces the strain on the surrounding countries.
As you mentioned, Jordan is a critical partner for us. The
same with Lebanon; we are very concerned about their
stability--in those countries that is critical--and frankly,
terrorism.
You know, a young man growing up, he can't feed his family.
He hasn't got a job. He is going to be much more open to the
lure, if you will, of people asking him to do bad things.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you very much. I think I got my question
answered.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
Mr. Yoho?
Mr. Yoho. Yes, going back to the aid that you are giving,
when you go into the different countries, there is Turkey,
Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq where the refugees are going. When
you are going into the different countries, like say Turkey,
you know, the human rights that we stand by, that we believe in
this country, are going to be different in those other
countries. Is that correct? You know, freedom of religion,
freedom of expression, those kinds of things.
And so, when Chairman Smith brought up the different areas
of abuses, like gender abuse, women's rights, and things like
that, how do you go about enforcing that? And is it different
between country to country? How do we hold that government
accountable?
Mr. Staal. That is an interesting and important question,
Congressman.
I can't remember whether it was you or Chairman Smith who
asked about working with faith-based organizations. We do work
with that. In fact, Ms. Clements and I visited with the
Archbishop in Kurdistan when we were there to talk about the
work they are doing. I know the King in Jordan has been very
open and meeting with different religious leaders, both from
sort of an Islamic perspective to reduce the lure of the ISIL,
but, also, how do we work with the various religious groups?
And Syria was one of the most tolerant countries in the
entire Middle East before all this took place. So, it is
important, but there are many groups there that we work with.
And that is a way to try to reduce the tension that is going
on.
Mr. Yoho. But is there a way to hold those areas that you
have the refugees in--you know, they are going to school and
they are being abused with whatever type of abuse it is. You
know, the human trafficking thing is just unconscionable. But
gender abuse, we will say that, how do you go about making--you
said you are helping those countries deal with that and you are
trying to make sure that they are protected, but how do you go
about holding that country or that government of that country
accountable? If we are in there giving aid, helping out a bad
situation, and they are not living up to that standard, what do
we do as far as holding those people accountable? Or do we not
get into that?
Mr. Staal. Well, we do in the sense that there are
international standards that these countries have signed onto
through U.N. Conventions, and so on. And so, that is one
advantage, if you will, with working through the U.N. system,
is we can hold them accountable for those standards.
Mr. Yoho. Do you feel it is working or is it something that
we talk about and, then, we turn a blind eye to it, saying,
``Well, we dealt with it. They are supposed to be doing it,''
but we know it is not getting done? I mean, I have seen that in
other parts of the world. I mean, is that what you are seeing
over there?
Ms. Clements. Maybe to give an example of trafficking cases
or smuggling cases, or what have you, normally, the aid
partners we would work with, if those cases are brought
forward, they would work with the local authorities in terms of
ensuring followup.
Or, for example, refugees are detained, seeking access, for
example, to prisons, to find out whether or not that was a
rightful detention or what the due process is for that case to
be able to be made. That is part of the protection part of what
the organizations do that we support.
I think the broader issue, as Tom has laid out, as part of
our dialog, I think, goes well beyond the humanitarian sphere,
but obviously connected.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Then, Mr. Staal, you had brought up that
there has been approximately 150 aid workers killed. Does that
take into account missing ones? Is there a number of missing
people that more than likely could end up as hostages and we
will see them on TV one day? And we will regret seeing that. Do
you have a sense for how many that are unaccounted for that
were aid workers?
Mr. Staal. Yes. As far as we know right now, there are
certainly no Americans held that are unaccounted for that we
know of.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Staal. Most of those 150, frankly, are local Syrians
who are working with different organizations that we support.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Staal. And so, it is that way, yes.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your time.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the extra time, and thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Yoho.
Thank you again, Mr. Staal, Ms. Clements, for your
tremendous leadership, for providing the two subcommittees with
your very fine insights and incisive testimony. It does help
us. Of course, by extension, we then brief other Members of
Congress. So, thank you.
You are saving lives every single day, and I do think the
American public--I have traveled with some DART teams. I
remember after the tsunami I was in Sri Lanka. We went from
Banda Aceh to Sri Lanka. I was in the van with the DART teams,
and I have never been more proud of people who were just
absolutely can-do, trying to make the situation better for
those who had lost life as well as property during that
terrible tsunami.
So, thank you for your leadership.
The hearing is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:38 p.m., the meeting was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Florida, and chairman,
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
