- U.S. HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO SYRIA: MINIMIZING RISKS AND IMPROVING OVERSIGHT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO SYRIA: MINIMIZING RISKS AND IMPROVING
OVERSIGHT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 14, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-195

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Thomas Melito, Director, International Affairs and Trade,
Government Accountability Office...............................     6
The Honorable Ann Calvaresi Barr, Inspector General, Office of
the Inspector General, United States Agency for International
Development....................................................    20

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Thomas Melito: Prepared statement............................     8
The Honorable Ann Calvaresi Barr: Prepared statement.............    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    44
Hearing minutes..................................................    45

U.S. HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO SYRIA:
MINIMIZING RISKS AND IMPROVING
OVERSIGHT

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 14, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:19 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
I know that Mr. Deutch is right in the side room, so he
will be right out. And my apologies for starting late.
After recognizing myself and Ranking Member Deutch for 5
minutes each for opening statements, I will then recognize
other members seeking recognition for 1 minute. We will then
hear from our witnesses.
And without objection, the witnesses' prepared statements
will be made a part of the record. Apologies for keeping you
waiting.
And members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
I would first like to thank all of the individuals and
organizations involved in providing humanitarian assistance for
the Syrian crisis. Working in an active conflict zone is
incredibly dangerous but also desperately needed. So we thank
you and we support you.
Today's hearing is the subcommittee's fourth hearing that
focuses specifically on the Syrian humanitarian crisis. It has
been an issue we have been following closely since the fighting
in Syria began over 5 years ago. And until the administration
gets serious about developing a comprehensive plan to end the
conflict, it will, unfortunately, be an issue we will continue
to revisit.
The numbers are truly staggering. By most estimates, there
have been at least \1/4\ million Syrians killed and possibly as
much as nearly \1/2\ million. Nearly 5 million Syrians have
fled to neighboring countries like Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan.
There are nearly 7 million internally displaced Syrians and
more than 13\1/2\ million people are in need of assistance,
with about 5\1/2\ million people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas.
We have convened this hearing today to see how we can
maximize our efforts and limit risks when providing
humanitarian assistance.
In addition to the $5 billion already provided, Secretary
Kerry announced, earlier this week, $439 million in additional
humanitarian assistance, and the President's budget request for
Fiscal Year 2017 seeks nearly $2.1 billion through accounts
that addresses the humanitarian impact of this crisis.
This is a lot to ask of the U.S. taxpayers, especially when
we know that there is no end in sight to this terrible crisis.
And that is why Congress must conduct oversight, to ensure that
this assistance is being used as effectively and efficiently as
possible. And that is why I was pleased to be joined by Ranking
Member Deutch, Gerry Connolly, and Ron DeSantis in requesting a
GAO review of our Syrian humanitarian assistance program.
This report focuses solely on our programs inside Syria.
With the U.S. no longer having a presence in the country, we
have to rely on remote programs and coordinating with
implementing partners. We recognize this brings challenges, but
these challenges also make it more important for our agencies
to mitigate all risks, because situations like these make our
effort more vulnerable to waste, fraud, abuse, and diversion.
And that is precisely what GAO and USAID's Inspector General
have found, that we have weaknesses in our humanitarian aid
programs in Syria and both State and USAID could improve their
fraud oversight.
GAO's review found that most of the implementing partners
that we work with to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria
do not assess the risk of fraud. Why is this important? Well,
we will hear from the Inspector General that her office has
opened 25 cases to investigate allegations of abuse of USAID
funds with three common fraud schemes. This, obviously, raises
concerns, not only with how USAID and State oversee our
assistance programs, but it raises concerns regarding the
checks and balances our implementing partners have in place as
well.
We rely heavily on our partners, as does the U.N., where 75
percent of all our assistance is funneled through. And if they
are lax in their oversight, we run the risk of wider loss due
to waste, fraud, and abuse, and diversion.
What GAO also found is that not only do most implementing
partners not assess the risk of fraud, but their controls for
mitigating the risk of fraud and loss were not informed by a
risk assessment. So it is likely that they either don't know
what they are looking for or are looking in the wrong place.
And that is why GAO has recommended that USAID and State
strengthen their fraud oversight themselves, but they must also
require implementing partners to conduct fraud risk assessment
and to ensure monitors are properly trained. These are common
sense recommendations for our efforts in Syria, but they are
also common sense for State and USAID across the board.
We provide large sums of money and assistance every year
and administer very large programs. We need to be doing
everything we can to minimize the risk of waste, fraud, abuse,
and diversion. It is also important because we do send most of
our assistance through the U.N., and from there we have less
oversight, less transparency. If we can work with our
implementing partners to strengthen how they assess the risk of
fraud and how they improve their oversight, we have a better
chance of maximizing the humanitarian assistance response
across the board.
State and USAID are doing a good job with their
humanitarian response, but we can always seek to do better. We
all want to ensure that we are being proper stewards of
American taxpayer dollars, but we are also promoting our core
ideals and values as Americans by doing what we can to help
those suffering from the ongoing crisis in Syria. So I am eager
to hear from our witnesses on how we can accomplish both of
these objectives without sacrificing our ability to assist
those in dire need.
And with that, I apologize to our ranking member for my
lateness, and he is recognized.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. It was an honor to
arrive before you----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch [continuing]. Once. First time ever.
Thanks so much for holding today's hearing, and thanks for
your continued commitment to making sure that this committee
keeps the humanitarian response to this herein crisis at the
forefront of our work.
And thank you to Congressman Connolly and Congressman
DeSantis for joining us in requesting the GAO report to review
our humanitarian assistance to Syria. Because of the extent of
U.S. commitment to responding to this humanitarian crisis, this
report is not only very timely, but it is extremely important
for the safety and for the accountability of our aid programs.
I also thank our witnesses for appearing here today and for
the work that you do to ensure proper oversight of aid to the
Syrian people who are in critical need.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria has reached staggering
heights. I repeat these figures at every hearing because we
have to take a moment to just try to grasp the magnitude of the
crisis. There are now more than 13\1/2\ million people inside
Syria in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. 13\1/2\
million people of which 6\1/2\ million are internally
displaced. These people require health care, water and
sanitation, shelter, food, and all of them desperately need
protection. Since the crisis began in 2011, Syria's development
situation has regressed almost by four decades, and the life
expectancy among Syrians has dropped more than 20 years.
This humanitarian catastrophe is exacerbated further by the
Assad regime, which has intentionally obstructed access to the
Syrian people. The regime leverages food and water as a weapon
of war. The regime's systematic denial of medical assistance,
food supplies, and other humanitarian aid to people living in
besieged areas is unacceptable. It is illegal under
international law.
There are over 5 million people in hard-to-reach areas,
including close to 600,000 people in 18 besieged areas who are
dying from starvation. This flagrant violation of international
humanitarian norms must end. The number of deaths surpasses
400,000 Syrians, and this number increases every day. These are
not just numbers; they are human lives, and we must continue to
think of that.
I commend the hundreds of aid workers, NGOs, and
implementing partners that are on the ground risking their
lives to provide food and medical care to the Syrian people.
They, you, are doing an exceptional job in extraordinarily
difficult circumstances, and I don't think that you get the
credit that you deserve.
I am proud that the United States has stepped up to lead
the worldwide humanitarian response effort. The U.S. has
consistently led global funding efforts since 2013, and our
total funding has passed $5 billion at the end of this year.
Other donor countries must now fulfill their pledges, something
that we say at every one of these hearings, and it continues to
be true and urgent. Yet the scale of the need continues to
grow.
I understand that the humanitarian response of this size is
not easy, especially in an operating environment that is
particularly dangerous and hostile. Delivery of U.S.
humanitarian assistance inside Syria is further complicated by
a reliance on partners who can deliver cross-border aid. This
means USAID and other international NGOs have been forced to
oversee assistance remotely from neighboring countries,
including Turkey and Jordan.
USAID has relied on implementing partners to cross the
border into Syria to deliver assistance into both government
and opposition controlled areas. These cross-border operations
only increase the opportunity for risks and fraud and for other
entities and individuals to take advantage of our resources.
This is troubling.
When I hear about organized criminal networks infiltrating
aid organizations or instances of bribery, bid rigging,
delivery of products of lower quality, or even the failure of
delivery altogether, I am concerned about where the gaps exist
within our humanitarian assistance programs. I am concerned
whether these programs have adequately assessed the risks and
provided the necessary oversight of the programs and their
partners. Our aid agency and partners need to be prepared for
potential risk and fraud, especially in a context like this.
They need to consistently review and verify that they are
meeting financial obligations and holding the highest standards
for aid products and partners.
The GAO found that although USAID had guidelines for
verifying the progress of activities in Syria, they did not
include clear instructions to identify and recognize potential
fraud risks. Moreover, field monitors did not receive fraud
awareness training.
When internal controls monitoring and financial oversight
plans fail, it puts taxpayer dollars at risk. But more
importantly, it delays the critical and crucial assistance to
those who are depending on this aid. It diverts resources from
those who need it most. We need to keep our agencies and
partners accountable. The Syrian people deserve that, and I am
pleased to see that USAID has concurred and is in the process
of implementing all of the GAO recommendations. I am also
pleased that USAID has increased its own third-party monitoring
of programs.
It is a war zone out there. We understand there will be
unforeseen circumstances and challenges. There will,
unfortunately, always be situations where individuals will
attempt to take advantage of the chaos. Despite all these
challenges, we need to have that confidence that the agencies
are doing all they possibly can to mitigate fraud and
mismanagement of our resources. We need to have the confidence
that the agencies have made all the necessary risk assessments
and are continually monitoring and updating procedures to close
the gaps and vulnerabilities.
I applaud USAID for working so quickly to address these
gaps, and I am hopeful that the measures that the USAID has put
in place as a result of both the GAO and OIG's work will give
us that confidence. All of that is to say, while there are many
obstacles to assisting Syrians, we are helping millions and we
are saving many, many lives. Americans can be proud that we are
the largest donor country to the Syrian crisis, that we have
the largest donor worldwide to humanitarian assistance. We are
committed to living up to our values and to meeting the needs
of the millions in crisis.
I look to our witnesses today to help us better understand
the situation on the ground and to their recommendations.
And, Madam Chairman, before I yield back, I would take just
a moment of personal privilege, if I may. Julie Ahn, who is
sitting behind me, is a Rangel Fellow from the State
Department, who is completing her internship with us before she
heads off to the Kennedy School in the fall. She will then be
entering the foreign service to pursue the good work that our
foreign service officers do all around the world.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yeah. Two lovely years in Kurdistan.
Mr. Deutch. So I thank you very much and I appreciate your
giving me that opportunity.
I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
So safe speed and may all go well.
And now, I would like to turn for any opening statements
that they would like to make to Randy Weber of Texas and then
to be followed by Ron DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. Weber. I am good and I am ready to go. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Texans are always ready.
Ron?
Mr. DeSantis. Let's get this show on the road.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Let's do it.
Well, thank you. And I know Lee Zeldin is there on the
side, and if he comes back, we will recognize him.
But the subcommittee is delighted to welcome back Dr.
Thomas Melito, who serves as the director of the International
Affairs and Trade team at the Government Accountability Office,
GAO. In this capacity, Dr. Melito is primarily responsible for
GAO's multilateral assistance portfolio as well as other areas
of important oversight.
So welcome back.
And next, we would like to welcome to our subcommittee for
the first time, but we know that it is going to be a repeated
engagement, Ms. Ann Calvaresi Barr, who serves as the Inspector
General for the United States Agency of International
Development, USAID. In this capacity, she leads the USAID
Office of Inspector General exercising broad oversight
authority over programs and operations of USAID, as well as the
Millennium Challenge Corporation, the U.S. African Development
Foundation, the Inter-American Foundation, and the Overseas
Private Investment Corporation. They sure keep you busy.
So it is my understanding that the two of you came through
GAO at the same time, so this is a very public reunion of
sorts. We welcome you. Welcome, both of you.
And we will start with Dr. Melito.

STATEMENT OF MR. THOMAS MELITO, DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
AND TRADE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Melito. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch, and
members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here to discuss
the work you requested on delivery of U.S. humanitarian
assistance----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. If you could bring that microphone a
little bit closer.
Mr. Melito. I am pleased to be here to discuss the work you
requested on delivery of U.S. humanitarian assistance to people
inside Syria. The conflict in Syria has created a complex
humanitarian challenge. As of May 2016, the U.N. reported that
13\1/2\ million people inside Syria have been affected by the
conflict and are in need of humanitarian assistance such as
food, shelter, and medicine.
Since the start of the conflict in March 2011, the United
States, through the Department of State and USAID, has provided
over $5 billion in humanitarian assistance, about half of which
has been provided for assistance to people inside Syria. In
2015, the U.S. provided more than a quarter of the total
international funding for the humanitarian response to Syria.
My testimony summarizes our report on the delivery of U.S.
humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria, which is being
released today. I will focus on four topics. First, factors
affecting delivery of assistance. Second, the extent to which
State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to their
program. Third, implementation of controls to mitigate
identifying risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of
humanitarian assistance projects. And fourth, GAO's
recommendations and the agency responses.
Regarding the first topic, several factors complicate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. For
example, the increasingly violent and widespread Syrian
conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In addition, administrative procedures put in place
by the Syrian Government have delayed or limited the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, especially to besieged areas.
Further, due to restrictions for traveling to Syria, State and
USAID staff must manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance
remotely from neighboring countries.
Regarding the second topic on risk assessments, U.S.
agencies do not require comprehensive risk assessments from
implementing partners, and most partners have not assessed the
risk of fraud. Risk assessment involves comprehensively
identifying risks associated with achieving program objectives
and determining actions to mitigate those risks. In the context
of Syria, such risks include theft, fraud, and safety and
security.
Most of the implementing partners we examined conducted
formal risk assessments for at least one type of risk, most
commonly security risk. In addition, several maintain
assessments on a variety of risks that are updated on a regular
basis. However, few of these implementing partners conducted
risk assessments for the risk of fraud, despite elevated risks
for fraud in assistance projects inside Syria. These risks have
been highlighted through the ongoing and closed fraud
investigations by USAID's Inspector General.
Absent assessments of fraud risk, implementing partners may
not have all the information needed to design appropriate
controls to mitigate such risk. In addition, State and USAID
officials may not have sufficient awareness of the risk of
fraud or loss due to theft.
Regarding the third topic on oversight, partners have
implemented controls to mitigate some of the risks of
delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria, but U.S.
agencies could improve their oversight of these programs. We
found that partners we examined had implemented controls to
mitigate certain risks of delivering humanitarian assistance
inside Syria. For example, many partners implemented controls
to account for safety and security risks to their personnel and
beneficiaries receiving assistance. However, we found that
fraud oversight could be strengthened.
While USAID has hired a contractor for verifying the
progress of activities in Syria, they have not clearly
instructed field monitors on how to identify and collect
information on potential fraud risks. Further, the contractors
have not received fraud awareness training.
Regarding the fourth topic, GAO made several
recommendations in our report. To provide more complete
information to assist the agencies in conducting oversight
activities, State and USAID should require the implementing
partners to conduct fraud risk assessments. In addition, USAID
should ensure its field monitors are trained to identify
potential fraud risks and collect information on them. Both
agencies agreed with GAO's recommendations.
Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch, and members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I will be
pleased to respond to any questions you may have at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Melito follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Ms. Calvaresi.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ANN CALVARESI BARR, INSPECTOR
GENERAL, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, UNITED STATES AGENCY
FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
discuss USAID's efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to
the more than 13 million in Syria affected by the crisis there.
The billions of dollars USAID has invested not only provide
relief to those impacted, it strengthens our standing in the
world. Yet despite our goodwill, bad characters have taken
advantage of the complex situation for personal gain,
ultimately denying Syrian people the food, clothing, health
care, and other aid they urgently need.
Today, I will summarize the actions our special agents and
investigators have taken to uncover and stop fraud. I will also
highlight several program management concerns exposed by these
investigations.
When the U.S. designated the response to Syria as a
contingency operation, we ramped up our oversight in the
region. OIG investigators briefed hundreds of USAID and
implementer staff on fraud indicators and developed a
comprehensive handbook for how to identify and report fraud.
They also stood up the Syria Investigations Working Group to
share information with other U.S. and international oversight
organizations about ongoing investigative issues.
To date, we have received 116 complaints of alleged abuse
and have opened 25 investigations. Some complaints relate to
terrorist diversions, but the majority, roughly two-thirds,
relate to theft and fraud schemes, such as collusion, product
substitution, and false claims. For example, vendors paid
bribes or kickbacks to implementer staff in exchange for
competitive bidding data or manipulation of bid evaluations.
One of our product substitution cases involved a Turkish
vendor that placed more salt and less lentils in food kits to
increase their profits. We also found nonfood kits in a
warehouse in Syria that were missing items or included
substandard products, such as poor quality frying pans that can
easily be bent and folded and tarps that were too small to
shelter an adult. In one false claims case, a Jordanian NGO
fabricated documentation that it distributed nonfood items to
communities in southern Syria when, in fact, the goods were
distributed by another organization at its own expense.
To date, we have made seven referrals to USAID regarding
nine implementers. These referrals prompted USAID actions
ranging from employee and program suspensions and terminations
to now placing specific conditions on implementer awards and
agreements. Our investigative outcomes have resulted in $11.5
million in savings and six programmatic suspensions of awards
valued at $305 million. This represents about a third of the
money USAID disbursed in Fiscal Years 2015 and 2016. This
demonstrates the impact our work has had and the proactive
measures taken to further prevent losses.
Our investigative cases not only stopped fraud, but also
raised a number of concerns about implementer procurement
practices and internal controls for managing projects as well
as USAID's oversight.
First, we question whether implementers' procurement
policies and internal controls are appropriate for the high-
risk environment. In an effort to expedite procurements,
implementers used an emergency waiver to bypass established
procurement policies and procedures, including full and open
competition. While the use of these waivers is allowable when
the needs are urgent, they were used for an extended period of
time and were not accompanied by enhanced monitoring. Internal
control concerns relate to implementers' quality control
procedures such as allowing vendors to ship materials across
the border without the items being inspected and accepting
substandard items. In addition, some implementers did not
pursue allegations, overlooked evidence of wrongdoing, or did
not notify USAID or OIG of internal investigations.
Finally, our cases point to potential gaps in USAID
oversight of implementers. For example, OFDA generally did not
require implementers to obtain prior agency approval of large
subcontracts or set requirements to inspect them. Further, DART
teams responsible for coordinating and managing response
efforts did not include permanent subject-matter experts to
evaluate procured items.
While we are encouraged by the steps USAID has taken and
plans to take in response to the vulnerabilities we identified,
continued vigilance and a better understanding of program
deficiencies is required. To that end, my office, along with
our partners at DOD and State, remain committed to aggressively
cracking down on fraud, waste, and abuse. Concurrently, my
office plans to advance audit work aimed at identifying
systemic weaknesses and additional actions USAID can take to
eliminating vulnerabilities before they can be further
exploited.
Providing aid in conflict settings presents significant
challenges and frequently calls for flexible practices.
However, as our investigators demonstrate and their work,
flexibility cannot eclipse rigor.
Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch, this concludes my
prepared statement. I would be happy to take any questions that
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Calvaresi Barr follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Really, thank you both for your testimony. There is
certainly a lot to think about there, and I want to make sure
that we thank you both and your teams for all the work they
have done on this issue, for continuing to seek ways to help
our agencies improve our oversight and the implementation of
our assistance programs.
And, Dr. Melito, I will start some questions with you, if I
might.
Tell us about why it is important for individuals and
organizations operating in Syria to conduct a risk assessment?
And if you could tell us how the U.N. internal control
framework compares to ours. What are the--how do the
requirements differ?
Mr. Melito. Very good. A risk assessment is a jargony
phrase that is pretty obvious. It is management, basically,
trying to understand the challenges that their employees are
having in the field. In this case, it is generally a
procurement and logistics exercise where they need to
understand which particular place they are using for buying
things, storing things, moving things. And in the environment
of Syria, there are a lot of complicating factors and a lot of
heavy risks.
So risk assessment would really be a diagnostic on looking
at what exactly is the situation on the ground, what are they
facing, and then recognizing that some of this is very risky
and then mitigating that by trying to make sure that there are
oversight controls and just a good situational awareness on the
part of management. That is why risk assessments are essential.
In terms of the internal control framework of the U.N., it
is very similar. They are using international auditing
standards which mirror, in a lot of ways, the ones that the
U.S. Government uses. So when we have dialogues with them, we
are pretty much on the same page. They are required to do risk
assessments like the U.S. Government is. So there was no
mismatch in discussions with them. They have the same
requirements in that area.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you. And all programs, and
just about anything we do, are going to have at least some loss
as a result of waste, fraud, abuse, diversion. It is sad to
say, but it is reality based. Did either State or USAID provide
you with a number on how much they believe is being lost to
waste, fraud, abuse, or diversion? And do you get a sense from
the agencies that they expect a certain amount to be lost as
the cost of doing business in that they may have a formal or
informal percentage they believe is acceptable?
Mr. Melito. So GAO's perspective on this, and this is the
auditing community as well, is that you need reasonable
assurance. Now, reasonable assurance is something which has to
be sort of understood at the corporate level, and they need to
really think about where their particular tolerance is. But we
are not talking about absolute assurance. I just want to drive
that home. Because absolute assurance would be too expensive
and it probably would prevent the humanitarian mission from
going forward.
In terms of the magnitude of the losses, I do not think
USAID or State have really any inkling on that. I don't think
they have done the work to address that, nor have they thought
about what is their risk tolerance. So I think that is a
dialogue that they need to have moving forward.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
And, Inspector General, I know you can't really go into
details about the individuals and the entities, because in a
lot of these cases, we are discussing ongoing investigations.
But I did want to ask you a few questions about how that works
when USAID says, okay, this implementing partner or this
program is problematic, we need to cut ties. Because the vast
majority of our assistance to--for Syria, for the humanitarian
crisis, does go through the U.N., and obviously, there will be
some overlap on the implementing partners and partner
organizations. So when USAID suspends these individuals, these
entities, these programs, they are no longer eligible to
receive any U.S. Government awards, correct?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Yes, for a period of time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And do we share this information with the
U.N. or other organizations and implementing partners? And if
so, what actions do they take or what actions do we expect them
to take?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Let me make a few comments with regard
to your question. First of all, I am very proud of the work
that our office of special agents and investigations have done
in this crisis.
When the overseas contingency operation was activated in
2014, proactive efforts went into the region, identified all of
the implementers that were in that region, conducted 32 fraud
awareness briefings with, you know, over 400 individuals,
including USAID, DART teams, implementers, public international
organizations. From that, these allegations have come forward,
we opened cases and we found fraud.
USAID's response to that has been very, very promising. And
what I will say to that is that we have ongoing communications
with the various bureaus affected by this, whether it be OFDA,
whether it be Food for Peace, regarding what we found. And they
have taken actions in terms of suspensions, debarments, special
conditions put on awards, employee terminations, and they have
done so oftentimes without having a full record of our
investigation.
And just to make a point of that, it is very difficult to
sit down with organizations or with employees and say, you are
being suspended, or you are being terminated, without the full
underpinnings of an investigation. So this speaks to what USAID
proper has done in response to that, and they have taken
approximately 35 actions as a result of our work.
With regard to the U.N.--with regard to the U.N., what
happens is--and as you noted in your statement, so much of the
money flows through U.N. organizations, these, you know, PIOs,
as we refer to them. It is absolutely important, because we do
not have independent oversight of those operations, that
information is shared.
Our office of investigations put together--and I know you
asked me about this when we met the other day, and I am proud
of it, so if I may hold it up for all of you--a fraud
prevention and compliance handbook just for the region that
goes out to everyone. This includes our U.N. counterparts. It
includes all of the NGOs. It tells them what to look for. Our
Syria Investigations Work Group, which we stood up, is a venue
to actually brief the U.N.--our U.N. partners with its World
Food Programme, on the fraud we are seeing. We share vendors
lists where we have had issues, and we put, I would say, not
only them on notice but pressure to say, you are likely working
with the same implementers, now here, have at it. So you get
the pressure points applied from a number of different
perspectives, and I just wanted to take that moment because I
am very, very proud of our----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I am glad that you did. Because I can
foresee an instance where maybe these guys are defrauding the
U.N. or other implementing partners as well or perhaps even the
U.N. continues to work with them after we provide these
agencies with our information.
And just to finish up with the U.N., perhaps I will ask
this of both of you, how does working through the impact, the
U.N. impact our ability to exercise the kind of oversight that
we would require if we were working with implementing partners
directly in terms of things like transparency and
accountability? How does that change?
Mr. Melito. So we do have audit authority over the
implementing parties. We do not have audit authority over the
U.N. That said----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Could you say that again?
Mr. Melito. So--here we go. I said we do have audit
authority over implementing partners, but we do not have audit
authority over U.N. agencies. That said, I have done, over the
last 10 years, a series of reports involving U.N. agencies
where I have generally gotten excellent cooperation. And I
think that is in recognition of how important the U.S. is as a
donor, and I think they would want to cooperate with the U.S.
Government. So I can't point out a case where I wasn't
ultimately able to get the information that GAO needed to do
its work. So while it is an indirect process, ultimately, I
think it's been a successful process.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. I would just add to that, again, to
underscore our Syrian Investigations Working Group. We also
have reached out sort of on a one-to-one basis. I just recently
met with the World Food Programme Inspector General. I know
that he was in town working with folks in the bureau as well,
and the pressure is really being applied saying, you are going
to be working with these same implementers, with these same
vendors. We are relying on you to provide this aid.
And I think it is also important to point out the very
important role that the U.N. plays. They provide these bulk
items in terms of humanitarian assistance into the region. They
can have staff in Syria. You know, we need them. They provide a
huge role and help us achieve this mission.
We just need to stay on top of them, make sure that the
right oversight, the monitoring, the internal controls are
established, and that USAID puts some pressure on them to do
it.
I will tell you, you can be assured, we will be on it.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I understand that.
Congratulations to both of you for the great work that you
do. It is important to carry that message to the U.S. taxpayer.
Thank you.
And with that, my good friend, the ranking member, Mr.
Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I also want to
express my personal gratitude and our committee's--
subcommittee's gratitude for the work you have done here. I
think it is really important.
Ms. Barr, I would like to pick up where the chairman left
off, on what happens when there is a suspension for fraud
activities?
I would tell my friend, if he would like to wait, I will
sit in as the chair. It is not something that I get to do. I am
just kidding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. No problem.
Mr. Weber. Will the gentleman yield the rest of his time?
Mr. Deutch. If I get to be chairman, I will.
When there is a program that is suspended, there is a
quick--how quickly can we move to find a partner to pick up
whatever support that program was providing, and how do we
ensure that, for all of the really necessary oversight efforts
that you both have been so deeply engaged in, that we don't
wind up with serious gaps in providing the lifesaving services
that are so important?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. I can tell you that USAID works very,
very promptly to try to identify other implementers that we--
the aids--that the aid can resume to get to those in need, and
they work very heartily and swiftly at that. There sometimes is
a delay. I am not going to say there isn't a gap in that aid
going out, because it certainly does happen, but these
companies needed to be suspended. As our results show, you
know, we have six suspensions currently out in place, and those
are six program suspensions that fall under some major, major
implementers.
The best thing that we can do, and I think it is in line
with Tom's statement and the work of GAO overall. USAID's role
is really to establish a baseline set of internal controls,
procurement practices that they are going to require for any
implementer, regardless of who they are. You know how many are
out there. The range of their--the rigor and their controls is
going to be vast. There should be a baseline standard set for
what those internal controls should be, what those good
procurement practices should be, and those should be monitored
from USAID.
And given that we don't have the oversight authority with
the U.N., you know, establishing those expectations, setting
them, making that a condition of the money flowing to those in
need is--it sounds quite simple, but it hasn't been uniformly
applied. And I think it speaks to the recommendations that the
GAO report made and certainly to the observations that are
coming out of the outcomes we have found.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that. It is a really good
suggestion.
Dr. Melito, I wanted to acknowledge, I think, what we have
all already been discussing. In the conflict zone like Syria,
we can't have U.S. personnel on the ground. So we rely on
remote monitoring and management.
The report discusses many of the challenges of remote
management, but if you could just elaborate on these
challenges, and in this particular environment, why it is
different in terms of what agencies and implementers have dealt
with previously. Why is it such a concern for oversight in
particular?
Mr. Melito. So as you mentioned, U.S. Government officials
cannot enter----
Mr. Deutch. Yes.
Mr. Melito [continuing]. Syria. So for a normal
humanitarian assistance effort, you would expect on-the-ground
monitoring by U.S. Government officials. They would be looking
at the warehouses, they would be watching the beneficiaries
receive their assistance, making sure it is up to the quality
and quantity that we paid for.
In this case, the information they have to rely on is
coming from people who are inside the country telling them
subsequently what has happened. That is indirect. Now, they
trust a number of these parties correctly, but it is still,
though, something which is indirect for them.
So what they do, they end up trying to triangulate, trying
to get information from multiple sources. They are trying to
use some new technologies such as geotagging pictures of
things, and that is all very good, but it will never be as
effective as being able to see it yourself. So that in itself
means the risk of fraud and diversion is greater. Because of
the indirectness of the monitoring, you are in a situation and
environment which heightens the risks, and that needs to be
recognized and addressed.
Mr. Deutch. And can you, just in the remaining time that I
have, can you try to put a face on this? When--we are obviously
concerned. We are grateful for the report, and we are concerned
about instances of bribery and bid rigging and failure to
provide the material that had been committed to or contracted
to provide.
But what does that actually mean for the people who were to
have been on the receiving end? And it is--we know what the
impact is on our taxpayers, and that is why this is so
important, but just how awful is it to the people on the ground
who are in such desperate need?
Mr. Melito. So in your statement and in the chairman's
statement, talk about the magnitude of it, 13\1/2\ million
people inside the country. The U.S. Government estimates it is
reaching about 4 million. So that is--the U.S. Government is
doing great. It is the single largest donor, but it is only
reaching a subset. Any diversion from that is even lower than
that.
So from our perspective, this is literally taking food out
of the mouths of babies. I mean, it is taking resources that
are in desperate need and not putting it where it needs to be
and, instead, in hands of people who you are not designating as
a target. So it has a direct humanitarian impact. It is not
just that this is a bad deed that we--you don't have them for
criminal reasons. It is hurting the humanitarian mission, and
that needs to be kept front and center.
Mr. Deutch. I am--I appreciate that.
And just, Ms. Barr, I would say to you, again, as grateful
as we are for the focus on the impact, dollars are one thing
and they are important. And as watchdogs, it is important that
you focus on that. But the work that you do is so terribly
important, because the proposals that you made, if they are
followed, will mean not only that taxpayers can be satisfied
that their tax dollars are being used the way they are supposed
to, but that those tax dollars are actually being used to save
lives. And we are grateful for that.
I yield back. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Weber [presiding]. Mr. DeSantis, if you are ready, if
you are in a hurry, I will yield to you for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to the witnesses.
So, obviously, we appreciate you looking into this. We know
there is going to be a certain amount of waste, fraud, and
abuse, unfortunately, when you have operations going on in this
area. But did you get the approximate numbers on how much U.S.
assistance inside Syria may have been lost due to waste or
fraud?
Mr. Melito. GAO does not have a number. That would be the
kind of number that AID would need to produce itself. I would
defer to my colleague if she has any information.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. What I can tell you is what we reported
and what we know, is $1.3 million in losses. And those would be
losses that are due to fires, bombings, parachutes not opening
when pilots drop, but they also refer to diversions to other
terrorist organizations.
Mr. DeSantis. What about fraud?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. And with regard to fraud, sometimes
things, they are stolen, but in terms of fraud, it is hard to
quantify the total dollar on fraud.
Mr. DeSantis. I think you have to view it differently. I
mean, if you are in a hot zone and you have aid that is
intercepted by terrorists, that is much different than if the
money is just being frittered away. And so I think it is
important for us to know the distinctions on there.
Let me ask you this, Mr. Melito. There have been a number
of attacks on medical facilities and humanitarian workers in
Syria. Did either USAID or State provide a list of all
instances in which one of the belligerents in Syria attacked
any of our partners delivering aid or seized any of our
assistance?
Mr. Melito. So in our report, we talk about some U.N.
information on that. So U.N. reports about 89 humanitarian
workers have been killed since the conflict has started, and
there have been hundreds of attacks on medical facilities and
also attacks on food deliveries and such. And then the U.S. in
my report, we also talk about when the city of Palmyra fell,
food that was stored there fell into the hands of ISIS.
Mr. DeSantis. So do you have an estimate on the numbers and
the costs in terms of the assistance that has been implicated
by any of those? I guess State didn't give you any information?
Mr. Melito. We are unaware of either agency doing a
comprehensive assessment of that.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. There are U.N. Security Council
resolutions in place for accessing movement for humanitarian
assistance inside Syria, but from your report, it seems that
Assad's regime may be in violation of these resolutions. So how
many requests do you know has the regime denied since the
beginning of 2015?
Mr. Melito. The U.N.'s reporting that they are only
receiving about--approvals about 20 percent of the time. I
think the number that we report is 110 requests and 13
approvals. So in--what is going on there, it pays to talk a
little bit about it.
So when the U.N. wishes to go outside of these Assad-
controlled areas, to the areas outside of our control, they
need permission for what the items are; they need permission to
travel on the roads; they need permission to cross checkpoints;
they need visas for employees to come in, and they have not
been getting the approvals 90 percent of the time. And when
they do get it, they say that it is very slow and uncertain.
Mr. DeSantis. So even if they are not actually denying it,
they are basically undermining it with the process. And so how
have State and USAID responded to those limitations?
Mr. Melito. Well, the U.S. is part of the international
community's effort to broaden the delivery of services. So
there was two Security Council resolutions that passed in 2014
and 2015, which made it legal for delivery of services across
the border. And that is what most of the international NGOs are
doing. They are delivering assistance from Turkey and Jordan
mostly, and that is against the wishes of the regime. So there,
they are saying that the humanitarian assistance is more
important than the wishes of the regime.
This that we are referring to as denials is areas that are
still within the control of the regime or at the border of the
control of the regime. So it is two different ways of
delivering services.
Mr. DeSantis. The agencies that concurred with your
recommendations, how long do they have to implement these and
for you to close the recommendations?
Mr. Melito. GAO tracks its recommendations for 4 years. But
generally, agencies respond within 1 or 2 years. And given the
importance of this issue, I am hopeful they will do it quickly.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, I thank you. I thank the witnesses.
And I yield back.
Mr. Weber. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlelady from Florida is recognized.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks to the witnesses.
I want to start by saying that I think most of us agree
that what is going on in Syria is one of the greatest
humanitarian tragedies of our lifetime since World War II. And
there is no question that we have to do whatever is reasonably
possible to be part of efforts to relieve some of the
suffering, the starvation, the homelessness. And because we are
going to lose a generation of people, of young people who are
not getting health care or getting education. So I want to say
that I appreciate your efforts to try to make sure that it is
done right.
My first question is, in your review of these--of the
programs, can you tell us, are any programs doing better than
others? And what is it that--where things are working, what
makes it different?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. I think it goes back to what we said in
terms of what is missing. And what is missing is when there
aren't clear expectations regarding what should be internal
control processes and good procurement practices that need to
be in place, given the fact that you are in these highly
unstable and stable environments, the fact that it is remote
monitoring and remote oversight. Those kinds of things call for
special conditions, and I think it is incumbent upon USAID--it
all starts with them, setting those baselines of standards,
holding its implementers, NGOs to that standard, the U.N.
organizations to that standard, and make sure that the
reporting does come back. There has to be that basic minimum
set of circumstances and requirements put in place, and
currently, that is missing.
Ms. Frankel. In your review, were you able to determine
where aid is actually getting through to? Because I know there
is--you have regime-held areas and you have ISIL-held areas and
then you have, I guess, other areas.
Mr. Melito. So the U.S. agencies, both State and AID, pay
very close attention to the map, basically. And it divides up,
generally, to areas that are controlled by the Assad regime and
the areas right near that, which includes a lot of the seized
areas and hard-to-reach areas. And the other part is the areas
near the borders of Turkey and Jordan.
They have different implementing partners for those two, so
the U.N. is able to operate within the Assad-controlled areas
of the country. The international NGOs cannot operate there,
but they can operate across border. And in all those cases,
State and AID pay very close attention to groups which are not
permitted to receive assistance. And we've got very good
assurance that there is no assistance going currently to ISIS-
controlled areas.
That all said, it is a very fluid situation on the ground
and a very complicated situation on the ground that has to be
constantly monitored, but those are the kinds of things that
the agencies are balancing.
Ms. Frankel. So is aid going to the Assad-controlled areas?
Mr. Melito. Yes. The U.N. is--there are a number of
individuals in the Assad-controlled areas which are in
desperate need. So the U.N. is providing assistance there, but
it also is deploying out of those areas into the besieged and
hard-to-reach areas. That said, it is not reaching nearly as
many of those people as it wishes to. That is the reference to
being denied access by the regime.
Ms. Frankel. So Assad is not--which countries are being
used, which borders, to get the assistance across?
Mr. Melito. So it is predominantly Turkey in the north and
Jordan in the south. Those are the two main.
Ms. Frankel. And how cooperative have their governments
been and their military that is on the border?
Mr. Melito. That is probably appropriate for both the State
and AID, but my understanding is they have been getting good
cooperation.
Ms. Frankel. That they have been given good cooperation.
All right.
I have nothing further. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Weber. All right. Thank you.
I am sorry, Dr. Melito, did you just say that the Turkey
and the Jordan military have not been very cooperative?
Mr. Melito. I said have been cooperative.
Mr. Weber. They have been cooperative.
Mr. Melito. That is also a question for USAID.
Mr. Weber. Okay. I don't think your button is on.
Mr. Melito. Yes. Have been. Sorry.
Mr. Weber. Have been. Okay.
Mr. Melito. I want to be clear on that.
Mr. Weber. All right. Very good.
A lot of questions. Is it Calvaresi Barr?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Calvaresi Barr.
Mr. Weber. Calvaresi Barr?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Calvaresi Barr.
Mr. Weber. Calvaresi Barr. Okay.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Very good.
Mr. Weber. I can do this.
You said earlier, I think, that there were nine partners
that had been either used or identified as bad players. Refresh
my memory on that.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. We have seven referrals that we have
given to USAID, and they involve nine implementers.
Mr. Weber. Implementers.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Implementers, right. And the program
suspensions that we have in place are six. And, again, I just
want to underscore, this isn't a wholesale suspension of the
implementers at large. These are programs within these
implementer----
Mr. Weber. In what period of time? Is that the last year?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. This is data pretty much coming from
2014 through the present.
Mr. Weber. So the last not quite 2----
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Since the overseas contingency
operation.
Mr. Weber. I got you. And when aid is delivered, do you
have evidence that it was delivered?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. So I think part of the challenge
definitely lies in that. And I think we are calling for
recommendations along the lines of the types of reporting back
you might require under some of these basic standards that you
set.
Could it be a phone call? Could it be a printed receipt?
Are there ways to put more branding or tags or labeling on the
food, on the nonfood items to come back? But because we are in
this kind of remote business and we are reliant on others, we
have to come up with creative mechanisms to determine that, in
fact, that aid did reach those it was intended for. Currently,
again, that is a mixed bag, but I think if there are reporting
standards and other kind of baselines to establish it, it could
help.
Mr. Weber. Well, they can put chips in animals, right, that
can be tracked? So if you put one on just every 50th, you know,
item or so?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Has that been looked at?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. It is something that, I think, is under
consideration, talking about a whole range of options. But it
all starts with even checking at the warehouses before it
crosses the border, whether it be in Turkey, in Jordan. You
know, it starts there, and then what happens in transit,
because, again, this is remote monitoring. This is remote
oversight.
Mr. Weber. So if you lose an implementer, do you have a
ready supply of people lined up on the list that are applying
to be implementers?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. I represent the oversight community, so
not being the USAID proper or others to know exactly what their
full list of contingents are, I know that for the aid going
into Syria, they are working with approximately 29 implementers
now. But oftentimes, when these situations occur, folks go into
the region very, very quickly in order to deliver the aid, to
deliver the assistance, and that--you know, that creates some
vulnerabilities in and of itself. They are new to it. We are
relying on them. It creates a perfect storm for what our
investigations have found.
Mr. Weber. It makes me wonder if there is not a preferred
implementer that actually--this is probably not the right
term--but gets a kickback or is a favorite. They get a pass,
they get to come on deep into Syria with the least amount of
hassle. Has that been your findings or no? Are there preferred
implementers, one does a better job than the other?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. You know, hard to say if there are
preferred, but I can tell you that all of the implementers have
to show themselves as presently responsible. And when that
doesn't occur--and there are certain criteria for that--that is
when program suspensions and other things happen.
So there are some implementers out there that have very,
very good, as I said in the beginning, tight controls, good
internal--know what internal controls are brought into play.
Mr. Weber. So that they all get treated--I guess I am
asking, are they bipartisan, is what I am asking? They all get
treated the same.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. They all get treated the same.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Good. And has there ever been an instance
where there is a recovery of any aid? Aid gets lost, gets
taken, and once that happens, it is done.
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Our work, one of the impacts that we
talked about is the fact that we brought in $11.5 million in
savings as a result of our fraud investigations. And what that
means is when we uncovered the fact, like in the case of a
Jordanian NGO that was to provide assistance and had another
NGO actually do the transport and deliver the items but yet
charged USAID for it when it was incurred by another NGO, shut
down that program, shut down that operation. That one in and of
itself was $10.5 million of the $11.5 million. So----
Mr. Weber. Were there criminal charges that ensued in that
instance?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. In some cases--these are ongoing
investigations. There could be criminal implications as a
result of it, but I can tell you it resulted in a number of
employee and implementer terminations, suspensions, debarments.
Mr. Weber. Okay. And then, Dr. Melito, I think you said
some aid workers were killed, and I didn't quite hear what you
said. Did you say eight or nine or 89?
Dr. Melito. According to the U.N., 89.
Mr. Weber. Eighty-nine. Okay. Okay. And then furthermore,
Turkey and Jordan were the two areas that the aid came out of,
but did you say that they really didn't--that the Assad regime
really doesn't prefer that?
Dr. Melito. So until these Security Council resolutions
were passed, it wasn't clear that they could do that, because
it would be violating the sovereignty of the country. Normally,
you have to basically get the permission of the country to
provide assistance.
Yes, the Assad regime is not supporting the cross-border
assistance and they are doing it against his wishes, but it is
an international--it is legal now because of the Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Weber. So is it because Turkey and Jordan signed onto
the resolution?
Dr. Melito. The Security Council resolutions have the force
of law internationally. So they gave permission for that kind
of assistance to occur.
Mr. Weber. So would Assad rather they come from Russia,
from Iran, from Iraq? Where would he rather they come from?
Dr. Melito. He would rather it was in his areas of control.
Mr. Weber. His areas of control, so he can parlay out the
goods----
Dr. Melito. He can determine when and how, yes.
Mr. Weber [continuing]. However he wants to. Well, that
makes sense, I guess, if you are Assad.
Okay. And then finally, your office hasn't yet conducted
audits of USAID programs in Syria. Is that right?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. We, in fact, have done some audits in
the recent past. There are about three audits that were done in
the 2014 timeframe. With that said, they were very specific
audits looking like a survey of OFDA activities. There were
audits regarding Office of Transition Initiatives work there,
Food for Peace work.
One thing, if I could take a moment, just since I have been
sworn in into this position as the new IG at USAID, one thing
that we need to do better--and I am working very quickly to do
so--is to make sure that our work informs at the policy and the
strategic level and goes after the highest risk areas. We have
done tremendous work on Food for Peace programs over the years.
They are very, very program transactional specific, but it
doesn't raise oftentimes to the higher level.
As a result of our investigative work, a number of program
concerns and questions have been raised now regarding internal
controls, procurement practices. We are now focusing our audit
work and our audit plans going forward on those very real
effects that our Office of Investigations have found.
So we have some work to do in that area. And I don't want
to belittle what USAID IG has done before, but we need to link
it to those policy-level decisions and the bigger picture and
the highest risk and crosscutting work across the board, and I
am committed to do that.
Mr. Weber. Well, that is encouraging to hear. So you will
have a plan put together and we will see you back next week?
Ms. Calvaresi Barr. Can I have an extra week on top of
that?
Mr. Weber. All right. Well, my time has expired. I am going
to yield back.
Ted, any more questions?
Mr. Deutch. No.
Mr. Weber. All right. This hearing is concluded. Thank you
very much.
[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
